     Participatory and Community-Driven
             Development in Urban Areas




S O C I A L , URBA N, RU RA L & RESILIENCE GLOB AL PRA C TI C E
                        Participatory and
                       Community-Driven
                         Development in
                             Urban Areas
                                           June 29, 2015
                                         Social, Urban, Rural
                                & Resilience Global Practice




SO C I AL , URBA N, RU RA L & RESILIENCE GLOB AL PRAC TI C E
Copyright © 2015

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development /
The World Bank Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA

Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission
to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of
the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
pubrights@worldbank.org.

Photos credits: Margaret Arnold and World Bank Photo Library




                                                     ii
Contents

Acknowledgements............................................................................................................. 1
Acronyms and Abbreviations.............................................................................................. 2
Summary.............................................................................................................................. 4
I.	Introduction................................................................................................................... 8
     Methodology...................................................................................................................................................................... 9
II.	 What Does the Urban Context Mean for Community Participation?........................... 12
     Continuum of participatory approaches in urban areas..................................................................................12
     Physical and institutional characteristics of urban areas..................................................................................15
     Social characteristics of urban areas........................................................................................................................16
III.	 Overview of the Portfolio and Case Studies................................................................ 18
     Description of the portfolio.........................................................................................................................................18
     Case study selection......................................................................................................................................................20
IV.	 Synthesis of Lessons Learned...................................................................................... 23
     Role of communities vs. role of local government.............................................................................................23
     Beneficiary targeting.....................................................................................................................................................25
     Community mobilization.............................................................................................................................................26
V.	 Conclusions and the Way Forward............................................................................... 29
Annex I. Case Study Summaries........................................................................................ 31
     Benin Second Decentralized City Management Project (PGUD-2)...............................................................31
     Haiti Urban Community-Driven Development Project.....................................................................................33
     Indonesia National Community Empowerment Program (“Program Nasional
     Pemberdayaan Masyarakat”) in Urban Areas (PNPM-Urban)..........................................................................37
     Kyrgyz Republic Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project (BOUIP)....................................................40
     Morocco National Initiative for Human Development Phases 1 and 2.......................................................42
     Tanzania Local Government Support Project.......................................................................................................45
     Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project ..........................................................................................................................48
Annex II. List of Urban Participatory/CDD Projects, 2003-2013....................................... 51
References......................................................................................................................... 55




                                                                                           iii
Figures
   Figure 1. The Number of Urban Projects Identified by the Three Databases and Overlaps.................11
   Figure 2. Continuum of Participatory Approaches in Urban Areas...............................................................14
   Figure 3. Total Number of Participatory and CDD Urban Projects................................................................18
   Figure 4. Number of Urban Participatory Projects by Region.........................................................................19
   Figure 5. Number of Projects by Sector Board......................................................................................................19

Tables
   Table 1: Overview of Urban Participatory and CDD Project Case Studies..................................................20




                                                                          iv
Acknowledgements

This paper reviews the World Bank’s portfolio of urban development projects that use participa-
tory or community-driven development (CDD) approaches. The work was jointly undertaken by
the World Bank’s Social and Urban Development departments just prior to the two units being
merged into the Global Programs Unit for the Social, Urban, Rural & Resilience Global Practice.
It aims to serve the developing country local and national governments that are working on
urban development issues, the World Bank’s CDD Community of Practice, and urban develop-
ment practitioners. In addition, the paper serves as a contribution to the World Bank’s initiative
on inclusive cities.

The study team was led by Margaret Arnold and Ellen Hamilton and included Victoria Beard,
Heejoo Lee, and Kaori Oshima. Susan Wong (Global Solutions Group Leader for CDD), Sameh
Wahba (Urban Practice Manager, GPSURR), and Sean Bradley (Lead Social Development Special-
ist and head of the CDD Community of Practice) provided overall guidance to the study team.
Laura De Brular edited the report and Gracie Ochieng provided valuable administrative support.

The core of the learning presented in the paper was derived from interviews of task team lead-
ers and team members of the case study projects. The study team is extremely grateful to the
following list of colleagues who shared their experience and perspective for this review. They
include: Ali Alwahti, Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh, Judy Baker, Andre Bald, Sean Bradley, Anna
Cestari, Ani Dasgupta, Sylvie Debomy, Hoa Thi Hoang, Rumana Huque, Barjor Mehta, Andrea
Liverani, George Soraya, and Susan Wong. The Haiti case study also benefitted from interviews
with Henriot Nader, the former Project Coordinator of the PRODEPUR at the BMPAD, and from
Jacquelin Eugène, Project Coordinator at CECI-Haiti. We greatly appreciate the time and insights
they provided to the study.

The paper also benefited from peer reviewers of the concept note and final draft. Inputs on
the concept for the study were provided by Judy Baker, Dick Calkins, Patricia Fernandes, Peter
Hawkins, Helena Hwang, Dan Owen, Lawrence Tang, and Makiko Watanabe. Peer reviewers for
the final paper included Judy Baker, Soraya Goga, and Rodrigo Serrano. Additional insights were
provided by a number of World Bank urban and social development practitioners in a series of
discussions on the draft paper which were organized in Bangkok, Istanbul, and Washington DC
in the context of the GPSURR Forum in April 2015. The team greatly appreciates the insights and
feedback of all of our colleagues.

The study team dedicates this publication to the memory of Henriot Nader.




                                                1
Acronyms and Abbreviations

ARIS	    Kyrgyz Republic Community Development and Investment Agency
BKM	     Badan Keswadayan Masyarakat
BOUIP	   Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project
CADEC	   Councils for Community Development Support
CBO	     community-based organization
CDD	     Community-Driven Development
CDS	     City Development Strategy
CISU	    Community Initiative Support Unit
CIUP	    Community Infrastructure Upgrading Project
CPT	     community planning teams
CSP	     Cities Support Project
CUP	     Community Upgrading Plan
DAS	     Division of Social Action
GDP	     gross domestic product
IBRD	    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR	     Implementation Completion Report
ICT	     information and communications technology
IDA	     International Development Association
ILDH	    Initiative Local de Developpement Humain
INDH	    National Initiative for Human Development Support Project
KDP	     Kecamatan Development Project
LGA	     local government authority
LGSP	    Local Government Support Project
ND	      Neighborhood Development
NDC	     Neighborhood Development Committee
NGO	     non-governmental organization
NUUP	    National Urban Upgrading Program



                                      2
                                                                     Acronyms and Abbreviations • 3




O&M	        operations and management
PAD	        Project Appraisal Document
PDC	        Project Development Council
PforR	      Program for Results
PGUD	       Decentralization City Management Project
PGUD-II	    Second Decentralized City Management Project
PNPM	       National Program for Community Empowerment
PRODEP	     Rural Community Participation Development Project
PRODEPAP	   Community Driven Development Project in Port-au Prince Area
PRODEPUR	   Urban Community Driven Development Project
PSDCC	      Decentralized Community-Driven Services Project
RLF	        Revolving Loan Funds
SDV	        Social Development Department
SERHU	      Societé d’Etudes Regionales d’Habitat et d’Amenagement Urbain
TC	         Territorial Councils
TOS	        Territorial Organization of Self-Governance
TST	        technical support teams
TTL	        task team leader
UDRUR	      Urban Development and Resilience Unit
UNODC	      United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UPP	        Urban Poverty Project
USB	        Urban Sector Board
VUUP	       Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project
Summary

With cities accounting globally for an estimated 70 percent of GDP, it is now broadly ac-
cepted that urbanization is not only inevitable but also a powerful force in support of pov-
erty reduction and economic growth. However, while cities are engines of economic growth,
urban growth has not been equitable. As more poor people move to cities in search of oppor-
tunities, the percentage of poor people living in urban areas is expected to grow (World Bank,
2015). Today’s urban population of about 3.5 billion people is projected to reach 5 billion by
2030. Two-thirds of the world’s population will then be urban, and ninety percent of this growth
is taking place in developing countries. Almost 1 billion people currently live in slums with inad-
equate services. More than 70 percent of Africa’s urban population lives in slums.

Participatory and community-driven development approaches can play a powerful role
in addressing acute poverty and inequality growing in cities while also contributing to
the process of democratization and empowerment. The World Bank has a substantial track
record using participatory approaches in urban areas and in implementing Community-Driven
Development projects. CDD is an approach that gives community groups control over planning
decisions and investment resources for local development projects. While the CDD approach
has principally been used by projects operating in rural areas, 40 out of 319 currently active
projects in the CDD database (12.5 %) are under the urban sector.

This review describes the World Bank’s use of participatory and CDD approaches in urban
areas between 2003 and 2013; identifies the challenges and assesses the lessons of us-
ing participatory and CDD approaches in the urban context. The study identified 120 urban
projects utilizing a participatory or CDD approach. Of those projects, seven were selected as
case studies which included desk reviews of project documents and interviews with project
teams. These include:

•	   Benin Second Decentralized City Management Project (PGUD-2)
•	   Haiti Urban Community Driven Development Project (PRODEPUR)
•	   Indonesia National Community Empowerment Program (“Program Nasional Pemberdayaan
     Masyarakat”) in Urban Areas (PNPM-Urban) III
•	   Kyrgyzstan Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project
•	   Morocco National Initiative for Human Development (INDH) Phase 1 and 2
•	   Tanzania Local Government Support Project
•	   Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project I

From these case studies, three key areas emerge in which applying a CDD approach may
require adjusting to the urban context. These include: the roles of communities and local
government authorities; beneficiary targeting; and community mobilization. The key lessons
are summarized below:



                                                4
                                                                                                    Summary • 5




1.	 Participatory development projects in urban areas often demand larger-scale invest-
    ments which determine the appropriate level of community control in addition to the
    role of the local government in the project.

Community investments in urban areas may need to be of a larger scale compared to
those in rural areas. For example, in the first phase of Morocco’s National Initiative for Human
Development (INDH) program, the average cost of rural subprojects was US$45,000 compared
to US$120,000 for urban subprojects due mainly to the larger population size. In Kyrgyz Repub-
lic, initial grant per community was found to be too small for meaningful investments and under
the additional financing, the maximum grant size per community increased to US$50,000.

The size, scope, cost, and technical complexity of urban development activities will affect
the level of community involvement or control that is possible in those activities. It is im-
portant to have a realistic understanding of the types of urban development activities that can
be effectively undertaken with a community-driven approach. Larger urban projects may have
complex engineering and technical demands that require expertise outside of the community.
When a project is beyond the technical capacity of the community, the role of the community
will likely be limited to assessing local conditions and needs, consultations, and collaboration
during the implementation phase.

Local government authorities (LGAs) generally play a stronger role in planning and imple-
mentation of participatory development projects in urban areas vs. rural areas. Infrastruc-
ture investments in poor urban communities connect to larger, trunk infrastructure systems
which are provided and maintained by LGAs. LGAs also play a more important role in urban
areas in relation to operations and maintenance (O&M) of subproject investments. For example,
water facilities are often times managed by a users’ or village association in rural areas, while
in urban areas, there are more complicated regulations, and linkages to LGAs are necessary for
proper O&M. To ensure adequate O&M in targeted municipalities in Benin, the project included
asset maintenance programs tied to established municipal maintenance teams that took re-
sponsibility of cleaning roads and drainage networks, etc. These arrangements allowed munici-
palities to programmatically budget and plan for maintenance services, depending on the type
of infrastructure. Almost all project teams emphasized the importance of providing more capac-
ity building opportunities to enable LGAs to collaborate effectively with communities without
distorting their voice and sense of ownership.

2.	 Beneficiary targeting in urban areas should utilize criteria beyond spatial boundaries
    when necessary and remain flexible to adjust to changing needs.

For the most part, beneficiary targeting can rely on spatial or geographical boundaries
when the purpose of a project is to upgrade a slum or informal settlement. Identifying
target beneficiaries becomes more difficult, however, when the project seeks to address social
exclusion or target specific groups across a municipality or urban community. The case stud-
ies revealed some instances where spatial targeting was initially unable to fully include cer-
tain groups, and targeting criteria was adjusted. In Morocco, for example, there were “pockets
of poverty” spread throughout target municipalities that did not correspond to the commune
system or other municipal organizational structure. Under the first phase of the National Initia-
tive for Human Development project (INDH-1), towns for the urban subprogram were selected
based on administrative criteria rather than socio-economic criteria, leaving targeting open to
6 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             the interpretation of each provincial authority. Learning from this, INDH-2 aimed to be more in-
             clusive, covering all municipalities with more than 20,000 inhabitants and using poverty maps to
             target beneficiaries. Criteria for neighborhood selection was based on a series of social exclusion
             indicators such as access to basic services, unemployment, illiteracy, and housing conditions. It
             also used participatory social mapping exercises to validate information at the local level.

             Beneficiary targeting in high risk urban areas requires greater flexibility. In the face of so-
             cial conflict, violence, or natural disasters, several projects adjusted the targeting criteria to adapt
             to shifting circumstances. When the Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project encountered
             instances of elite capture in Kyrgyz, the project team adjusted the selection criteria to select ad-
             ditional beneficiaries and minimize conflict. After the earthquake in Haiti, the PRODEPUR project
             found the need to adjust criteria again in some cases when people established new social net-
             works in relief camps and no longer identified with the neighborhood they lived in prior to the
             disaster. When they were resettled, some preferred to stay with their new networks.

             3.	 Mobilizing urban communities requires a greater investment in time and effort due to
                 constraints in terms of people’s availability, physical space, and trust.

             In urban areas, social mobilization tends to take more time and require more patience.
             People living in urban areas may be too busy with wage earning jobs to participate in meetings,
             or they may not feel a sense of “community” or clear identity attached to their area of residency,
             as they may have migrated from different parts of the country. Therefore, the role of facilita-
             tors becomes even more crucial in promoting participatory development processes in the ur-
             ban context. Even with larger and better resourced local government units, retaining effective
             community facilitators can be a challenge. Contracting NGOs or firms may be more realistic and
             effective, rather than relying on project staff or local government officials.

             Informal social networks become increasingly important in contexts where organizational
             structures are weak, overly politicized, or do not facilitate meaningful participation. How-
             ever, social networks also represent power structures that have the potential to capture project
             benefits. For example, in Kyrgyzstan communities were prioritizing the construction of neigh-
             borhood sports facilities. The project team noted that certain groups were taking over the cen-
             ters and women were being excluded over time. In Haiti, it was essential to engage community
             members involved in criminal activity as part of community-based organizations for the project
             to proceed as they were recognized as legitimate community leaders.

             Having communities contribute financially to subprojects can potentially serve to pro-
             mote ownership of investments, but project teams need to carefully consider the cultural
             and economic aspects of requiring community contributions. In Tanzania, the project ini-
             tially required the community to contribute 10% of the subproject cost. Realizing that this was
             overburdening poor households, the project abolished the financial contribution requirement,
             and poor households were able to participate and benefit from the subproject investments. On
             the contrary, in Vietnam, the community contribution under the urban upgrading project was
             very effective in enhancing their commitment and participation.

             Even with larger-size grants or a separate component to support big infrastructure, most
             case study project teams acknowledged the importance of supporting social and econom-
             ic activities of the target beneficiaries. While more challenging to implement, some projects
                                                                                                        Summary • 7




have succeeded in integrating physical, social, and economic components. For example, in Viet-
nam, the urban upgrading project sought to mitigate flooding by raising the level of the street.
However, if the street was to be raised without changing the level of adjacent housing, this
would exacerbate flooding, so the project incorporated a mechanism for households to borrow
money to raise their floors. It also incorporated an income-generation loan so households could
expand their economic activities to repay the housing loans. The typical challenge for CDD-type
operations supporting economic activities is to ensure that project team and facilitators have
sufficient skills to support the management of private goods investment and market systems.
Without a clear understanding of local markets, grassroots organizations and self-help groups
who start economic activities can end up being unable to pay back loans or to sustain business-
es.

As the world urbanizes, so does risk. The way urban development takes place will either com-
pound or reduce those risks—be they from climate change, natural disasters, political upheaval,
violence and crime, displacement, or economic shocks. Urban development approaches that
promote physical, financial, and social inclusion of all residents will be critical to ensuring that
cities are resilient and sustainable. The synergies between the urban and social agendas have
never been more relevant. A few suggested areas for future thinking and collaboration include:

•	   Further emphasize and systematize community engagement in urban planning:
     Urban CDD and slum upgrading projects have traditionally focused on retrofitting already
     established settlements. A greater focus on engaging communities in newly urbanizing
     areas could be beneficial. One example is the City Development Strategy (CDS) process,
     where local stakeholders formulate a holistic vision for the city, giving voice to the residents
     on shaping the strategy and in monitoring the implementation. More systematic use of local
     government participatory planning and budgetary systems in urban projects could also be
     promoted.
•	   Develop guidance and learning events around specific urban challenges: A number of
     issues emerged from the document reviews and interviews that would benefit from specific
     guidance and thinking for staff working on urban participatory and CDD projects. These
     include: resettlement and safeguards in urban CDD projects; the use of a CDD approach
     for relocation planning needs; understanding the different dynamics within and between
     city center, peri-urban areas, and small towns; dealing with displaced populations in urban
     areas; and comprehensive approaches to strengthening resilience and managing risks in
     urban areas (including climate and disaster risk, conflict and violence, economic shocks,
     etc.).
•	   Build on the foundation of the current set of case studies: The interviews revealed
     that urban and CDD practitioners have a wealth of knowledge that needs to be captured.
     While this set of case studies provides a first step, developing mechanisms to capture and
     share more of that tacit knowledge would be extremely useful. Undertaking additional
     case studies and building on the current ones with field research would allow a deeper
     understanding of the challenges and how to address them. In addition, it is recognized
     that there is a vast amount of innovation going on in cities throughout the globe related
     to citizen engagement, community empowerment and urbanization. Providing incentives
     to bring more of that knowledge into projects at the country and city level will be valuable.
I.	Introduction

Urban development is a critical and urgent agenda for a large part of the world, especially
for developing countries. Today’s urban population of about 3.5 billion people is projected
to reach 5 billion by 2030. Two-thirds of the world’s population will then be urban, and ninety
percent of this growth is taking place in developing countries. About 5 million people migrate
every month to cities in developing countries in search of jobs and better access to services
(World Bank 2013). With cities accounting globally for an estimated 70 percent of GDP, it is now
broadly accepted that urbanization is not only inevitable but also a powerful force in support of
poverty reduction and economic growth.

While cities are engines of economic growth, urban growth has not been equitable and
poverty is urbanizing. As more poor people move to cities in search of opportunities, the per-
centage of poor people living in urban areas is expected to grow (World Bank, 2015). The World
Bank notes that while urban areas can offer better quality of life and, in fact, account for lower
rates of extreme poverty compared to those of rural areas, one in three urban residents still lives
in under-serviced areas. Almost 1 billion people currently live in slums with inadequate services.
More than 70 percent of Africa’s urban population lives in slums. The living conditions of slum
dwellers and informal settlers are dire—take for example, one toilet for every 500 people in the
slums of Nairobi, Kenya. Such inadequate access to services leads to deterioration of the urban
environment and increases the disease burden on the urban poor (ibid).

In order to ensure that the benefits of urban growth are shared by all, it is critical to ad-
dress the social aspects of urban development challenges. A number of efforts are exploring
the social dimensions of resilience and inclusiveness. The World Bank’s Global Programs Unit has
a body of work on social resilience to disasters and climate change1 and recently published “In-
clusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity,” one of the most comprehensive reviews
of social inclusion available. In addition, the Global Programs Unit is exploring ‘exclusion’ in ur-
ban areas as multidimensional challenges, including physical/spatial exclusion (i.e., intra-urban
inequalities between various districts/neighborhoods in terms of access to land and housing,



1	   See www.worldbank.org/socialresilience




                                                 8
                                                                                                                            I. Introduction • 9




infrastructure, basic services, and public amenities and the differences between legal/formal
neighborhoods and illegal/informal settlements) and economic exclusion (i.e., an inability to en-
ter formal labor markets, obtain capital for business development, or the education necessary
to be considered for employment)—which are often driven by social exclusion on the basis of
age, gender, race, caste, religion, ethnicity, or disability impacts on individual’s participation and
voice in the governance of the city.

Participatory and community-driven development approaches can play a powerful role in
addressing acute poverty and inequality growing in cities while also contributing to the
process of democratization and empowerment. In urban contexts, “participatory urban up-
grading” gained prominence when the growing needs of the urban poor began exceeding the
capacity of the local authorities to respond with public housing policies and other more con-
ventional ‘top-down’ approaches. The World Bank also has a large portfolio of projects that fulfill
the specific criteria to be considered Community-Driven Development (CDD). CDD is an ap-
proach that gives community groups control over planning decisions and investment resources
for local development projects. While the CDD approach has principally been used by projects
operating in rural areas2, 40 out of 319 currently active projects in the CDD database (12.5 %) are
under the urban sector.3
As cities grow and poverty urbanizes, practitioners need a better understanding of the
strengths, limitations, and challenges of using participatory approaches in these environ-
ments. This could be helped by highlighting the overlaps and the synergies between partici-
patory approaches in urban upgrading and CDD. There is extensive knowledge among CDD
practitioners on designing CDD projects and programs in rural areas but less on using CDD or
community-based approaches to address specific challenges in the urban context.

This paper aims to contribute to learning on community engagement and CDD in urban
areas. Specifically, the review describes the World Bank’s use of participatory and CDD ap-
proaches in urban areas between 2003 and 2013; identifies the challenges of using participa-
tory and CDD approaches in the urban context; assesses lessons from the application of CDD
in urban areas through case studies; and makes recommendations for a way forward in terms
of operational approaches and further research to improve the application of CDD in cities. In
conducting the study, the team engaged colleagues from social and urban development, and
other relevant sectors in order to leverage cross-sectoral collaboration. The paper aims to pro-
vide a useful starting point for dialogue and collaboration to contribute to sustainable and in-
clusive cities. The findings of the review are targeted to task team leaders and national and local
government officials who are interested in initiating, expanding, or scaling up projects with a
participatory approach in urban areas.

Methodology
The first step in the study was to identify the World Bank’s “urban participatory and CDD
portfolio.” This involved searching several project databases to identify projects operating in


2	   The CDD team in the SDV has been tracking IBRD/IDA lending towards projects with the CDD approach since 2000, which
     can be accessed at: http://sdweb.worldbank.org/cdd/index.cfm?Page=home

3	   The “CDD amount” being invested in community-level activities by these active projects is estimated as USD 2.37 billion.
10 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             urban areas that have components with high levels of community participation or that use a
             CDD approach. The following database searches were undertaken to identify relevant projects
             approved between fiscal year 2003-2013:

             1.	 CDD database: This database lists the CDD portfolio since fiscal 2000, covering all projects
                 that have used a CDD approach in any component of the project. The data are maintained
                 by the CDD Secretariat and are obtained through an end-of-fiscal year annual review of
                 project appraisal documents for World Bank lending operations.4 Seventy-two projects were
                 identified with greater than 30% of the investment committed to CDD components and that
                 were either mapped to the urban sector or were mapped to other sectors but have “Urban
                 Services and Housing for the Poor” as a theme.

             2.	 Slum Upgrading database: The (former) Urban Development unit has been tracking infor-
                 mation on slum upgrading projects in a separate database.5 From this database, 43 projects
                 with “Slum Upgrading” components were identified with substantial aspects of community
                 participation.

             3.	 World Bank operations mapped to the Urban Sector Board (USB): Finally, the overall da-
                 tabase of projects mapped to the USB was searched to identify projects with the “Participa-
                 tion and Civic Engagement” theme. Thirty-eight projects mapped to the urban sector were
                 found to have the specific theme related to community participation.

             Searching these three databases helped to ensure that urban projects with significant
             CDD or participatory components were not overlooked. Following this initial review, the
             three project lists were compared to identify overlaps. The number of overlaps among the proj-
             ects found in each of these sources is shown in figure 1 below. Based on this comparison, a
             universe of 120 urban participatory or urban CDD projects were identified for the review (see
             Annex II).

             Of the 120 urban participatory or CDD projects identified, seven projects were selected
             as case studies for further review. Cases were selected with an aim to represent diversity in
             terms of regional representation; level of development (with both International Bank for Recon-
             struction and Development (IBRD), and International Development Association (IDA) borrowers
             represented); availability of results and maturity of the project (closed or nearing full disburse-
             ment); and diversity of the project environment and design. Based on these criteria, seven proj-
             ects were identified as suitable candidates for further study:

             •	   Benin Second Decentralized City Management Project (PGUD-2)
             •	   Haiti Urban Community Driven Development Project (PRODEPUR)
             •	   Indonesia National Community Empowerment Program (“Program Nasional Pemberdayaan


             4	   The set of criteria for the portfolio review was tightened in 2011 and, therefore, the CDD projects identified before 2011 were
                  subject to potentially looser definition. This has had an impact of showing a significant drop in the number of projects entering
                  into the CDD portfolio starting in 2011.

             5	   This portfolio review examined an initial database of projects from 2000 to 2013 that had the following theme and sector
                  codes to identify all as “housing projects”: Urban Services and Housing for the Poor (theme code #71), Other Urban Develop-
                  ment (theme code #74), Urban Planning and Housing Policy (theme code #101), City-Wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery
                  (theme code #102), Housing finance (sector code FC) and Housing Construction (YC). These projects were then categorized
                  according to the main type of intervention with “urban (slum) upgrading” being one of the categories.
                                                                                             I. Introduction • 11




     Figure 1. The Number of Urban Projects Identified by the Three Databases
               and Overlaps




                                                  52
                                             CDD database


                                           7               10
                                                   3
                                 23                                 52
                          Slum Upgrading
                                                 10         Civic engagement
                                                               under Urban
                                                               Sector Board




     Masyarakat”) in Urban Areas (PNPM-Urban) III
•	   Kyrgyzstan Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project
•	   Morocco National Initiative for Human Development (INDH) Phase 1 and 2
•	   Tanzania Local Government Support Project
•	   Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project I

Case studies consisted of a desk review of project documents and interviews with project
teams. For each of the seven cases, project documentation, including project appraisal docu-
ments (PADs), implementation and completion results reports (ICRs), project evaluations, and
project presentation materials were reviewed to identify challenges and lessons from the proj-
ect. Following this, task team leaders and project team members were interviewed either by
phone or in person to gain additional insights. In the case of Haiti, the study team was also able
to interview two government and civil society implementing partners of the project.
II.	What Does the Urban
    Context Mean for
    Community Participation?

The World Bank has a substantial track record using participatory approaches in urban
areas and in implementing Community-Driven Development projects. Urban development
practitioners have long recognized the importance of engaging urban communities in devel-
opment. Slum upgrading projects have promoted participatory approaches with the level and
characteristics of participation varying according to the country context and capacity of stake-
holders. The Community-Driven Development (CDD) practice has also developed over several
decades of practice and distinguishes itself by focusing consistently on active engagement of
beneficiaries in the design, management, and implementation of projects. CDD projects have
mainly focused on rural areas, but the approach is increasingly being used in urban contexts as
well.

Continuum of participatory approaches in urban areas
Beginning in the 1970s, the World Bank began to apply urban participatory approaches
to slum upgrading projects. Work in this area was heavily influenced by the writing of John F.C.
Turner, Freedom to Build (1972) (Werlin 1999). Turner’s approach underscored the organizational
capacity of communities and argued in favor of minimizing the role of the state. Based on his
experience in Peru, Turner argued that instead of demolishing slums, the urban environment
should be improved. On a project level, this meant emphasis was placed on providing small-
scale infrastructure and basic services, eradicating muddy, unlit lanes, and providing potable
water, sanitation, and drainage. Turner argued that if the urban environment was improved and
squatters were given security and access to credit, they would maintain infrastructure and im-
prove their own homes over time.




                                              12
                                          II. What Does the Urban Context Mean for Community Participation? • 13




Towards the end of the 1980s and into the 1990s, striking a balance between the role of
the state and the community became a visible task. Based on an analysis of three of the
World Bank’s largest and most expensive upgrading projects in Calcutta, Jakarta, and Manila,
Werlin (1999) found that initial evaluations document remarkable success and support Turner’s
theory. However, by the end of the 1980s, “The benefits of these slum upgrading efforts ap-
peared ephemeral.…” Reviewing later evaluations of upgrading projects, Werlin concludes “that
the ‘minimal state’ advocated by Turner can deal with the problems typically encountered in
slum upgrading is a dangerous illusion.” He identifies three areas where these efforts fall short in
resolving difficult problems: (1) land acquisition and tenure; (2) cost recovery for maintenance;
and, (3) citizen participation. In conclusion, Werlin advocates for a combined development from
“above” and “below” approach because the success of urban upgrading projects over the long
term depends on strong government support.

Participatory urban upgrading has evolved to be broadly defined as an holistic approach
to making improvements not only in the physical but also the social, economic, organiza-
tional, and environmental aspects of living conditions. An integral part of urban upgrading
is the cooperative effort among citizens, community groups, businesses, and local authorities to
ensure sustained improvements in the quality of life. More specifically, upgrading projects typi-
cally focus on (i) regularizing land tenure security; (ii) providing basic services and infrastructure;
(iii) formulating institutional and organizational structure; and (iv) addressing socio-economic
issues (Basset et al., 2003). The participatory facet is arguably a fundamental dimension in the
sense that upgrading projects are complex operations requiring collective effort to mobilize
technical skill, ingenuity, and patience. The intrinsic value of community support and partici-
pation is now widely accepted as a point of departure for project design (Imparato and Ruster,
2003). Beyond the scope of the project, participation is recognized as contributing to democ-
ratization and empowerment of the population, fostering working relationships and mutual
respect between the community and public authorities (Basset et al., 2003).

In parallel to the evolution in thinking about urban upgrading, the Community-Driven
Development (CDD) practice and portfolio began to be increasingly supported by the
World Bank and other development partners. CDD is an approach that gives control over
planning decisions and investment resources to community groups and local governments.
Historically, programs using a CDD approach grew out of situations of crisis (financial shock,
conflict, or natural disasters) and were meant as transitional instruments for service delivery
where governments (particularly newly established administrations) lacked capacity to deliver
services (Wong 2012). By optimizing the use of community actors, a CDD approach places less
stress on government line agencies and at the same time is able to reach very large numbers of
poor people. A CDD approach had traditionally been used by Social Funds, which are govern-
ment agencies or programs that channel grants to communities for small-scale development
projects. Social Funds typically finance a mixture of socioeconomic infrastructure (e.g., building
or rehabilitating schools, water supply systems, and roads), productive investments (e.g., micro-
finance and income-generating projects), social services (e.g., supporting nutrition campaigns,
literacy programs, youth training, and support to the elderly and disabled), or capacity-building
programs (e.g., training for civil and local governments) (World Bank 2009).
14 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




       Figure 2. Continuum of Participatory Approaches in Urban Areas

       Government            Community participates     Community directly          Community controls
       consults with         in all aspects of the      controls the planning       all planning decisions,
       the community,        planning cycle through     decisions, but              and the financial
       information flows     an intermediary, NGO,      procurement and contract    resources
       from top to bottom    or local government        supervision are carried
                                                        out by another entity




                Continuum of participatory development approaches based on citizen power




        Manipulation,            Informing,            Partnership and             Citizen control
        therapy                  consultation,         delegated power
                                 placation




             Wong (ibid) describes how a typical CDD program works:

                     “CDD program designs usually involved communities undertaking a village-level
                     participatory planning process with the help of project facilitator or local govern-
                     ment officials. Communities identify their priority needs and the plans or propos-
                     als are sent to inter-village representatives or higher level forums at the district or
                     provincial levels for decision making.”

             The CDD approach implies a process of community consultation, facilitated decision making,
             control of resources, and participatory monitoring of implementation and results. These fea-
             tures are captured in Arnstein’s (1969, 217) seminal article, “A Ladder of Citizen Participation,”
             which provides a useful continuum for characterizing the range of participatory development
             efforts—from manipulation and therapy at one end to delegated power and citizen control at
             the other (see figure 2).

             While a “pure” CDD project would fall on the far right of the participation continuum, the
             urban context presents a number of challenges to achieving this level of citizen control.
             Most urban upgrading projects likely fall towards the left and middle points of the continu-
             um. The majority of CDD projects have been implemented in rural areas where defining village
             boundaries, identifying local needs, and engaging constituents is in many ways a more straight-
             forward process. As CDD projects are increasingly implemented in urban areas, practitioners
             are faced with a number of characteristics which complicate the level of citizen control that is
             feasible in projects. These include physical, institutional and social characteristics of urban areas.
                                         II. What Does the Urban Context Mean for Community Participation? • 15




Physical and institutional characteristics of urban areas
The line between urban and rural areas is increasingly blurred. While the identification of
urban areas may seem simple because of national criteria identified by bureaus of statistics,
political administrative systems, or land administration systems, this identification process is
inconsistent in many parts of the world. For example, the growth of peri-urban areas and the
increased industrialization of rural areas do not fit traditional understandings of urban or rural
areas. Despite the conceptual limitations created by a rural and urban dichotomy, there exist ar-
eas that we understand as clearly urban due to their high population density, the predominance
of non-agricultural employment, dependency on the cash economy, and the nature of their
built environment. This paper focuses on these areas and describes below some key physical
and institutional traits that affect the urban poor.

Built environment, public space, physical exclusion

Poor and marginalized urban communities are typically more densely settled than their
rural counterparts and are poorly connected to urban infrastructure and basic services.
This density combined with poor construction quality and precarious sites puts these settle-
ments at greater risk for certain hazards, such as fire, floods, landslides, and trash slides (Baker
2012). The informality that often characterizes these settlements results in a loss of formal and
informal public spaces, which can reduce opportunities to build social capital and organize col-
lectively. This implies that participatory development would require a longer period of time to
allow for development of trust and mutual understanding to build consensus around shared
needs and priorities.

Informality and land tenure

Poor urban communities throughout the developing world are characterized by informal-
ity in terms of residents’ rights to occupy urban space as well as the physical construction
of the built environment (Aldrich and Sandhu 1995; Gilbert and Gugler 2000). These commu-
nities are also characterized by mixed land tenure status and overlapping land administrative
systems. Land tenure is often a result of the process by which occupation occurred initially re-
sulting in a mix of de jure and de facto rights. Informality, mixed, and ambiguous land tenure sta-
tus complicates participatory approaches in a number of ways. First, it can make understanding
community boundaries as well as identifying beneficiaries more complicated. Second, infor-
mality typically results in a more complicated physical environment in terms of the density of
occupation and haphazard construction of housing and infrastructure. Third, informality often
limits service providers such as utilities from providing services.

Local government

In urban areas, local government plays a more significant role in planning and project im-
plementation compared to rural villages. This is partially due to the size and complexity that
characterize urban projects. Complexity refers to the average size of a project’s beneficiaries,
size of the investment, as well as the technical complexity involved with implementation. Many
community-level projects in urban areas need to connect to larger systems; for example, sys-
tems for potable water, solid waste disposal, sewage, drainage, and transportation. This neces-
16 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             sity to connect to trunk infrastructure requires levels of coordination that go above and beyond
             the purview of the community. Furthermore, in urban areas, the local government has a more
             significant role to play in terms of project maintenance and sustainability over the long term.
             However, participatory approaches benefit when local government has more capacity and is in
             a position to play a supportive role (Mansuri and Rao 2013; Werlin 1999).

             Social characteristics of urban areas
             The nature of social capital is more complex in urban areas. Participatory approaches are
             largely dependent on the quality of the social relationships among community members di-
             rectly affected by the outcome of the system. As a result, policy makers and development prac-
             titioners have become increasingly interested in social relationships and social capital among
             actors (Beard and Dasgupta 2006; Grootaert and van Bastelaer 2002; Mansuri and Rao 2004;
             Woolcock 1998; Woolcock and Narayan 2000). In this context, social capital refers to the quality
             of individual relationships facilitated by trust, reciprocity, and exchange between community
             members. Coleman (1990) identifies three conditions associated with the presence of social
             capital: closure, stability, and the presence of a communitarian ideology. Typically these three
             conditions are more strongly associated with rural communities compared to their urban com-
             munities. Each of these three conditions is challenged by a number of characteristics associated
             with urban environments.

             Size, heterogeneity and complexity

             In urban areas the population size of the target community is typically larger. It is well doc-
             umented that the collective action that underlies many aspects of participatory development
             is more challenging with larger groups (Olson 1965). Urban populations are also more likely to
             be characterized by heterogeneity compared to their rural counterparts in terms of, but not
             limited to: socio-economic status, caste, religion, ethnicity, language, and community of origin.
             Increased diversity makes building consensus around a sense of purpose, identifying and priori-
             tizing needs, and even developing a common understanding of what constitutes an acceptable
             process of engagement more complicated.

             Economic inequality

             Socio-economic heterogeneity is a particular challenge for participation in urban areas.
             Urban areas are more likely to have greater economic inequality, which makes identifying and
             prioritizing needs a more difficult task. For example, poorer community members will be more
             concerned with access to basic services (i.e., water, sanitation, health care, education) while
             wealthier community members have the ability to meet these needs through the private mar-
             ket. In communities with high degrees of economic inequality, community members have dif-
             ferent demands on their time. In terms of participatory development, there is a point at which
             households on either end of the income distribution will opt out of participatory processes to
             gain access to services because, for example, they do not have the minimum level of resources
             necessary to participate or the opportunity cost of participation is too high (Beard 2007).
                                         II. What Does the Urban Context Mean for Community Participation? • 17




Migration, mobility, and displacement

Many urban neighborhoods are comprised of a mix of long-term and more recent resi-
dents. Recent migrants are likely to have smaller local social networks and more tenuous ties to
their receiving communities. In recent years, there has been a rise of involuntary or forced mi-
gration. Globally, the number of forced migrants, both international and internal, is estimated at
somewhere between 100 and 200 million (Castles 2003, 15). Involuntary migration is caused by
a variety of factors, including natural disasters, climate change, environmental degradation, po-
litical conflict, trafficking and displacement by development projects (Biermann and Boas 2010;
Castles 2003, 15). Migrants arrive in urban areas with fewer resources and without the option to
return to their sending communities. The number of displaced due to conflict, violence, and po-
litical upheaval alone is estimated at 45.2 million. Most displacement is occurring in developing
countries, and more than half of the displaced people are living in urban areas, drawn to cities
and towns by the prospect of anonymity and better access to services and economic opportuni-
ties. Returning refugees also tend to settle in urban areas, having become accustomed to urban
life in refuge, lacking the inclination or skills to farm, or wishing to avoid ongoing insecurity in
rural areas (World Bank, forthcoming).

Violence, crime, and conflict

Urban areas in the developing world are increasingly violent with the victims tending to
be among the most vulnerable segments of society: women, youth, and the poor. Africa
and Latin America are some of the most violent regions of the world (UNODC 2011). Moser
(2006, 4) explains there is a complex relationship between poverty, inequality, and exclusion
that together have the potential to precipitate crime, conflict, and violence. In terms of partici-
patory development, Moser (2006, 5) explains how violence erodes community cohesion, social
relationships based on trust, and makes cooperation more difficult. For example, literature has
found that the threat of violence and crime can make attending community meetings more
difficult, particularly for women.

In short, the characteristics described above affect greatly the level of citizen control that
is feasible in urban areas. The principle of community control over resources for distinguishing
CDD from other forms of participatory development is not as meaningful in the urban context
as these projects are typically larger and financially and technically more complex. In addition,
defining communities and their needs can be more difficult and contentious due to their larger
size and to higher levels of complexity and heterogeneity.
        III.	Overview of the Portfolio
             and Case Studies
        Description of the portfolio
        This section provides a descriptive analysis of the 120 projects in the World Bank’s urban
        participatory and CDD portfolio. The figures below are based on the number of projects iden-
        tified for the analysis. A weakness of using the number of projects as the basis for these figures
        is that this information does not indicate the size of the investment. However, isolating the size
        of the investment is not a straightforward process since all of the projects have multiple compo-
        nents, and not all of these components are related to participatory development or CDD. Figure
        3 shows the number of projects initiated and the number of projects that received additional
        funding over the last 11 years.



Figure 3. Total Number of Participatory and CDD Urban Projects
   20
   18
   16                                      2
   14                                                7
                                                                                 Additional Financing
   12      1
                                                                                 (AF) to on-going
   10                              2                               5   2         projects

    8                                                          3
                                          15
    6      12                                        11                          Number of Project
    4                        8     9                                   9
                 7     7                         6             7   7             (other than AF)
    2
    0
         2003 2004   2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

                                       Fiscal Year




                                                          18
                                                             III. Overview of the Portfolio and Case Studies • 19




     Figure 4. Number of Urban Participatory Projects by Region


                                                             Africa

                                14                           East Asia and the Pacific

                       13                     39
                                                             Europe and Central Asia

                                                             Latin America and Caribbean
                       29
                                         17                  Middle East and North Africa
                                     8
                                                             South Asia




Figure 3 shows that the number of projects has been fairly constant; on average about 11 proj-
ects per year were funded and two projects received additional funding per year. In 2008 and
2010, a significantly larger number of projects were funded. In 2008, 15 projects were funded
and 2 projects received additional funds.

Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean regions have the greatest number of urban
participatory and CDD projects in the universe of the study, 39 and 29, respectively (see
figure 4). The Europe and Central Asia region has the least number of projects (8), which may be
reflective of a relatively smaller overall portfolio for the region.



     Figure 5. Number of Projects by Sector Board


                                                           Urban Development
                            4    8
                       4
                                                           Water
                   6

                                                           Social Development
                 14
                                         84                Social Protection


                                                           Agriculture and Rural Development
20 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




                Not surprisingly the vast majority of projects, 70 percent, were mapped to the urban de-
                velopment sector (see figure 5). The remaining projects were mapped to the water, social de-
                velopment, and other sectors. The reader should note that all of the figures are based on the
                universe described in the preceding methods section.

                Case study selection
                Seven country case studies were selected for closer review from the universe of the identified
                120 urban participatory projects. They include:

                •	   Benin Second Decentralized City Management Project (PGUD-2)
                •	   Haiti Urban Community Driven Development Project (PRODEPUR)
                •	   Indonesia National Community Empowerment Program (“Program Nasional Pemberdayaan
                     Masyarakat”) in Urban Areas (PNPM-Urban) III
                •	   Kyrgyzstan Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project
                •	   Morocco National Initiative for Human Development (INDH) Phase 1 and 2
                •	   Tanzania Local Government Support Project
                •	   Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project I

  Although 7 cases cannot represent the rich and diverse experience in participatory and community-driven
  development projects in the urban context, the cases do provide interesting observations on the oppor-
  tunities and challenges related to engaging communities and targeting beneficiaries in different political
  and historical contexts. To the extent possible, the case studies also tried to capture lessons from the proj-
  ects that emerged from the document reviews and task team interviews. Project descriptions, community
  participation aspects under the project, achievements, and lessons learned are provided in Annex I. Table 1
  presents an overview of the basic project information of the cases reviewed.


   Table 1: Overview of Urban Participatory and CDD Project Case Studies
                                                                   Description of CDD
                                                                   component
   Country/
                     Project Name/
   Investment                          Project Development         (planned or actual when           Number of Beneficiaries
   (US$)             Years             Objective                   available)                        (approx.)

   Benin             Second            To increase access to       1.	   Municipal Management        Target: 336,000 population
   P082725           Decentralized     infrastructure and basic          Strengthening               getting access to primary
   P109209           City Management   services for residents of         (US$3.51m)                  and secondary paved
                     Project           Benin’s primary cities                                        roads; 114,000 additional
   Total 50m                                                       2.	   Basic Infrastructure
                                       (Cotonou, Porto-Novo,                                         population protected from
   (IDA 35m,         2005-2012                                           (US$22.50 m with
                                       and Parakou) and selected                                     periodic flooding
   AF IDA                                                                additional financing 40m)
                                       secondary cities (Abomey-
   40m,                                                                                              Actual: approximately
                                       Calavi, Kandi, and          3.	   Community Participation
   France 11.7m,                                                                                     446,500 people to have
                                       Lokossa).                         and Integration
   Govt of Benin                                                                                     better access to paved
                                                                         (US$1.79 m)
   3.3m)                                                                                             roads; 526,000 people
                                                                   4.	   Solid Waste Management      to benefit from reduced
                                                                         in Porto-Novo               exposure to flood risk.
                                                                         (US$9.06 m)
                                                                           III. Overview of the Portfolio and Case Studies • 21




Haiti              Urban            To improve access to and    1.	        Community Subproject        Target: Directly 85,000
                   Community        satisfaction with (i) basic            Funding, Management,        individuals (17,000 HHs)
P106699
                   Driven           and social infrastructure              and Support (US$13.5m;      + Indirectly 490,000
Total 54.2m        Development      and services and (ii)                  IDAUS$12.70m)               individuals = in total
(IDA 15.7m         Project          income-generating                                                  575,000 individuals.
                                                                2.	        Capacity-Building and
AF1 IDA 30m,       (PRODEPUR)       opportunities for residents                                        The estimated number
                                                                           Technical Assistance
AF2 IDA                             of targeted urban slums.                                           of subprojects to be
                   2008-2015                                               (US$0.90 m)
7.5m, Local                                                                                            completed is 360-400.
Communities                                                          3.	   Project Administration,
                                                                                                     Actual: Number of
1m)                                                                        Supervision, Monitoring
                                                                                                     beneficiaries not yet
                                                                           and Evaluation (US$2.1 m)
                                                                                                     available. As of May 2014,
                                                                     4.	   (from AF) Housing repair  over 493 subprojects are
                                                                           and reconstruction        financed in Port-au Prince
                                                                                                     and three other cities.

Indonesia          PNPM-Urban III   To assist the Government         1.	   Community Development
                                    of Indonesia to ensure                 and Local Government
P118113            2010-2013
                                    that the urban poor                    Capacity Building
Total 217.48m                       benefit from improved                  (US$25.2m)
(IBRD 149.98m,                      socio-economic and local
                                                                     2.	   Kelurahan Grants
Gov of Indonesia                    governance conditions.
                                                                           (US$184.5m)
67.5m)
                                                                     3.	   Implementation and
                                                                           Technical Assistance
                                                                           (US$14.8m)

P125405            PNPM-Urban       To support the Republic          1.	   Capacity building for       Target: 6,000,000 direct
                                    of Indonesia to ensure                 Communities and Local       beneficiaries of the project
Total 500m         2012-2015
                                    the urban poor in                      Governments (Loan           (maintaining the peak
(IBRD 266m, Gov
                                    participating kelurahans               $80m+ Grant $5.3 m)         in 2011 while aims at
of Indonesia
                                    benefit from improved                                              improving the quality)
210.5m, TF                                                           2.	   Kelurahan (“urban wards’)
                                    local governance and
23.5m)                                                                     Grants (Loan $149m +        Actual: Baseline Oct 2011:
                                    living conditions.
                                                                           Grant $14.2 m)              6,100,000
                                                                     3.	   Implementation Support
                                                                           and Technical Assistance
                                                                           (Loan $37m + Grant $4m)
                                                                     4.	   Contingency for Disaster
                                                                           Response ($0).

Kyrgyzstan         Bishkek and      To increase the                  1.	   Basic Infrastructure        Target: 220,000 (By June
                   Osh Urban        availability of basic urban            (US$9m, with additional     2015)
P104994
                   Infrastructure   services in semi-formal                financing US$26m)
                                                                                                       (female 50%)
Total 30.59m       Project          settlements known as new
                                                                     2.	   Community Investment
(IDA 12m,                           housing developments                                               Actual: As of Nov 2013:
                 2008-2015                                                 Programs (US$1m, with
AF IDA 15.8                         (novostroiki) in the cities of                                     81,000 (female 54%)
                                                                           additional financing
m, Gov of                           Bishkek and Osh, as well as
                                                                           US$5.1m)
Kyrgyzstan                          in select small towns* of
2.35m, TF 0.44m)                    the Kyrgyz Republic, and         3.	   Institutional Development
                                    to increase the availability           (US$1m)
                                    of social infrastructures        4.	   Operational Support
                                    in the cities of Bishkek               (US$1m, with additional
                                    and Osh and in both the                financing US$1.6m)
                                    selected small towns and
                                    other small towns.
22 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




   Morocco           National Initiative   To improve inclusiveness,      Rural Poverty Reduction           INDH-1 Actual: over 22,000
                     for Human             accountability and             (US$327m)                         subprojects and over 5
   INDH-1
                     Development           transparency of                                                  million beneficiaries; urban
   P100026                                                                Reduction of social exclusion
                     Support Project I     decision making and                                              component benefitted
   Total 1 billion                                                        in urban areas (US$497m)
                                           implementation processes                                         1,627,600 people through
   (IBRD 100m,       (INDH-1)
                                           at the local level in          Tackling vulnerability            4,069 subprojects.
   Govt of Morocco
                     2006-2011             order to enhance use           (US$356m)
   900m)
                                           of social and economic         Strengthening governance and
                                           infrastructure and services    institutional capacity (US$525)
                                           by poor and vulnerable
                                           groups.                        (costs are the total costs with
                                                                          other sources)


   INDH-2            INDH-2                To improve access to           Rural subprogram (US$374m)        Target:
   P116201                                 and/or use of enhanced
                     2012-2016                                            Urban Subprogram (US$410m)        403 rural communes and
   Total 1.165                             participatory local
                                                                                                            264 urban
   billion                                 governance mechanisms,         Cross-cutting subprogram
   (IBRD 300m,                             basic infrastructure, social   (US$331m)                         Neighborhoods (various
   Govt of Morocco                         services, and economic                                           indicators under Program
                                                                          Vulnerability subprogram
   865m)                                   opportunities in the                                             for Results instrument)
                                                                          (US$168m)
                                           program area.
                                                                          Territorial upgrading
                                                                          subprogram (US$602m)
                                                                          (costs are the total costs with
                                                                          other sources)


   Tanzania          Local                 To (a) strengthen fiscal       Support for Local Government      Target:
   P070736           Government            decentralization, improve      Capital Development Grant
                                                                                                            CIUP targeted 330,000
                     Support Project       accountability in the          System (USD35m)
   Total 158.8m                                                                                             people in low-income
                                           use of local government
   (IDA 52m, AF      2004-2012                                            Dar es Salaam Upgrading and       households, to cover 20% of
                                           resources, and improve
   IDA 98m, Local                                                         Institutional Strengthening       unplanned areas in Dar es
                                           management of
   Gov 2.3m, Gov                                                          (USD18.8m) (with AF 39.4m)        Salaam. Initially 41 LGAs.
                                           intergovernmental
   of Tanzania
                                           transfers and demand-          Community Infrastructure          Actual:
   6.5m)
                                           driven urban investments;      Upgrading Project (CIUP)
                                                                                                            65 community events
                                           and (b) increase access        Local Revenue Enhancement         reaching out to 15,827
                                           to infrastructure and          / Operation and Maintenance       people in CIUP wards. After
                                           services in the unplanned      Program                           AF and restructuring, it
                                           areas of Dar es Salaam                                           supported all 132 LGAs in
                                           and improve revenue            Support to PO-RALG
                                                                                                            the country
                                           performance for                (USD7.9 m)
                                           sustainable operations
                                           and maintenance.

   Vietnam           Urban Upgrading       To alleviate poverty           Tertiary Infrastructure           Target: Total population of
   P070197           Project               in urban areas by              Upgrading (US$69m)                3 districts of Quan 6, Quan
                                           improving the living and                                         11 and Tan Binh in 2007
   Total 579.34m     2004-2014                                            Complementary Primary and
                                           environmental conditions                                         were 1.29 million people
   (IDA 222.47m,                                                          Secondary Infrastructure
                                           of the urban poor using
   AF IDA                                                                 (US$280m)                         Actual: As of April 2013,
                                           participatory planning
   160m, Local                                                                                              approximately 200 low
                                           methods, and influencing       Resettlement Housing
   communities                                                                                              income neighborhoods
                                           planning processes to          (US$13.7m)
   4.15m, Govt of                                                                                           have been upgraded,
                                           become more inclusive          Land and Housing
   Vietnam 148.53,                                                                                          benefitting over 2.5 million
                                           and pro-poor                   Management (US$1.7m)
   Japan 6.68m,                                                                                             residents
   France 37.51m)                                                         Housing Improvement Loan
                                                                          Program (US$15m)
    IV.	 Synthesis of Lessons
         Learned

This paper aims to provide some specific insights on engaging poor communities in urban
areas using principles common to rural CDD operations. The case studies (Annex I) reflected
some general lessons that would apply to any project using a participatory approach, including
the importance of ensuring ownership, promoting an inclusive approach, and the importance
of effective targeting. However, due to specific characteristics of investments in urban areas, the
nature and degree of community participation may differ from rural areas. The case studies also
revealed that engaging communities in urban areas for development projects is generally more
complicated and requires more time, effort, and flexibility than in rural areas. Project teams not-
ed that it is more challenging to convene and mobilize urban communities due to people’s work
schedules, that urban residents tend to be more skeptical about the potential benefits of com-
munity development projects, and that it takes a lot more time to gain the trust of communities
in urban areas. In some cases (Haiti, Tanzania, Vietnam) it took between one and two years to
complete the community mobilization process.

While there were valuable lessons unique to each project, the lessons summarized be-
low have been observed across several or all cases. Three key areas emerge in which project
teams wishing to apply CDD approaches may need to think differently or innovate to adjust to
the urban context. These include: the roles of communities and local government authorities,
given the nature and scale of investment; beneficiary targeting; and community mobilization.

Role of communities vs. role of local government
Participatory development projects in urban areas often demand larger-scale investments
which determine the appropriate level of community control in addition to the role of the
local government in the project.

Community investments in urban areas may need to be of a larger scale compared to those
in rural areas. For example, in the first phase of Morocco’s National Initiative for Human De-




                                                23
24 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             velopment (INDH) program, the average cost of rural subprojects was US$45,000 compared to
             US$120,000 for urban subprojects due mainly to the larger population size. In Kyrgyz Republic,
             the project was originally designed to provide annual grants up to a maximum of US$20,000 per
             eligible community. It was later learned that the size of the grants was too small for meaningful
             investments and, under the additional financing, the maximum grant size per community was
             set at US$50,000. The project also encouraged pooling grants across different communities to
             achieve larger community infrastructure investments. In Indonesia, evaluation reports showed
             that past urban CDD projects had limited impacts on household welfare, partly because of a dis-
             persion of relatively small grants over a large number of activities. To increase the average size of
             activities, the project increased the subproject grant allocations to poorest areas.

             The size, scope, cost, and technical complexity of urban development activities will affect
             the level of community involvement or control that is possible in those activities. It is im-
             portant to have a realistic understanding of the types of urban development activities that can
             be effectively undertaken with a community-driven approach. Many urban projects connect to
             broader infrastructure networks, and usually local residents do not have a synoptic view of the
             entire infrastructure system. Furthermore many larger projects have complex engineering and
             technical demands that require expertise outside of the community. When a project is beyond
             the technical capacity of the community, the role of the community will likely be limited to
             assessing local conditions and needs, consultations, and collaboration during the implementa-
             tion phase. Referring to Arstein’s continuum of participatory approaches discussed in section
             II, this focuses the project on an “informing/consultation” or “partnership and delegated power”
             approach rather than a “citizen control” approach. Broader citizen control is better suited to
             smaller physical infrastructure projects that are less complex and can be adequately managed
             by the local community. When urban participatory programs still engage communities in con-
             trolling resources, though, fiduciary and accountability risks must be taken into consideration
             and factored in the project design using other mechanisms, such as grievance mechanisms,
             information disclosure, social audit, and so on.

             Local government authorities (LGAs) generally play a stronger role in planning and im-
             plementation of participatory development projects in urban areas vs. rural areas. In ad-
             dition to more complex contractual, financial, and technical management, infrastructure in-
             vestments in poor urban communities connect to larger, trunk infrastructure systems which are
             provided and maintained by LGAs. This adds further to project complexity and requires greater
             engagement of LGAs in relevant subprojects. In Tanzania, the project took into account the
             proximity to trunk infrastructure for selecting the sub-wards (unplanned communities) but at
             the same time focused investments on tertiary infrastructure to keep subprojects more man-
             ageable. The project later noted while this approach did simplify project management for the
             communities, it also missed opportunities to develop subprojects based on a more holistic
             vision and to address the pressing issues of flooding.

             LGAs also play a more important role in urban areas in relation to operations and main-
             tenance (O&M) of subproject investments. For example, water facilities are often times man-
             aged by a users’ or village association in rural areas, while in urban areas, there are more com-
             plicated regulations, and linkages to LGAs are necessary for proper O&M. To ensure adequate
             O&M in targeted municipalities in Benin, the project included asset maintenance programs
             tied to established municipal maintenance teams that took responsibility of cleaning roads
                                                                            IV. Synthesis of Lessons Learned • 25




and drainage networks, etc. These arrangements allowed municipalities to programmatically
budget and plan for maintenance services, depending on the type of infrastructure.

As a result, almost all project teams emphasized the importance of providing more ca-
pacity building opportunities to enable LGAs to collaborate effectively with communities
without distorting their voice and sense of ownership. A stronger focus on community/
LGA partnership (vs. informing/consultation) can ensure that local priorities are addressed and
that the investments are more sustainable. Several of the cases demonstrated this approach by
integrating community-developed local plans with the government’s development planning,
implementation, and budgeting process. In Indonesia’s PNPM, this was the main tool to ensure
that community voices were heard. In Benin, municipalities presented their audit findings in
front of urban communities to ensure transparency. Building on the capacity and experience
gained through community-based approaches, some governments are implementing pilot ini-
tiatives that aim to apply LGA-community collaboration for larger-scale investment programs.
However, some capacity constraints need to be addressed due to the high level of technical
skills required to manage a much larger scale and complicated types of investments.

Where LGA capacity is weak, or there is little trust of government (e.g., in Haiti), CBOs
and civil society organizations play a very important role in mobilizing and supporting
communities, including managing funds. However, in the long-run, involving LGAs becomes
critical to sustain bottom-up efforts and provide basic services. Programs need to involve LGAs
and build their capacity especially around consultations, participation, social accountability
mechanisms, and participatory monitoring. Some projects encourage proposals be submitted
jointly by municipalities and communities to strengthen the LGA’s capacity to collaborate with
communities. In another on-going effort, Haiti’s PRODEPUR project seeks to convert represen-
tative community-based organizations created for project management into more permanent
bodies at the municipality level in order to work together with the LGAs. The use of information
and communications technology (ICT) such as smartphones applications and other tools could
be explored for promoting greater accountability and building trust between urban LGAs and
communities.

Beneficiary targeting
Beneficiary targeting in urban areas should utilize criteria beyond spatial boundaries when
necessary and remain flexible to adjust to changing needs.

For the most part, beneficiary targeting can rely on spatial or geographical boundaries
when the purpose of a project is to upgrade a slum or informal settlement. In these cases,
residents in the area to be upgraded by definition would meet the criteria of intended benefi-
ciaries. Identifying target beneficiaries becomes more difficult, however, when the project seeks
to address social exclusion or target specific groups across a municipality or urban community.
Target groups—such as the poorest of the poor, ethnic minorities, and female-headed house-
holds—may be scattered in “pockets’ throughout the city, and local authorities tend to have
little information that can be used to identify beneficiaries.

The case studies revealed some instances where spatial targeting was initially unable to
fully include certain groups, and targeting criteria was adjusted. In Morocco, for exam-
26 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             ple, there were “pockets of poverty” spread throughout target municipalities that did not cor-
             respond to the commune system or other municipal organizational structure. Under the first
             phase of the National Initiative for Human Development project (INDH-1), towns for the urban
             subprogram were selected based on administrative criteria rather than socio-economic criteria,
             leaving targeting open to the interpretation of each provincial authority. Learning from this,
             INDH-2 aims to be more inclusive, covering all municipalities with more than 20,000 inhabitants
             and using poverty maps to target beneficiaries. Criteria for neighborhood selection was based
             on a series of social exclusion indicators such as access to basic services, unemployment, illiter-
             acy, and housing conditions. It also used participatory social mapping exercises to validate in-
             formation at the local level. Robust social analysis can shed light on complex social dynamics in
             urban contexts—particularly regarding land ownership, tenant-ship and rights, and exclusion
             of specific groups.

             Beneficiary targeting in high risk urban areas requires greater flexibility. In the face of
             social conflict, violence, or natural disasters, several projects adjusted the targeting criteria to
             adapt to shifting circumstances. When the Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project en-
             countered instances of elite capture in Kyrgyz, the project team adjusted the selection criteria
             to select additional beneficiaries and minimize conflict. The team held focus group discussions
             complemented by rapid surveys to collect data on income levels and ethnicity. In Haiti, the
             PRODEPUR project intervened in 10 out of the 17 government-identified Priority Zones. Within
             those zones, official demarcations did not exist, so the project team applied a flexible and par-
             ticipatory method to identify intervention areas based on poverty levels, population density,
             and levels of violence. Also in Haiti, after the earthquake, the project found the need to adjust
             criteria again in some cases when people established new social networks in relief camps and
             no longer identified with the neighborhood they lived in prior to the disaster. When they were
             resettled, some preferred to stay with their new networks.

             Community mobilization
             Mobilizing urban communities requires a greater investment in time and effort due to con-
             straints in terms of people’s availability, physical space, and trust.

             In urban areas, social mobilization tends to take more time and require more patience.
             Urban communities may be too busy with wage earning jobs to participate in meetings, or they
             may not be accustomed to being consulted and given the opportunity to participate in local
             development decision making. Moreover, people living in urban settings do not always feel a
             sense of “community” or clear identity attached to their area of residency, as they may have mi-
             grated from different parts of the country. They may not interact with each other because they
             do not share common jobs, languages, or cultures. Typically there are no traditional leadership
             structures to facilitate community engagement, unlike in rural areas. Therefore, the role of fa-
             cilitators becomes even more crucial in promoting participatory development processes in the
             urban context. Even with larger and better resourced local government units, retaining effective
             community facilitators can be a challenge. Contracting NGOs or firms may be more realistic and
             effective, rather than relying on project staff or local government officials.

             Physical space for communities to gather and discuss issues can also be a challenge be-
             cause some urban areas (especially in slums or informal settlements) can be overcrowded with
                                                                            IV. Synthesis of Lessons Learned • 27




facilities and living spaces. In Vietnam, for example, urban community members decided to
address this constraint by using block grants to rehabilitate a community center for them to
discuss local development issues. Now, the community members use the center to organize
cultural and sporting events.

Several project teams observed that urban communities can be more skeptical about in-
terventions or communicating with outsiders. In these cases, sharing information in a trans-
parent way and demonstrating continued commitment throughout the process was critical.
In Vietnam, for example, the project team reported that not many people participated in the
first meeting and several expressed skepticism. However, once the project team returned with
some concrete upgrading plans based on the ideas the community members put forth, they
understood the commitment and “seriousness” of the project teams and the local authorities
and participation increased.

The role of local resource people is increasingly important to gain entry to complex urban
environments. Several task teams mentioned the importance of identifying local resource per-
sons who knew the context, people, and the power structures in a particular area for facilitating
engagement with urban communities. In Haiti, Cite Soleil was known to be impenetrable to
outsiders due to the high level of violence. The project team identified a woman that was well
known inside the community for her previous work on community development projects and
worked through her to gain entry into the community.

Informal social networks can facilitate or impede participatory approaches, and it may be
necessary to engage unconventional actors in urban settings. Informal social networks be-
come increasingly important in contexts where organizational structures are weak, overly po-
liticized, or do not facilitate meaningful participation. However, social networks also represent
power structures that have the potential to capture project benefits. For example, in Kyrgyz-
stan there were powerful social networks operating at different levels that had the potential to
capture project outcomes. This was seen, for example, when communities were prioritizing the
construction of neighborhood sports facilities. The project team noted that certain groups were
taking over the centers and women were being excluded over time. In Haiti, it was essential to
engage community members involved in criminal activity as part of community-based orga-
nizations for the project to proceed as they were recognized as legitimate community leaders.

Having communities contribute financially to subprojects can potentially serve to pro-
mote ownership of investments, but project teams need to carefully consider the cultural
and economic aspects of requiring community contributions. In Tanzania, the project ini-
tially required the community’s in-cash contribution of 10% of the subproject cost. However,
they found that the requirement was overburdening poor households who were unable to pay.
Once the project abolished the financial contribution requirement, poor households were able
to participate and benefit from the subproject investments. On the contrary, in Vietnam, the
community contribution under the urban upgrading project was very effective in enhancing
their commitment and participation. The contribution was initially considered as an unthink-
able requirement in Vietnam, where people had not been asked to submit their assets or cash
to public programs. However, this is now a very important part of developing a sense of owner-
ship, and another project in the country also introduced this requirement.
28 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             Even with larger-size grants or a separate component to support big infrastructure, most
             case study project teams acknowledged the importance of supporting social and eco-
             nomic activities of the target beneficiaries. An important benefit of local public investments
             is the short-term employment it can create through small-scale infrastructure construction or
             rehabilitation. However, infrastructure investments alone cannot address the needs of the ur-
             ban poor, especially when those who live in the cash economy do not have a secure job and
             access to credit. In Indonesia, while infrastructure services are valued by communities, there was
             strong demand for livelihood and social investments. Therefore, the PNPM project sought to
             incorporate greater balance between the social, economic, and infrastructure themes covered
             by the project block grants, by increasing the share of activities allocated to social and other
             economic activities.

             While more challenging to implement, some projects have succeeded in integrating phys-
             ical, social, and economic components. In urban settings, there may be particular linkages
             among different components (e.g., between access to credit for home improvements and up-
             grades to trunk infrastructure) that produce synergies and additional benefits for communities.
             For example, in Vietnam, the urban upgrading project sought to make physical improvements
             to mitigate flooding by raising the level of the street. However, if the street was to be raised
             without changing the level of adjacent housing, this would exacerbate flooding, so the project
             incorporated a mechanism for households to borrow money to raise their floors. It also incor-
             porated an income-generation loan so households could expand their economic activities to
             repay the housing loans. Furthermore, when the road was raised and new sewage infrastructure
             was constructed underneath the road, the home improvement loans enabled local residents to
             construct individual latrines and make other improvements. This enabled residents to take full
             advantage of the larger infrastructure improvements. The challenge for CDD-type operations
             typically with supporting economic activities is to ensure the project team and facilitators have
             sufficient skills to support the management of private goods investment and market systems.
             Without a clear understanding of local markets, grassroots organizations and self-help groups
             who start economic activities or small businesses can end up being unable to pay back loans or
             to sustain businesses.
    V.	 Conclusions and the Way
        Forward

With cities accounting globally for an estimated 70 percent of GDP, urbanization is broad-
ly recognized as a powerful force in support of poverty reduction and economic growth
(World Bank, 2014). However, as more poor people move to cities in search of better opportu-
nities, the percentage of poor people living in urban areas is expected to grow. To achieve the
goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity, concerted efforts are necessary to ensure that
urban growth occurs in an equitable and inclusive manner. Doing this requires addressing the
social dimensions of urbanization and more effectively empowering the poor and marginalized
in urban areas to drive an urban development agenda that addresses their felt needs and pri-
orities.

CDD and other participatory processes are critical to contributing to inclusive urban devel-
opment, yet the complexities of urban areas present a number of challenges to applying a
typical set of CDD processes. Areas that require particular consideration include: understand-
ing the role of communities and local government and the importance of their collaboration;
identification and targeting of beneficiaries; and social mobilization in complex urban settings.

While they have much in common, the World Bank’s CDD and Slum Upgrading portfolios
have evolved as parallel service lines to World Bank borrowers with somewhat limited
cross-fertilization and shared learning. This study was undertaken jointly by the social and
urban development specialists to launch a platform for greater collaboration not only between
social and urban practitioners but among land experts, disaster and climate risk management
specialists, conflict and fragility experts. The study examined projects undertaken in urban areas
where communities played some role in the investment decision-making process. The study’s
aim was to lay out key challenges and opportunities of participatory development in urban
areas as a first step and to catalyze future discussions among various stakeholders. As we have
seen in the study, participatory development and CDD in urban settings include a very wide
range of issues and stakeholders, due to the heterogeneity and rapidly changing situations that
are typical to the space and require more efforts to gather lessons.



                                               29
30 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             The World Bank’s cross-sectoral Global Practice on Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience
             presents a unique opportunity for interdisciplinary thinking and innovation towards
             more effective community engagement and community/LGA partnership in urban devel-
             opment. A few suggested areas for future thinking and collaboration include:

             •	   Further emphasize and systematize community engagement in urban planning
                  (beyond urban upgrading projects): Urban CDD and slum upgrading projects have
                  traditionally focused on retrofitting already established settlements and areas. Other scopes
                  of urban projects, such as supporting newly urbanizing areas of lower densities, could think
                  about how to engage the community. Planning processes for a longer term and a wider
                  boundary of the city can involve intensive citizen engagement in a systemic way, such as
                  demonstrated in the City Development Strategy (CDS). In CDS, local stakeholders formulate
                  a holistic vision for the city, giving voice to the residents on shaping the strategy and in
                  monitoring the implementation. More systematic use of local government participatory
                  planning and budgetary systems in urban projects could also be promoted.
             •	   Develop guidance and learning events around specific urban challenges: A number of
                  issues emerged from the document reviews and interviews that would benefit from specific
                  guidance and thinking for staff working on urban participatory and CDD projects. These
                  include: resettlement and safeguards in urban CDD projects; the use of a CDD approach
                  for relocation planning needs; understanding the different dynamics within and between
                  city center, peri-urban areas, and small towns; dealing with displaced populations in urban
                  areas; and comprehensive approaches to strengthening resilience and managing risks in
                  urban areas (including climate and disaster risk, conflict and violence, economic shocks,
                  etc.).
             •	   Build on the foundation of the current set of case studies: The interviews revealed
                  that urban and CDD practitioners have a wealth of knowledge that needs to be captured.
                  While this set of case studies provides a first step, developing mechanisms to capture and
                  share more of that tacit knowledge would be extremely useful. Undertaking additional
                  case studies and building on the current ones with field research would allow a deeper
                  understanding of the challenges and how to address them. In addition, it is recognized
                  that there is a vast amount of innovation going on in cities throughout the globe related
                  to citizen engagement, community empowerment and urbanization. Providing incentives
                  to bring more of that knowledge into projects at the country and city level will be valuable.

             As the world urbanizes, so does risk. The way urban development takes place will either com-
             pound or reduce those risks—be they from climate change, natural disasters, political upheaval,
             violence and crime, displacement, or economic shocks. Urban development approaches that
             promote physical, financial, and social inclusion of all residents will be critical to ensuring that
             cities are resilient and sustainable. Poor communities will need to work in partnership with their
             local authorities to identify, develop, and implement solutions that directly address their needs
             and priorities. The synergies between the urban and social agendas have never been more rele-
             vant—it is hoped that this paper advances that dialogue and spurs collaborative action.
Annex I.
Case Study Summaries



Benin Second Decentralized City Management Project (PGUD-2)

Project description

The Decentralization City Management Project (“PGUD” in French) started in 1999 as a
two-phased adaptable lending program to strengthen municipal government capacity
to deliver basic infrastructure and services to urban communities. While Benin’s Decentral-
ization Law was enacted in 1990, the process of decentralization had been slow due to several
factors, including reluctance to transfer fiscal responsibilities to municipalities and other local
governments deemed weak by central government. The first phase of PGUD (1999-2004) was
built on the Urban Rehabilitation and Management Project (1992-1997) and successfully com-
pleted the transfer of responsibility for operation and maintenance of urban infrastructure and
communal services to local communities and governments.

The second phase of PGUD (PGUD-2, 2008-2012) covered an additional three primary cit-
ies and three secondary cities with US$75 million of support.6 Before the project began,
each beneficiary city signed an agreement with the state, which included budget commitments
to counterpart funding to ensure successful project implementation. In these six cities, the proj-
ect promoted participation of the local population in select low-income neighborhoods under
the “Community Participation and Integration” component (US$1.79m). Neighborhood selec-
tion was based on relative needs, poverty level (measured as lack of access to basic infrastruc-
tures such as schools, roads, solid waste collection points, water facilities, and health centers),
and level of community organization, in order to ensure stakeholder ownership and sustainabil-
ity of the infrastructure financed under the project. The selection was carried out under super-
vision of a quasi-governmental implementation entity, Societé d’Etudes Regionales d’Habitat et
d’Amenagement Urbain (SERHU).

Community participation under the project

The PGUD created community representative groups in each low-income neighborhood,
called Neighborhood Development Committees (NDCs). The NDCs conducted communi-
ty outreach, prioritized and determined community requests for neighborhood projects and
community-based activities, tracked neighborhood infrastructure projects, oversaw communi-
ty micro project implementation, mobilized human and financial resources, and organized the
community to perform maintenance. Referring to the participation continuum introduced in


6	   The six cities are: Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, Kandi, Parakou, Lokossa and Porto-Nove, comprising a total target population of
     562,142 inhabitants.




                                                             31
32 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             section II, the project would fall closest to the “partnership and delegated power” point, where
             communities directly control the planning decisions, but procurement and contract supervision
             are carried out by local government and the implementation entity, as described below.

             NDCs worked closely with Community Initiative Support Units (CISUs) established in each
             municipality. CISUs recruited staff specialized in community development, undertook outreach
             activities, supported administration of NDCs, and oversaw activities for the population of poor
             neighborhoods. CISUs also undertook activities to promote hygiene and sanitation, developed
             vegetable gardens with links to the Ministry of Agriculture, and supported women’s access to
             microcredit. At the municipality level, Local Monitoring Committees were also established to su-
             pervise implementation of the micro projects. They were chaired by General Secretaries of the
             municipalities. The project provided extensive training programs to NDC and CISU members,
             including exchange visits with members in other cities.

             Implementation of the overall “community participation and integration” component was
             managed through the implementation entity, SERHU. SERHU was responsible for manag-
             ing all contracts for studies, training, infrastructure works, and purchase of equipment financed
             through the component. For long-term activities, SERHU worked with municipalities to com-
             petitively select local NGO operators to carry out community mobilization, awareness-building
             (on environment, health and hygiene, and community development), and CISU staff training.
             At the neighborhood level, CISUs worked through local NGOs in the targeted communities for
             community mobilization and ‘Information, Education, and Communication’ activities.

             Project achievements

             PGUD-II provided 446,500 people with better access to paved roads and 526,000 benefit-
             ed from reduced exposure to flood risk. Social and economic infrastructure included primary
             schools, primary health care centers, small shops and markets, water kiosks, community devel-
             opment centers, latrines, and public squares. Previously, the targeted neighborhoods had been
             isolated and prone to flooding with very few basic social services. The average size of commu-
             nity-level investment ranged between US$5,000 for small community managed toilets, water
             points, etc. to about US$40,000 for the construction of model classroom blocks for local schools,
             markets, and stalls within some existing markets.

             By project completion in May 2014, 14 NDCs were set up across the six cities, with strong
             support of the municipal CISUs. This created a participatory community dynamic and helped
             the Government deepen its decentralization policy and move from the initial step of administra-
             tive to fiscal decentralization. The NDCs continue to work with the follow-up project to PGUD-II,
             the Cities Support Project (CSP, 2014-2020, IDA US$60 million), which continues to support the
             Government’s National Decentralization and Deconcentration Policy launched in 2009.

             Lessons learned

             First, sufficient time is needed for poor communities to acquire the technical and opera-
             tional skills for project implementation and to familiarize themselves with participatory
             processes. Where collective or participatory action did not traditionally exist, it was necessary
             to create a local dynamic along the lines of the NDCs. To help facilitate the process, the task team
             encouraged participation by, for example, taking some community members on supervision
                                                                                              Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 33




missions in order to boost their learning and motivation. Also, in order for local residents to
gain ownership of a project, their involvement needed to begin in the earliest possible stages,
through representatives who were widely known and respected throughout the community.
The project also provided extensive training programs to NDCs and community members, some
of which used resources developed by an IDA-supported CDD program in rural Benin7. As ca-
pacity of the NDCs developed, they were able to acquire greater responsibilities, for example, to
move from a simple advisory role to more active involvement in supervision of works and joint
management of the project.

Second, shared physical space was not an effective entry point to organize and engage
women in the project in urban areas. The project team noted that other social networks es-
tablished through the market place were instrumental in facilitating the participation of wom-
en. These networks were voluntarily organized around common economic activities, such as
selling fish or fabric. The project also found that different phases of the subproject cycle had dif-
ferent levels of women’s participation. At the implementation stage, men tended to play a more
prominent role, probably because of traditional beliefs related to gender roles and division of
labor and the skills required to implement infrastructure-type work.

Finally, for sustainability of urban infrastructure, operations and maintenance (O&M)
arrangements needed to be established upfront with strong involvement of municipal
governments. PGUD-2 included asset maintenance programs linked to established municipal
maintenance teams for such activities as cleaning-up roads regularly and maintaining drainage
networks prior to each rainy season. The ICR for PGUD-2 notes that municipal budget ratios set
for maintenance were generally respected. Setting up these teams and rules allowed a larger
share of revenue increases to feed into sustaining existing and newly-built assets and further ex-
panding infrastructure networks. These arrangements allowed municipalities to programmat-
ically budget and plan for maintenance services, depending on the type of infrastructure. The
municipalities also made portions of their maintenance budgets available to local NDCs for the
cleaning and small maintenance works of markets, schools and clinics. Management contracts
between the municipalities and NDCs assigned roles and responsibilities including financial re-
sponsibilities and commitments between both parties.

Haiti Urban Community-Driven Development Project

Project description

The Haiti Urban Community-Driven Development Project (PRODEPUR in French) show-
cased the critical role that civil society and community-based organizations can play in
promoting demand-driven local development where the capacity of local government is
weak and violence and crime rates are high. In this regard, the project provided a discus-
sion point around how established community-level structures can be mainstreamed together
with local government institutions. The project also played an important role in the wake of the
earthquake that hit the country in 2010. Together with additional financing approved right after
the earthquake, IDA provided support totaling US$45 million.


7	   National Community-Driven Development Project (P081484), 2004-2012, IDA US$50 million.
34 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             PRODEPUR was developed based on two preceding CDD programs in Haiti. One of the
             programs was the Participatory Rural Community Development Project, PRODEP (2006-2013)
             which undertook a total of 1,700 infrastructure subprojects and income generating activities,
             providing 1.6 million people in 59 municipalities with improved access to basic services across.
             The other program was a trust-funded pilot program, PRODEPAP (2006-2009), which adopted
             the CDD approach and experience of PRODEP in two poverty and violence stricken slums of the
             Port-au-Prince metropolitan area. The CDD approach was selected as a means to help mitigate
             conflict and violence and to support stabilization in the targeted slum areas by quickly pro-
             viding improved access to basic services and income generation opportunities to beneficiary
             communities.

             PRODEPUR operates in 10 of 17 “Priority Zones” identified by the Government across five
             municipalities.8 The Government focused interventions in the Priority Zones in order to build
             political stability by restoring basic services and showing visible improvements (delivering a
             “peace dividend”) for the residents of these particularly volatile neighborhoods, which had high
             levels of violence and crime. Within the Priority Zones, the project introduced a flexible and
             participatory demarcation method to identify intervention areas as official demarcations barely
             existed. To be consistent with the project’s overarching objective of poverty reduction, the se-
             lected project areas needed to meet standard eligibility criteria such as poverty level, popula-
             tion density, and current and past levels of violence.

             Community participation under the project

             While the 1987 Constitution provided a legal framework for decentralization, local gov-
             ernment in Haiti remains weak, particularly in disadvantaged urban areas. In large urban
             centers, there was a gap between communities and the commune structure. No official subdivi-
             sions existed within cities, and the municipal council and municipal assemblies technically rep-
             resented the entire commune, not just the city itself. While efforts to strengthen public agencies
             and municipal governance were ongoing, the absence of established forums or representative
             government structures for civic engagement made the existing network of non-governmental
             organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs) critical.

             CBOs are comprised of neighborhood residents with common interests that are organized
             into formally constituted civil associations. The groups range in size from 25-200 individu-
             als. CBOs are responsible for the identification, preparation, implementation, supervision, and
             maintenance of community subprojects. The CBOs are supported with technical assistance
             from Project Development Councils (PDCs) as well as “Service Providers,” which are experienced
             NGOs contracted by the project. Service Providers play a central role in providing training, fa-
             cilitation, and technical assistance for CBOs and PDCs to participate in the project and fulfill
             their roles in subproject management. Given the full engagement of community members in
             subproject management, PRODEPUR would fall close to the far right end of the participation
             continuum, where communities control all planning decisions and financial resources together
             with the Service Providers.


             8	   The estimated number of beneficiaries in these 10 zones was approximately 17,000 families or 85,000 individuals, at the proj-
                  ect launch.
                                                                            Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 35




Communities were also represented on the Project Development Councils (PDCs), which
included elected representatives of CBOs and civil society, in addition to local/municipal
government. Government participation in PDCs was limited to less than 20% of council seats.
The project required municipal government participation in PDCs in order to gradually build lo-
cal government capacity and encouraged them to propose and implement subprojects jointly
with CBOs. As the principle entity for targeting benefits and allocating project resources at the
communal level, PDCs provided a critical link to local government. PDCs played a fundamen-
tal role in mobilizing communities and promoting their participation in local decision-making,
through such activities as community mapping, tenure verification, and consulting with disas-
ter-affected people after the earthquake.

PRODEPUR supported small-scale infrastructure and productive/income-generating sub-
projects. As mentioned, CBOs identified and proposed subprojects, sometimes jointly with
municipal governments. The proposed subprojects were later prioritized by PDCs, and once ap-
proved, subproject funds were managed jointly by the Service Providers and CBOs. According
to the final monitoring report, the pilot program PRODEPAP found that co-managing subproj-
ect funds by using joint bank accounts of Service Provider agencies and CBOs was an important
tool to mitigate the potential risk of financial mismanagement by CBOs. To better assist CBOs in
the implementation of their subprojects, the Service Providers created regional technical offices
in the participating cities as needed. The level of funding per project area was calculated on the
basis of the population of the disadvantaged urban area, using an approximate allocation of 4.5
subprojects in the Port-au-Prince region or 7 subprojects in the three other cities, per 10,000
people. In total, it was estimated that PRODEPUR would finance between 360-400 subprojects
with an average cost of US$20,000 per subproject.

With additional project financing provided after the 2010 earthquake, Community Re-
construction Centers were established in each neighborhood. These centers housed com-
munity liaisons and technical assistants to serve as a platform or a one-stop shop open to all
neighborhood residents to provide trainings, host consultations, distribute materials, and ad-
dress complaints regarding reconstruction work.

Project achievements

Under PRODEPUR, as of May 2014, the community subproject preparation and implemen-
tation component financed the establishment of 14 PDCs and the implementation of 493
subprojects in targeted areas of Port-au-Prince and three other cities. In response to the
January 2010 earthquake, with additional financing, the project immediately prioritized the im-
plementation of subprojects addressing the disaster recovery needs of project communities,
such as cash-for-work subprojects focused on the removal of debris from public spaces and
cleaning of local drainage ditches. These activities provided temporary jobs to over 5,000 peo-
ple in the neighborhoods of Belair, Cité Soleil, Delmas, and Martissant. The newly added compo-
nent of Housing Repair and Reconstruction contributed to community-wide upgrading, includ-
ing basic infrastructure and services that benefited approximately 24,800 urban households.
36 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             Lessons learned

             First, to gain access to communities in unsafe cities, it was critical to work through trusted
             local resource persons and to prioritize transparency. Cité Soleil was known as one of the
             most impoverished and dangerous communes in the country and no outsiders could easily step
             in. The project team identified a community advisor at the Water Agency who was well known
             and respected by the community for her previous work on a water and sanitation program and
             learned about the community from her before starting any activities. Without her knowledge
             and facilitation, project implementation agencies acknowledged that gaining access to the area
             would not have been possible. Also, to build trust in volatile areas, transparency in every aspect
             of the project became even more critical. The PRODEPUR used radio programs, flyers, public
             meetings, public displays, and any available means to disseminate information to communities.

             Second, when mobilizing communities in insecure urban settings, engaging “unconven-
             tional” but recognized local leaders became important. Under the PRODEPUR, the project
             team was led to engage individuals that, while involved in criminal activity, were recognized
             locally as community leaders. The project engages these leaders in PDCs and provided training
             programs to them along with other community members. The project team recognized that
             excluding these individuals would be detrimental to the project and to the longer-term goal of
             building social cohesion and safety.

             Third, the community-based platform proved to be very effective in post-disaster recov-
             ery where no other traditional network existed in affected urban areas. When the January
             2010 earthquake struck, the community-driven platform was fully utilized to mobilize resources
             and deliver recovery aid. With additional financing, the CDD project became ‘the instrument
             of choice’ to deliver emergency goods and information to people in the aftermath. The project
             team needed to ensure flexibility to respond to shifting priorities of affected people. For ex-
             ample, the project attempted to return people to the areas of the city where they lived before
             the earthquake to clear debris and rebuild their homes. However, in some cases, residents had
             established new social networks in temporary camps that became important to them and they
             did not want to be separated from these new networks in the recovery process.

             Finally, building capacity of local government to play a stronger role in supporting com-
             munity participation was critical for project sustainability. Without the presence of a func-
             tioning local government, the system established through the PDCs could not be institutional-
             ized. Therefore, considering how the mechanisms of engagement created by the project would
             be maintained and evolve over time became critical. In this context, with a second additional
             financing approved in June 2014, PRODEPUR is providing technical assistance to municipalities
             to play a stronger role in the program so that coordination and ownership at the communal
             level are strengthened. To lay the foundation for mainstreaming the community-driven ap-
             proach into decentralized institutions, the model developed in rural Haiti under PRODEP will be
             adopted where PDCs transition into Councils for Community Development Support (CADECs).
             CADECs convene CBOs and civil society organizations at the municipal level, and differ from
             PDCs in that they are formal public structures rather than temporary structures financed by the
             project. This model is expected to foster local governance by linking with the local development
             framework coordinated by the municipality. The housing component of PRODEPUR after the
             earthquake would also gradually move away from the emergency reconstruction focus to the
             longer-term development challenge of new housing construction.
                                                                                                       Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 37




Indonesia National Community Empowerment Program (“Program Nasion-
al Pemberdayaan Masyarakat”) in Urban Areas (PNPM-Urban)

Project description

The case of Indonesia provides insights from a large-scale program that had been oper-
ating in the country for 15 years. The urban program operated under the umbrella of the na-
tional CDD program known as PNPM, which began as two closely related projects in 1999—the
Kecamatan Development Program in rural areas and the Urban Poverty Program (UPP) in urban
areas. In 2006, they were combined and adopted as a single national program. PNPM is present-
ly the largest CDD program in the world, covering all urban wards and rural villages in Indonesia.
The first UPP was designed in response to the 1997 Asian Economic Crisis that triggered a rapid
rise in urban poverty. The PNPM-Urban phase III (2010-2013), with IBRD support of US$149.98
million, covered about 5.5 million persons living in 5,130 kelurahans (urban wards) in 154 dis-
tricts and municipalities across 19 provinces throughout the country9.

The majority of the project supported grants to co-finance kelurahan subprojects identi-
fied in Community Development Plans. The kelurahan grants supported investments in basic
infrastructure, income generating activities through Revolving Loan Funds, and social programs
to benefit the poorest and most vulnerable groups or individuals. UPP and PNPM-Urban pro-
grams have benefitted from a rich set of past evaluations and analytical work. For example, eval-
uation of the UPP phase 2 showed that the impacts of the program on household welfare were
limited10. The project task team notes that given the relatively modest amounts of per capita
investments ($2.50-$5.00/person), this result was not altogether surprising11. To better support
kelurahans with particularly high population density and high poverty incidence, the on-going
phase (2012-2015) program increased the grant allocations to the poorest areas, consisting of
a combination of investments (co-financed by city governments) to upgrade the living condi-
tions in the area comparable to block redevelopment. The programs were to be prepared and
implemented in close cooperation with local governments, which were expected to contribute
5-20% of the total cost.

Community participation under the project

In PNPM, representative community organizations, called Badan Keswadayan Masyarakat
(BKMs), were established in all participating local governments. The ICR of the PNPM-Urban
III notes that about 41% of the adult population voted in elections for BKM representatives in
PNPM-Urban III. According to beneficiary feedback and indicators of women, poor, and vulnera-
ble persons participating in planning and decision making meetings, the vast majority of BKMs
were deemed representative and trust-worthy.




9	    The average population of kelurahan is 6,400 (kelurahan populations are substantially higher in Java and Bali).

10	   Pradhan, Rao, and Rosemberg, 2010, “ The Impact of the Community level activities of the Second Urban Poverty Project
      (UPP)”

11	   Project Appraisal Document. PNPM Urban 2012-2015.
38 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             A major task of the BKMs was to formulate and update Community Development Plans
             (CDPs) based on a participatory process and community surveys. The CDP is a medium-term
             plan that outlines the basic goals and general direction that communities want to take in ad-
             dressing poverty. The menu of activities is open in order to encourage creative development
             approaches. Over the first year of implementation, the CDP identified a more detailed invest-
             ment program, to be financed from kelurahan grants and possibly augmented with contribu-
             tions from other stakeholders such as local governments, NGOs, and private firms. When the
             CDP was prepared or updated, it was reviewed by senior project staff at the kota level (one level
             higher than kelurahan and one lower than province) to assess if communities made decisions
             in an inclusive and participatory manner and that the plan was focused on poverty alleviation.
             Volunteer community members in the kelurahans then formed groups and submitted proposals
             to the BKM to implement the programs identified in the CDP. The allocation of block grants was
             determined by population size and the poverty level of kelurahans. Under the on-going phase,
             it ranges from Rp 50 million (US$4,125) to Rp250 million (US$20,625) per year per kelurahan.
             With the active role community members play in planning and implementing subprograms, the
             PNPM-Urban falls on the right end of the participation continuum (see figure 2) where commu-
             nities control all planning decisions and financial resources.

             There are two important pilot initiatives linked to PNPM-Urban that strengthened part-
             nerships between communities and local governments. Initiated during UPP Phase 2, these
             initiatives addressed the need, also identified in other cases reviewed here, regarding larger and
             more complex investments for urban communities. One was the Poverty Alleviation Partnership
             Grant, which supported shared planning and financing by providing matching funds for activ-
             ities jointly proposed or cost-shared by local government and the community. The other was
             Neighborhood Upgrading Schemes or Neighborhood Development (ND), which was a slum
             upgrading program in 18 pilot sites with special planning and larger-scale grant activities joint-
             ly planned and managed by communities and local governments. While the average amount
             of block grant that a regular PNPM-Urban community could receive was around US$15,000-
             30,000, ND grants averaged US$108,000 per kelurahan. The process evaluation12 observed that
             the ND faced difficulties in finding and keeping community volunteers because its infrastruc-
             ture projects tended to require specialty skills and typical sites tended to have a smaller pool of
             potential volunteers compared to regular PNPM-Urban subprograms. Based on these findings,
             the government was making adjustments to the design of ND.

             Project achievements

             Since 1999 when the first UPP started, the Bank has committed over $1.2 billion in financ-
             ing for urban CDD programs in Indonesia13. The program has financed over 31,100 km of
             small roads, 8,800 km of drains, rehabilitation of 126,800 houses of the poorest, 164,800 units
             of solid waste and sanitation facilities, and 9,450 health facilities. The process evaluation found
             that overall the program is demonstrating positive results in terms of community participation,
             capacity building, the quality of infrastructure, the cost-effectiveness of community construc-


             12	   Rand Corporation, 2011. “Process Evaluation of the Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM)-Urban”.

             13	   Based on the analysis of key features of the program over time (UPP1, 2, 3, and PNPM-Urban I, III, and 2012-2015), in the
                   Project Appraisal Document, PNPM-Urban 2012-2015.
                                                                                                 Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 39




tions, and governance improvements (such as the occurrence of regular, well-attended commu-
nity meetings, physical audits, and external monitoring).

PNPM-Urban III financed 5,042 km of tertiary roads and footpaths, 1,667 km of drainage
systems, and the rehabilitation of 29,480 housing units. By the end of 2013, the project had
improved access to these services in 4,903 of 6,121 kelurahans, or 80.1%. About 85% of project
beneficiaries indicated that they were satisfied or very satisfied with the outcomes of the proj-
ect. Infrastructure built through PNPM-Urban programs was 20% less expensive than that built
by non-community-based approaches in 80% of participating kelurahans. Infrastructure sub-
projects were reported to be of good quality in 94% of the participating kelurahans.

Lessons learned

First, lack of traditional social structure made mobilizing urban communities more chal-
lenging, but they also presented substantial opportunities. According to the project team,
it was easier in rural areas to facilitate collective action due to the existing traditional social
structures where people take direction from traditional leaders. It was suggested that rural pop-
ulations may also need to collaborate for survival. In this context, the role of the facilitator was
often to transfer knowledge and coordinate community participation. In urban areas, it was
more challenging to find the proper entry points or social structure to organize and mobilize
“community” and to build consensus around project objectives and processes. The facilitation
process was even more challenging and required patience as people in urban areas usually
have less time to participate. In PNPM-Urban, participation in decision making meetings was
on average about 20%, given the large population size and time constraints in target urban
communities. On the positive side, the team felt that there is often more capacity in the urban
community that can be mobilized (e.g., architects, doctors, and accountants) and that if the fa-
cilitator can successfully engage community members, people can contribute specialized skills
to transform an area.

Second, while microfinance activities proved challenging to implement, income gener-
ating support as well as social safety-net programs are in high demand among urban
communities. Revolving Loan Funds (RLFs) started in 1999 under UPP 1 in order to respond
to the financial crisis. Since 2008, PNPM-Urban has placed greater emphasis on achieving their
institutional sustainability. However, due partly to lack of key skill sets and environment to fully
support the activity, several assessments found that RLFs had not been performing well.14 On
the other hand, while more than 80% of the kelurahan grants were spent on infrastructure un-
der PNPM-Urban15, the most frequently mentioned challenges in urban focus group discussions
were inadequate incomes, difficulty in finding jobs, and school expenses. Therefore, the on-go-
ing phase of the project decided to explore options for expanding economic activities beyond
RLF. Examples of such activities include introducing products, expanding marketing networks,
and creating job opportunities which will require project staff and facilitators with specific skill
sets including financial management or private sector engagement.


14	   At the end of PNPM-Urban III, 70% of RLFs performed poorly or were non-performing, and the project recommended kelura-
      hans to only keep well-performing RLFs and to link those funds to commercial providers of microcredit.

15	   Only around 10% of the program funding supported social activities (transfer or training programs) aimed at the poorest
      households or individuals
40 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             Third, when social and economic activities are implemented, it is important to ensure the
             link between different types of activities supported by the project. The project assessment
             identified that decisions to invest in community infrastructure, RLF, and social safety programs
             have been taken in isolation. This created missed opportunities because financing a skills train-
             ing program for an unemployed woman, for example, was much more effective if upon suc-
             cessful completion of the training she was given access to an RLF, social fund, or other program
             initiated by the local government. To strengthen the linkage between decision-making on the
             allocation of kelurahan grants over eligible categories, the project invested in facilitator training.

             Fourth, in urban areas, the role of local governments in capacity and financial support is
             more prominent than in rural areas due to more complex project design and the need for
             maintaining investments. PNPM-Urban promoted collaboration between communities and
             local government primarily by having communities present their development plans at the local
             government development planning meeting. The process evaluation found that in successful
             communities, the local government’s planning and budgeting process was a crucial mechanism
             for coordination between PNPM-Urban and local government. The project supported initiatives
             to further strengthen collaboration, such as building communication strategies, assisting local
             government officials to work with BKMs, and developing tailored operational manuals for cities
             with specific needs. The project also had cost-sharing arrangements, which provided enormous
             opportunities for communities and local governments to work together, though currently it is
             on an ad-hoc basis. Local governments were usually expected to contribute 5-20% of the total
             subproject cost.16

             Finally, considering the heterogeneity and complexity of urban communities, the project
             needs to make adjustments in the design and support system for those communities. For
             example, if the population size is large or the community has innovative ideas, the project can
             add more facilitators or tailor the support process to better promote their activities. In Jakarta,
             for example, community groups can be too large to manage due to the high population densi-
             ty, and therefore, the project operates at the sub-kelurahan level. Similarly, in order to tailor the
             project support to target communities, the task team leader emphasized the need for project
             staff to identify different types of urban areas and related characteristics, such as squatter set-
             tlements, areas with conflicts between land owners versus renters, poor areas dominated by a
             single family because they have owned the land for a long time, and elite urban areas. However,
             most of the project’s urban work focused on slum areas so their experience with urban elite
             was limited. A comparative study or exchange among task teams working on different urban
             settings would be useful.

             Kyrgyz Republic Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project (BOUIP)

             Project description

             The Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project (BOUIP) was developed to upgrade
             poor living conditions and ease social tension in semi-informal settlements called no-



             16	   According to the ICR of PNPM-Urban III, 87% of local governments covered by the project co-financed at least 20% of the
                   project cost from their own resources, which was 80% higher than the target.
                                                                               Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 41




vostroiki. Built in the periphery of the two largest cities that house half of the total urban popu-
lation of the country (Bishkek 1 million and Osh 500,000), these settlements were established by
the government to accommodate waves of migrants and avert slum-like neighborhoods. While
effective in housing the population influx, novostroiki have come to be characterized with poor
living conditions and lack of social cohesion among the community as well as with the rest of
the city. The deficiency of basic infrastructure, particularly those related to social services, made
novostroiki especially prone to social tension. The Community Investment Programs component
engaged residents on project design for upgrading smaller-scale neighborhood infrastructure
with a total amount of US$4.2 million IDA funding, which accounts for roughly 15 percent of the
overall IDA financing size of US$27.8 million.

Community participation under the project

In BOUIP, community participation was seen as an instrumental mechanism to mitigate
growing social tension. The Government recognized persisting deterioration of key infrastruc-
ture and social services as an important aggravating factor of political instability. Despite the
municipal governments of Bishkek and Osh establishing specific departments to provide a min-
imum level of infrastructure and services in the novostroiki, conditions remained unsatisfactory.
Consequently, a decision was made to strengthen community involvement in decision making.

Community representatives were formed into Territorial Organizations of Self-Governance
(TOS) in Bishkek and Territorial Councils (TC) in Osh. The TOS/TCs, block committees, and
other neighborhood organizations as well as active community residents, were key implement-
ing partners under the Community Investment Component. These community representative
groups signed agreements laying out their responsibilities, which included selecting subproj-
ects, committing five percent of the total subproject cost in cash, and handling procurement for
goods and works less than US$10,000. The groups were facilitated by the project implementing
NGO—the Community Development Investment Agency (ARIS)—which was experienced in
rural CDD projects in Kyrgyz Republic. This level of community engagement places the project
close to the far right of the participation continuum presented in figure 2.

Engaging the community focused on delivering a two-way flow of information, and build-
ing this channel helped to address the source of social tension and conflict. A number of
strategies were mobilized in order to disseminate information in a timely manner without in-
conveniencing the recipients. Such attributes reinforced the reliability and predictability that
help build trust. To facilitate two-way flow of information, public consultations were held utiliz-
ing questionnaires or with local citizens calling in their questions and concerns to radio or TV
stations (Operational Manual, 2008). The establishment of a communication channel addressed
the lack of a systematic way to convey the community’s needs and concerns.

Project achievements

As of March 2014 roughly 130,000 persons directly benefited from the project, and it is
expected to reach the end target of 220,000 persons by the closing date in 2015. The ba-
sic infrastructure component of the project has delivered access to water supply, urban roads,
and sewerage. Under the CIP component, communities have invested in subprojects for build-
ing playgrounds, sports grounds, sidewalks, information centers, etc. Subprojects averaged
42 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             US$25,300 per grant and benefitted 1,325 persons per subproject. This is equivalent to an in-
             vestment per capita of US$20 (ISR June 2014).

             In terms of community participation, the project contributed to establishing regular and
             institutionalized communications between residents and municipal institutions. Robust
             and systematic community engagement helped to ease the frustration that was at the heart
             of the concern around growing social tension (Project Paper, 2011). Community members in-
             creased their capacity to interact with their local administrations by developing leadership, or-
             ganizational, and negotiating skills. Project reports also note that community representatives
             also expressed an increased feeling of community and social cohesion.

             Lessons learned

             Improving social cohesion within the community is crucial, particularly in environments
             with large migrant populations. Novostroiki are peri-urban, semi-formal settlements typically
             comprising migrants from different backgrounds and lacking social cohesion. This manifested
             itself through difficulties in collecting community contributions and making collective decisions
             on investment priorities. Community participation in monitoring and supervision also tapered,
             leading to disrepair and vandalism. These challenges were met with a focus on increasing the
             community’s collective sense of confidence in the project, which in turn helped to increase the
             sense of ownership. Communities were encouraged to visit the sites where projects were al-
             ready being implemented. Seeing this work on the ground increased confidence in the project,
             and the community became more willing to contribute financially. For facilitating investment
             prioritization, guidelines were provided requiring identification of one flagship priority invest-
             ment utilizing at least 60 percent value from the total resources available.

             The potential conflict among communities around the project site can be reduced by en-
             suring demographic and geographic representativeness of beneficiaries and by imple-
             menting equitable selection criteria to identify target communities. The stakeholder analy-
             sis conducted for the institutional and implementation arrangements identified that community
             representation and distribution of benefits were uneven in certain instances. For instance, the
             project team observed that certain subproject facilities were serving only the interest of local
             elites or the patron community, leading to restrictions in access to non-beneficiary or adjacent
             communities. To ameliorate this problem of exclusivity, emphasis was put on conducting qual-
             itative focus group discussions, complemented by rapid surveys collecting quantitative data of
             key baseline and demographic information on new and existing beneficiaries.

             Morocco National Initiative for Human Development Phases 1 and 2

             Project description

             Initiated in 2005, the National Initiative Human Development (INDH in French) is a nation-
             al flagship program in Morocco that promotes demand-driven development and social
             inclusion in urban and rural areas. Shifting from the Government’s traditional, centrally-driv-
             en approach to reduce poverty and social exclusion, INDH is the first program in the country to
             allocate resources directly to communes and neighborhoods and to engage beneficiaries in the
             decision-making process of local development initiatives. This program was launched by the
                                                                                                Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 43




King as a response to persistent poverty, low human development indicators, and the predom-
inance of top-down sectoral approaches that did not respond to location- and social-specific
factors. The INDH has been an integral and pioneering element of the Government’s overall
push towards decentralization and social and economic inclusion.17 Phase 2 of the INDH was
also launched by the King as the flagship economic and social inclusion program targeting es-
pecially disadvantaged groups and areas with an expanded budget and geographical scope,
demonstrating the national commitment to the program. It takes a Program for Results (PforR)
approach, in which key results indicators trigger disbursements.

INDH-2 (2011-2015) builds on the implementation platforms established under INDH-1
(2005-2010), and supported five categories of subprograms (rural, urban, cross-cutting,
vulnerability, and territorial upgrading). IBRD’s contribution to INDH-2 was US$300 million,
with the government contributing US$865 million. The objective of the urban subprogram com-
ponent was to fight social exclusion and improve people’s living conditions and quality of life in
532 targeted urban neighborhoods, for which the entire cost was estimated at US$410 million.

Community participation under the project

Implementation of INDH was the responsibility of established governance bodies at the
local, communal, and provincial levels, comprising elected representatives of local gov-
ernments, staff from public agencies, and civil society representatives. At the lowest urban
neighborhood-level, local facilitation teams worked with the local population to draft a rapid
needs assessment and list of possible activities. A participatory planning process (Initiative Local
de Developpement Humain, ILDH) was then carried out by the commune-level governance body
of about 10-15 members to develop a proposed local development plan to prioritize needs and
pre-identify activities to be financed by the INDH block grants. The local plans were then pre-
sented for no objection to the provincial level governance body which included line ministries
and is chaired by the governor.

Design of the urban subprograms was decentralized to the neighborhood level and was
normally carried out by project sponsors in collaboration with the program’s local facili-
tation teams, the technical services of the municipalities, and the Division of Social Action
(DAS). DAS is a unit of the Provincial/Prefectural level Ministry of Interior office under the au-
thority of the Governor. Implementation of the activities is primarily the responsibility of sub-
project sponsors, typically NGOs, cooperatives, associations, and communes, with assistance
provided by DAS and technical services of line ministries. For each subproject, an agreement is
signed between the Governor of the province and the group of institutions implementing the
subproject. To further support the participatory process and implementation of subprograms,
INDH has partnership arrangements with about 6,000 NGOs across the country. On the par-
ticipation continuum (see figure 2), INDH would likely fall somewhere in-between the middle
groups, with community participation in all aspects of the planning cycle through an interme-
diary, and direct community control over planning with procurement and contract supervision
carried out by others.



17	   Under INDH-1, almost 700 participatory diagnostic and local investment programs were prepared and implemented for the
      rural and urban components, involving over 3 million beneficiaries.
44 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             Investment in urban areas reflected demand for greater youth inclusion compared to ru-
             ral areas. Four categories of activity were offered under both the rural and urban subprograms,
             namely: construction or rehabilitation of infrastructure; income-generating activities; social,
             cultural, and sports activities; and capacity building. Based on the identification of activities
             tailored to each community’s needs, under INDH-1, the share of social, cultural, and sports ac-
             tivities was much higher in urban areas (22%) than rural areas (3%). The other three categories
             of investment showed more or less the same share in rural and urban areas. Social, cultural and
             sports activities were intentionally included by Government authorities to target youth, given
             the relatively high lack of such facilities in Morocco. It was also a strategic decision made in the
             early 2000s to target social exclusion of the youth for social, economic, and political reasons. En-
             hancing the quality—not only quantity—of youth participation in local governance body was a
             critical area for the INDH-2.18 The experience from INDH-1 showed that overall the average per
             subproject cost was US$45,000 for the rural program and US$120,000 for the urban program,
             due mainly to the larger population size as well as the type of infrastructure financed.

             Project achievements

             INDH-1 set up a complex but generally well-functioning institutional architecture and fi-
             nanced about 700 local participatory plans with more than 22,000 subprojects reaching
             5.2 million beneficiaries nationwide. Given the history of top-down, centralized decision mak-
             ing, fostering a culture of participatory programming and empowerment of poor communities
             was necessarily cast of a long-term endeavor requiring strong government commitment, ade-
             quate resource allocation, and good technical support. In terms of urban subprograms, during
             2005-2010, about 1,627,600 people benefited from 4,069 subprojects. Allocations of grants to
             the subprograms are made on the basis of poverty rates and socio-economic exclusion criteria.

             Lessons learned

             First, in urban areas of Morocco, rigorous poverty mapping was challenging because pov-
             erty is not distributed evenly but rather concentrated in “pockets” across neighborhoods.
             Compared to rural areas, where poverty mapping is relatively straightforward, the targeting
             criteria for urban areas were more qualitative, thus leaving more leeway to provincial authori-
             ties to identify beneficiary communities. Under INDH-1, the national-level steering committee
             selected a number of urban centers and neighborhoods across the country and set out a series
             of social exclusion indicators (such as access to basic services, unemployment, illiteracy, and
             housing conditions) to be used. However, targeting of specific communities relied on the pro-
             vincial authorities. They ranked the importance of the criteria and applied them to select the
             target neighborhoods. This approach led to biases in the allocation of resources toward those
             more capable of presenting persuasive projects. For example, more educated NGO leaders who
             may or may not represent the target community had the time and skills to lead the process.
             Conducting participatory planning in all the “pockets” of poverty that spread across more than
             one neighborhood was not feasible in terms of time and labor. INDH management is aware of
             these challenges and is working to improve the targeting of beneficiaries in urban areas.



             18	   In Morocco, youth (15-24 years old) represent roughly 30 percent of the population and about 44% of the total working age
                   population.
                                                                            Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 45




Second, the project recognized the need for innovation and patience in mobilizing urban
communities, as they lack a clear community identity. In rural areas people are dispersed
over a relatively large geographic area and governed by distant communes (municipalities).
However, traditional structures still function, providing a stronger sense of community. In urban
areas, on the other hand, the population was more heterogeneous, so traditional structures
did not operate. The idea of “community” is more tenuous and the idea of “neighborhood” has
not taken root yet in terms of a framework for citizens to organize. According to project staff,
“people don’t have a clear ‘community’ identity; there are no established community leaders, so
community participation takes more hands and more time.” However, they also noted that cer-
tain cultural norms have been altered in urban areas, and it was often easier to engage women
and youth because “people have a more open outlook” compared to rural areas where “it is not
acceptable to have women in a room discussing [issues with men].” Yet, some peri-urban and
newly urbanized areas are re-emphasizing traditional ideas about gender roles and religious
values.

Third, urban subprograms faced constraints of the built environment, especially land
availability in already crowded cities. Due to a lack of available land in Morocco’s urban areas,
upgrading existing infrastructure was preferred over building new investments. However, be-
cause those facilities already existed and were being upgraded, the project’s target population
of excluded groups and individuals tended not to be the principal beneficiaries.

Fourth, when sub-national governance bodies in urban areas have large capacity and
powers, the participatory planning process may be undermined. For example in INDH-1,
in some cases, the provincial-level governance body could modify the local development plan
presented by the commune-level governance body. Having learned from this experience, INDH-
2 precludes provincial governance bodies from changing local plans without prior consulta-
tion. INDH-2 also reinforces social mobilization teams and strengthens the mandate of neigh-
borhood-level associations to ensure that they are truly representative of local communities.
Some specific tools include community management of funds and promotion of community
contracting, strengthening community ownership of subprojects, and reinforcing measures for
the sustainability of their operation and maintenance.

Finally, integration of project investments with line ministry plans is critical for sustain-
ability. To improve synergies between project and line ministry activities and support for oper-
ations and maintenance (O&M), INDH-1 introduced a commune-wide planning process in 2010
that included INDH-1 investments, commune-financed investments, and line ministry-financed
investments. Under INDH-2, government has gone a step further and recommended that the
investment programs of INDH and line ministries should be integrated in order to ensure com-
plementary inputs for O&M budget and equipment for the sustainable operation of activities
once completed.

Tanzania Local Government Support Project

Project description

The Local Government Support Project (LGSP, 2005-2012) aimed to strengthen fiscal
decentralization throughout Tanzania and to improve access to infrastructure and ser-
46 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             vices in unplanned areas of Dar es Salaam. The Dar es Salaam Upgrading and Infrastructure
             Upgrading component included the Community Infrastructure Upgrading Project (CIUP) to
             strengthen local government’s capacity to work with communities for strategically prioritizing
             and implementing investments. CIUP responded to high pressure for service delivery in the
             unplanned settlements of Dar es Salaam–a city of 2.5 million (population in 2002 at the initial
             stage of the project) that was expanding rapidly with an average annual growth rate of 5.6%
             and increasing informal settlements that covered 60 percent of the land.

             The CIUP subcomponent financed improvements to basic infrastructure in 31 settlement
             areas in Dar es Salaam. This affected a combined population of approximately 330,000 (2004)
             or roughly 13% of the total population of Dar es Salaam and 19% of the population living in un-
             planned areas. This community-driven infrastructure upgrading program was allocated US$18.8
             million. Upon restructuring in 2009, funds reallocated among components allowed CIUP to scale
             up with additional US$15.9 million. Hence roughly two-thirds of the entire US$52 million IDA
             funding was dedicated to CIUP component, benefiting 330,000 persons. These funds provided
             important public infrastructure such as paving of trunk roads, footpaths, public toilets, drainage
             systems, streetlights, water kiosks, etc.

             Community participation under the project

             After the first national multi-party elections in 1994, the government started the pro-
             cess of decentralization by devolution, transferring greater responsibilities from central
             to local government. In 1999, the “Strategic Urban Development Plan” for Dar es Salaam
             was prepared, which began gathering basic information for infrastructure and service devel-
             opment. CIUP utilized the list of unplanned and unserviced settlements for priority upgrading.
             Focusing on low-income settlements, CIUP was supported as part of part of effort to increase
             participation in planning and development and strengthen the capacities of local authorities.

             Once the selection of unplanned communities was finalized, technical support teams
             (TST) at the municipality level and community planning teams (CPT) at the sub-ward lev-
             el were established. Thirty-one unplanned communities (sub-wards) were selected based on
             the potential to reach the highest number of low-income people. Municipal councils appoint-
             ed a group of community workers and urban planners to create the TST for their municipali-
             ties, who were then mandated with community outreach and coordination across municipal
             departments (CIUP Operations Manual). For each of the 31 unplanned communities, elected
             household representatives served on the CPT together with a community chairman and invited
             members of civil society groups. The role of CPT focused on representing the community in all
             CIUP preparation processes and sensitizing the community regarding CIUP at large. Along the
             participation continuum, CIUP is most closely identified with the middle-right point, participat-
             ing in all aspects of the planning cycle through an intermediary.

             Local government authorities and communities demonstrated commitment to their in-
             vestment projects through an iterative engagement process. Commitment to the process
             was demonstrated by certain LGAs systematically allocating specific budget while communi-
             ties took part in the design, operation, and maintenance. The interaction between LGAs and
             communities was iterative, for example, by reconvening community residents for consultation
             after field visits, and again after developing investment and upgrading plans, and finally after
                                                                            Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 47




discussion around resettlement. Such iterative processes helped to engage the community in
an incremental and consistent manner (Operational Manual, 2004).

Communities made informed decisions about investment project selection to be com-
mensurate with affordability and capacity to manage. Mapping exercises and budget ceil-
ings were instrumental in prioritizing needs. A budget ceiling or per-hectare-cost-cap was ad-
opted, calculated to be the minimum expenditure necessary to provide a basic level of services.
Initially set at US$18,000 per hectare, Phase One found the cap to be an underestimation and
was adjusted to US$25,000 in Phase Two. In order to implement manageable projects, small-
scale basic infrastructure investments were selected and different levels of service level stan-
dards were made available to reflect the community’s affordability.

Project achievements

The CIUP upgraded community infrastructure in 31 sub-wards over a sequence of two
separate phases that divided the pool of sub-wards into two groups. According to the Im-
plementation Completion Report, CIUP benefited roughly 300,000 people in priority unplanned
settlements by providing roads, drainage systems, solid waste containers, and streetlights. The
physical upgrades and improved access to services also led to reduced health hazards and in-
creased school enrollment. The provision of streetlights and footpaths made it safer for children
to get to school. The ICR upholds that the low-risk approach to upgrading that focused only on
tertiary infrastructure was appropriate for the project, given the complexity, counterpart capac-
ity, and resources availability. Having successfully introduced a community-driven approach to
upgrading, it is expected that the city will be able to engage communities in future upgrading
endeavors that will address trunk infrastructure.

Lessons learned

While the focus on low-risk, basic infrastructure helped to keep the subprojects man-
ageable, at the same time, the opportunity to develop subprojects based on more holis-
tic plans was missed. The CIUP midterm review recommended against restricting roads and
drainage investments to artificial ward or sub-warding boundaries–citing potential problems
with road interconnections and drainage discharge at the outfalls. To tackle problems such as
flooding, a systemic and coordinated citywide approach is needed. Without a broader perspec-
tive, the opportunity to address the pressing issues of flooding was missed (ICR, 2013). Sectoral
linkages were also missed, reinforcing the issue raised in Section II regarding the need to con-
sider the broader context of trunk infrastructure in urban contexts and to not consider urban
communities in isolation.

Collecting community financial contributions proved to be an additional challenge during
project implementation. Communities were required to provide 5 percent of the subproject
cost before work could begin. Typically, only 15-20 percent of the expected community contri-
bution was collected (hence community contribution loomed around 1 percent of the total sub-
project cost), which caused significant delays in project implementation. Low-income house-
holds were unable to pay, and those that could pay tended to have a greater voice in decision
making. However, the task team noted that communities were also more willing to contribute
once contractors started the work on the ground. For these reasons, the project team abolished
48 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             the requirement of financial contributions as a condition to begin the work. One task team lead-
             er pointed out that such upfront cash contribution requirement could be replaced with other
             means of demonstrating commitment, i.e., in-kind contributions such as time, land, etc.

             Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project

             Project description

             Community-driven development came to be a defining trait of the Vietnam Urban Up-
             grading Project (VUUP). Recognizing the unsuccessful results of earlier clearance-and-com-
             pensation approaches to the issues of informal housing, the Government of Vietnam began to
             experiment with smaller-scale, localized solutions that emphasized in situ upgrading. Observ-
             ing that localized community-driven approaches led to enhanced efficiency of resources and
             more accurate targeting of local concerns, a larger movement began to take form supporting
             in-situ upgrading. Following the successes of VUUP, a full-fledged National Urban Upgrading
             Program was approved in 2009 by the Prime Minister.

             VUUP focused on lagging areas to make basic social services accessible and affordable to
             the poor, involving the community in tertiary infrastructure upgrading. The project was
             first approved in 2004 and received additional financing in 2009, closing in 2014. Overall IDA
             lending for the project amounted to US$389.6 million, while the component Tertiary Infrastruc-
             ture Upgrading allocated US$74 million. The project was carried out in four cities in Vietnam—
             Ho Chi Minh City (population 6,000,000), Haiphong (600,000), Can Tho (300,000), and Nam Dinh
             (230,000). The hallmark of the component was the introduction of community participation
             in the development, approval, and oversight of the upgrading projects. The project financed
             a package of multi-sectoral tertiary infrastructure and service improvements including water
             supply, paved access, electricity, solid waste management, as well as rehabilitation of markets,
             public toilets, education facilities, etc. Designs were prepared using demand-based participato-
             ry methods, and once the tertiary infrastructure upgrading was completed, designs for comple-
             mentary primary and secondary infrastructure were prepared.

             Community participation under the project

             In each of the low-income areas identified, the community members, ward authorities,
             civic organizations, and utility companies developed the Community Upgrading Plan
             (CUP) together. Hence along the participation continuum in figure 2, the project falls towards
             the middle right of the spectrum with citizen participation in the planning cycle. Training was
             provided to community members to ensure their active participation in the design of the CUPs.
             Developing the CUP included determining priority investments, most appropriate and optimal
             designs, and plans for resettlement and compensation. Certain operation and maintenance
             work for tertiary infrastructure, for example, clearance of tertiary drains, was directly carried out
             by the communities, as was monitoring. Financially, communities contributed around 3 to 10
             percent of the tertiary infrastructure costs and continued to pay monthly bills for the new utility
             services. Communities also provided their time and labor, sometimes voluntarily contributing
             land and/or sections of their houses to improve access in the upgrading areas. The community
             members’ contribution to the tertiary infrastructure work was also helped by another project
                                                                            Annex I. Case Study Summaries • 49




component which provided micro-finance loans for home improvements. Investing in their
houses complemented the infrastructure improvements.

Project achievements

Across four cities, a total of 263 low-income areas were identified, receiving a multi-sec-
toral package of tertiary infrastructure and service improvements. These included a combi-
nation of water supply, drainage, paved access, electricity, sanitation, and solid waste manage-
ment services. By early 2013, approximately 200 low-income neighborhoods were upgraded,
benefitting over 2.5 million low-income residents. Furthermore, it is estimated that the improve-
ments in trunk infrastructure will bring direct and indirect benefits to more than 3 million addi-
tional people.

The project also worked with local governments to ensure that all households in the up-
graded areas receive a certificate of tenure or land use certificates. Under the housing im-
provement loan program, eligibility criteria and loan terms and conditions were designed to
make loans accessible to low-income households. According to one task team leader, the hous-
ing loan component led to greater confidence in low-income households to borrow capital.
By early 2013, over 46,613 micro loans were made for housing improvement and 41,010 micro
loans for income generation.

VUUP utilized a comprehensive approach with coordinated project components that
addressed physical, social, and economic aspects for low-income communities. The proj-
ect delivered tertiary infrastructure upgrading, complemented by the upgrading of trunk in-
frastructure networks that supported the tertiary-level investment, in addition to the housing
improvement revolving fund which reached individual households. The revolving fund also
offered income-generation loans, allowing households to expand their economic activities to
repay the housing loans. While the complementary components posed greater complexity in
design, implementation, and management, they also generated valuable synergies.

Lessons learned

Central government commitment to the participatory approach and to concrete results
on the ground helped both communities and local governments gain confidence in the
benefits of participation. Although initially the participatory approach of the project was met
with skepticism from the government and the community, central government’s commitment
to promoting a participatory approach allowed the project to tackle the greater complexity of
having a combination of multiple components. However, it was important that all stakehold-
ers—communities, financiers, and local government authorities—recognize that the process
required more time than usual, and the process could not be expedited as in simpler projects.

To gain community commitment, trust building efforts by the local authorities played a
critical role, while providing housing improvement loans increased community owner-
ship in the project. Extensive outreach and training for both local officials and communities
were used to encourage participation. According to one task team leader, these efforts received
a positive response from communities. Local authorities also made deliberate efforts to provide
logistical support for community engagement–namely, providing appropriate physical space
50 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             to convene the community and carefully coordinating schedules. Housing improvement loans
             also led to a spillover effect where homeowners began to maintain the communal facilities.

             Still, the project met many challenges on a number of fronts, including preserving a truly
             participatory process and collecting financial contributions from the communities. Public
             participation in the preparation phases of city construction and master plans through public
             meetings and workshops were found to be sometimes weak and limited, giving way to a top-
             down process where the local government authority would strongly push for large-scale physi-
             cal improvements, slum clearance, and resettlement. At the point of mid-term review, collection
             of community contributions had only reached 21 percent. This led to a requirement that com-
             munity contributions be paid upfront before the commencement of construction in Phase II of
             the project.
Annex II.
List of Urban Participatory/CDD Projects,
2003-2013


As described in the methodology section, following the initial review of three databas-
es—CDD Database, Slum Upgrading database, and World Bank operations mapped to Ur-
ban Sector Board—a universe of 120 urban participatory or CDD projects were identified
for the review.

                                                                                                              SECTOR
PROJECT ID   PROJECT NAME                                                          FY     COUNTRY             BOARD*
  AFRICA
  P059073    Dar es Salaam Water Supply and Sanitation Project                     2003   Tanzania             WAT
  P060005    Urban Infrastructure and City Management Project                      2006   Rwanda               UD
  P066488    Municipal Program                                                     2010   Kenya                UD
  P070736    Local Government Support Project                                      2005   Tanzania             UD
  P071340    Lagos Metropolitan Development & Governance                           2007   Nigeria              UD
  P072030    Urban Development SIL (FY07)                                          2007   Chad                 UD
  P077477    Second Local Government Development Project                           2003   Uganda                PS
  P082373    Urban Environment Sanitation 2 (FY04)                                 2004   Ghana                WAT
  P082812    Local Infrastructure Development SIL (FY06)                           2006   Gabon                UD
  P084002    Urban and Water Development Support Project                           2007   Cameroon             UD
  P088619    Emergency Living Conditions Improvement Support Project               2008   Congo, Democratic    UD
                                                                                          Republic of
  P088876    Urban Poverty Reduction Project                                       2008   Djibouti             UD
  P090867    Local Government Management and Services Delivery Project             2008   Uganda               UD
  P095232    Local Government Project (SLGP)                                       2011   Swaziland            UD
  P095949    Local Urban Infrastructure Development SIL                            2008   Niger                UD
  P096332    Pro Maputo, Maputo Municipal Development Program                      2007   Mozambique           UD
  P101474    Urban Local Government Development Project                            2008   Ethiopia             UD
  P106975    Water, Electricity & Urban Development SIL                            2010   Congo                UD
  P108905    Emergency MS Rehabilitation & Recovery ERL Second Additional          2008   Congo, Democratic    EMT
             Financing                                                                    Republic of
  P109986    Water and Sanitation Millennium Project                               2010   Senegal              WAT
  P111019    Additional Financing for the Benin Energy Services Delivery Project   2008   Benin                EMT
  P112998    Public Works and Urban Management Project                             2009   Burundi              UD
  P113542    Informal Settlements Improvement Project                              2011   Kenya                UD




                                                       51
52 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




                P117102    Sanitation Project                                                      2011   Cameroon      UD
                P117764    Decentralized Community Driven Services Project                         2012   Benin         SP
                P117876    Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Program                 2013   Uganda        UD
                P118152    Urban Local Government Strengthening Program                            2013   Tanzania      UD
                P118533    Water Supply and Sanitation Project-Additional Financing                2010   Ethiopia      WAT
                P119900    Urban Development - Add Financing                                       2010   Mauritania    UD
                P120190    Urban Poverty Reduction Add Financing                                   2010   Djibouti      UD
                P121027    Urban and Water Development Support Project Additional Financing        2011   Cameroon      UD
                P122692    Local Government Capacity Support Project                               2011   Ghana         UD
                P122950    Cities Support Project                                                  2013   Benin         UD
                P125049    Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Energy Project -            2011   Togo          UD
                           Additional Financing
                P125316    Urban Local Government Development Project                              2012   Ethiopia      UD
                P126899    Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation & Energy Project - Additional   2013   Togo          UD
                           Financing
                P127079    Local Governance and Service Delivery Project                           2013   South Sudan   UD
                P127262    Public Works and Urban Management Project - Additional Financing        2012   Burundi       UD
                P127543    Local Government Development Program                                    2013   Mauritania    UD
                EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
                P070191    Shanghai Urban Environment APL1                                         2003   China         WAT
                P070197    Urban Upgrading                                                         2004   Vietnam       UD
                P072852    Second Urban Poverty Project (UPP2)                                     2003   Indonesia     UD
                P073311    Provincial and Peri-Urban Water and Sanitation Project                  2003   Cambodia      WAT
                P084583    Third Urban Poverty Project                                             2005   Indonesia     UD
                P086508    VN-Priority Infra Investment                                            2008   Vietnam       UD
                P096813    Additional Financing for Second Urban Poverty Project (UPP2)            2007   Indonesia     UD
                P096921    National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas               2013   Indonesia     UD
                           (PNPM UPP)
                P106956    Ningbo New Countryside Development Project                              2010   China         UD
                P109196    National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas               2009   Indonesia     UD
                           (PNPM II UPP
                P113904    Mekong Delta Region Urban Upgrading Project                             2012   Vietnam       UD
                P115897    Urban Upgrading Project Additional Finance                              2010   Vietnam       UD
                P118113    Third National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas         2010   Indonesia     UD
                           III
                P120595    Post Tsunami Reconstruction                                             2011   Tonga         UD
                P121075    Ketsana Emergency Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Project             2011   Cambodia      UD
                P125405    National Community Empowerment Program In Urban Areas For 2012-         2013   Indonesia     UD
                           2015
                P143770    Livelihood Support Urban Poor Thailand                                  2013   Thailand      SDV
                EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
                P069532    Social Investment & Employment Promotion Project (SIEP)                 2003   Bulgaria      SP
                                                     Annex II. List of Urban Participatory/CDD Projects, 2003-2013 • 53




P078359   Seismic Risk Mitigation Project                                      2005   Turkey                  UD
P096481   Municipal Services Improvement                                       2009   Macedonia, former       UD
                                                                                      Yugoslav Republic of
P103703   Community Development Additional Financing                           2007   Bosnia and              SP
                                                                                      Herzegovina
P104994   Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure                                 2008   Kyrgyz Republic         UD
P118158   Social Investment Fund III Second Additional Financing               2010   Armenia                 SP
P122811   Additional Financing – Bishkek and Osh Urban                         2012   Kyrgyz Republic         UD
P129996   Additional Financing – Municipal services Improvement Project        2012   Macedonia, former       UD
                                                                                      Yugoslav Republic of
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
P006553   BR APL Integrated Water Management In Metropolitan Sao Paulo         2010   Brazil                 WAT
P049265   Recife Urban Upgrading Project                                       2003   Brazil                  UD
P051306   Peace and Development Project (1st Phase APL)                        2004   Colombia               SDV
P074726   Bogota Urban Services Project                                        2003   Colombia                UD
P076837   National Community Development Project                               2003   Jamaica                 UD
P076924   Amapa Sustainable Communities                                        2005   Brazil                 ENV
P081436   Bahia Poor Urban Areas Integrated Development                        2006   Brazil                  UD
P081834   Additional Financing - Lima Water Rehabilitation and Management      2003   Peru                   WAT
          Project
P082328   Integrated Municipal Project -Betim Municipality                     2005   Brazil                 ENV
P082419   Water Supply and Sanitation in Low-Income Communities                2008   Panama                 WAT
P082625   Vilcanota Valley Rehab & Management Project                          2005   Peru                    UD
P083979   Urban Infrastructure Project                                         2007   Bolivia                 UD
P085727   Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project - APL2                      2003   Colombia                UD
P088319   (CRL) Barrio-Ciudad Project                                          2006   Honduras                UD
P088966   Municipal APL3: Teresina                                             2008   Brazil                 WAT
P089011   Municipal APL1: Uberaba                                              2007   Brazil                 WAT
P089013   Municipal APL: Recife                                                2008   Brazil                  UD
P089440   Brasilia Environmentally Sustainable                                 2006   Brazil                 ENV
P090159   Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management                           2011   Haiti                   UD
P091299   Inner City Basic Services for the Poor Project                       2006   Jamaica                 UD
P094315   Municipal APL4: Sao Luis                                             2009   Brazil                 WAT
P101277   Additional Financing for Peace and Development Project               2010   Colombia               SDV
P104995   Municipal APL5: Santos                                               2010   Brazil                  UD
P106689   Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management (Additional Financing)    2012   Haiti                   UD
P106699   Urban Community Driven Development Project / PRODEPUR                2008   Haiti                  ARD
P114292   Emergency Bridge Reconstruction & Vulnerability Reduction Project    2010   Haiti                   UD
P121833   Housing Reconstruction - Urban Community Driven Development          2011   Haiti                  ARD
          Additional Financing
P125829   APL2 Sao Bernardo Integrated Water Management in Sao Paulo           2012   Brazil                 WAT
          Program
54 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




     P130528      Urban Infrastructure Project (II) Additional Finance                     2013   Bolivia              UD
     MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

     P070958      Regional and Local Development Project                                   2007   Jordan               UD
     P073433      Urban Upgrading and Housing Reform                                       2004   Iran                 UD
     P074398      Municipal Development Project (03)                                       2003   Tunisia              UD
     P082221      Public Works and Social Development Supplemental Project                 2006   Djibouti             UD
     P082976      THIRD PUBLIC WORKS                                                       2004   Yemen, Republic of   UD
     P094229      Alexandria Development                                                   2008   Egypt                UD
     P100026      National Initiative for Human Development Support Project (INDH)         2007   Morocco              SDV
     P107037      Water Sector Support                                                     2009   Yemen, Republic of   WAT
     P107050      Integrated Urban Development                                             2010   Yemen                UD
     P108649      Public Works III Additional Financing                                    2010   Yemen, Republic of   UD
     P109219      Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection Project                  2008   Yemen, Republic of   UD
     P116197      Cultural Heritage Add. Financing                                         2012   Lebanon              UD
     P116201      National Initiative for Human Development 2                              2012   Morocco              SDV
     SOUTH ASIA

     P071454      AJK Community Infrastructure and Services Project                        2003   Pakistan             SDV
     P074018      Gujarat Emergency Earthquake Reconstruction Project                      2006   India                UD
     P082621      NWFP Community Infrastructure Project II (NWFP CIP2)                     2004   Pakistan             ARD
     P082977      Second Poverty Alleviation Fund Project                                  2004   Pakistan             FPD
     P083919      Kabul Urban Reconstruction Project - AF                                  2005   Afghanistan          UD
     P094513      Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project                                 2010   India                UD
     P099110      Pakistan Earthquake ERC                                                  2009   Pakistan             UD
     P100390      Puttalam Housing Project                                                 2007   Sri Lanka            UD
     P102624      Kerala Local Government and Service Delivery                             2012   India                UD
     P105076      Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund Project II Suppl Social Mobilization   2008   Pakistan             ARD
     P110317      Second North East Housing Reconstruction Program                         2008   Sri Lanka            UD
     P113036      North East Local Services Improvement Project (NELSIP)                   2010   Sri Lanka            UD
     P124514      Local Governance Support Project II                                      2012   Bangladesh           UD
     P131394      Reaching Out of School Children II                                       2013   Bangladesh           ED

               *Sector Boards:
               ARD: Agriculture and Rural Development
               ED: Education
               EMT: Energy and Mining
               ENV: Environment
               FPD: Financial and Private Sector
               PS: Public Sector
               SDV: Social Development
               SP: Social Protection
               UD: Urban Development
               WAT: Water
References

Aldrich, B.C. and R.S. Sandhu. 1995. Housing the Urban Poor: Policy and Practice in Developing Countries. London: Zed
     Books.
Arnstein, S. R. 1969. “A Ladder of Citizen Participation.” Journal of American Institute of Planners, 35(4): 216-224.
Baker, J. (Ed.) 2012. Climate Change, Disaster Risk, and the Urban Poor: Cities Building Resilience for a Changing World.
    Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Bassett, E.M., Gulyani, S., Farvarque-Vitkovik, C. and S. Debomy. 2003. Informal settlement upgrading in sub-Saharan
    Africa: Retrospective and lessons learned. Africa Regional Urban Upgrading Initiative. Washington, D.C.: The World
    Bank.
Beard, V.A. 2007. “Household Contributions to Community Development in Indonesia,” World Development, 35(4):
    607-625.
Beard, V.A. and A. Dasgupta. 2006. Collective Action and Community-Driven Development in Rural and Urban Indo-
    nesia, Urban Studies, 43(9): 1451-1468.
Beard, V.A., Miraftab, F. and C. Silver. (eds.) 2008. Planning and Decentralization: Contested Spaces for Public Action in the
    Global South. London: Taylor and Francis.
Biermann, F. and I. Boas. 2010. “Preparing for a Warmer World: Towards a Global Governance System to Protect Cli-
    mate Refugees.” Global Environmental Politics, 10(1): 66-88.
Castles, S. 2003. “Towards a Sociology of Forced Migration and Social Transformation.” Sociology, 37(1): 13-34.
Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory, Cambridge, MA, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
De Angelis, M. 2005. “The political economy of neoliberal governance.” Review, XXIII, 3: 229–257.
Grootaert, C. and T. Van Bastelaer. (Eds.) 2002. The Role of Social Capital in Development: An Empirical Assessment. Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gilbert, A. and J. Gugler. 2000. Cities, Poverty and Development: Urbanization in the Third World. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
     sity Press.
Gulyani, S. and Connors, G. 2002. Urban Upgrading in Africa: A Summary of Rapid Assessment in 10 Countries. World
    Bank Africa Infrastructure Department.
Imparato, I. and Ruster, J. 2003. Slum Upgrading and Participation: Lessons from Latin America. World Bank Directions
    in Development Series.
Mansuri, G. and V. Rao. 2004. “Community-Based and -Driven Development: A Critical Review.” The World Bank Re-
   search Observer, 19(1): 1-39.
Mansuri, G. and V. Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work? Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Moser, C.O.N. 2006. Reducing Urban Violence in Developing Countries. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Nitti, R. and B. Dahiya. 2004. Community Driven Development in Urban Upgrading. Social Development Notes, Number
      85. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Olson, M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
    sity Press.
Rahnema, M. 1992. “Participation.” In The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge as Power. ed. W. Sachs . Lon-
    don: Zed Books, pp. 116-131.
Rosenau, J. and E.O. Czempiel. (Eds.) 1992. Governance without Government: Order and Change in World Politics. Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Santos, B. de Sousa. 2004. “Governance: Between myth and reality.” paper presented at the 2004 Law & Society Asso-
    ciation annual meeting, Chicago, May 27-30.




                                                             55
56 • Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas




             Turner. J.F.C. and R. Fichter. (Eds.) 1972. Freedom to Build: Dweller Control of the Housing Process. New York: MacMillian.
             United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2011. Global Study of Homicide. Vienna: UNODC.
             Vecvagare, L. 2004. Community Driven Development Approaches in Housing Sector Projects in Transition Economies. So-
                 cial Development Notes, Number 71. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
             Werlin, H. 1999. “The Slum Upgrading Myth.” Urban Studies, 36(9): 1523-1534.
             Wong, S. 2012. What have been the Impacts of World Bank Community-Driven Development Programs? CDD Impact Eval-
                uation Review and Operational and Reseach Implications. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
             Woolcock, M. 1998. “Social Capital And Economic Development: Toward A Theoretical Synthesis And Policy Frame-
                work.” Theory And Society, 27(2): 151-208.
             Woolcock, M. and D. Narayan. 2000. “Social Capital: Implications for Development Theory, Research, and Policy.” The
                World Bank Research Observer, 15(2): 225-249.
             World Bank, 2013. Urban Sector Results Profile: Harnessing Urbanization for Growth and Poverty Alleviation. Washington,
                 D.C.: The World Bank.
             World Bank, 2015. Inclusive Cities: Approach Paper. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
The World Bank Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
www.worldbank.org/cdd




                           58
