    Report No: ACS18659



Republic of Guinea
Socioeconomic Impact of Ebola using Mobile Phone
Survey


.
May 2016


.
GPV01
AFRICA
This report was prepared by a World Bank team led by Ali Zafar (Senior Economist, GMFDR and TTL)
with Yele Batana (Senior Economist, GPV01 and co-TTL), Alvin Etang Ndip (Economist, GPV01) and
Abdoul Mijiyawa (Senior Economist, GMFDR). The team worked closely with the National Institute of
Statistics (INS) under the leadership of Aboubacar Kaba (Director, INS) and Aly Komah (Senior
Statistician, INS). The team appreciates the guidance from Nina Rosas Raffo (Social Protection Specialist,
GSP07). The team also thanks Vasco Molini (Senior Economist, GPV01) and Aly Sanoh (Economist,
GPV01) for comments on an earlier draft. The team worked under the direction of Pablo Fajnzylber
(Practice Manager, GPV01).




                    Regional Vice President:       Makhtar Diop
                          Country Director:        Pierre Laporte
                           Senior Director:        Ana Revenga
                         Practice Manager:         Pablo Fajnzylber
                         Task Team Leader:         Ali Zafar
                      Co-Task Team Leader:         Yele Batana
                                                          REPUBLIC OF GUINEA

                                               SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT OF EBOLA

                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................... 1
I.     INTRODUCTION AND COUNTRY CONTEXT .......................................................................... 3
II.    POVERTY CONTEXT ........................................................................................................... 7
III.   SURVEY METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................... 8
IV.    KEY FINDINGS OF THE SURVEY..........................................................................................15
        A.       FACTORS INFLUENCING THE RISK OF BEING INFECTED WITH EBOLA ............................................ 16
        B.       EFFECTS ON EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS .......................................................... 17
        C.       EFFECTS ON AGRICULTURAL OUTPUTS ................................................................................... 21
        D.       EFFECTS ON FOOD SECURITY AND COPING STRATEGIES ............................................................ 22
        E.       EFFECTS ON MIGRATION AND CASH TRANSFERS ...................................................................... 26
        F.       EFFECTS ON HEALTH ........................................................................................................... 27
        G.       EFFECTS ON EDUCATION ..................................................................................................... 29
        H.       EFFECTS ON ASSETS ............................................................................................................ 30
V.     CONCLUSION ...................................................................................................................31
ANNEX A: NUMBER OF ORANGE NUMBERS DRAWN BY PREFECTURE FOR THE WORLD BANK SURVEY
ON THE IMPACT OF EBOLA IN GUINEA .......................................................................................35
ANNEX B: BREAKDOWN OF HOUSEHOLDS RESPONDENTS BY ADMINISTRATIVE REGION .............37
ANNEX C: EBOLA SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE (2015) .....................................................................38
                                         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


1.       The Ebola pandemic has been one of the most virulent pandemics in modern times. By the end
of 2015, the epidemic had cost the lives of more than 11,300 people in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra
Leone, including more than 500 frontline health care workers. It unleashed large damage to economic
growth in these countries, leading to lost gross domestic product (GDP) of close to US$2.8 billion and
much panic, among both the local population as well as foreign and domestic investors. Guinea, where
the Ebola crisis originated in December 2013, was the last to emerge free from Ebola. Liberia was
declared free of Ebola in May 2015, Sierra Leone in November 2015, and Guinea on December 29, 2015,
by the World Health Organization (WHO). In addition to the severe effects of Ebola, the economic
downturn in the three countries has been exacerbated by the sharp decline in global commodity prices.
Despite evidence of the effect of Ebola on the macroeconomic and fiscal environment, there was a
scarcity of just-in time data on the household impact.

2.      After good growth performance between 2011 and 2013, Guinea’s economy has suffered a
number of setbacks, including the Ebola crisis and a sharp drop in new investment in the mining
sector. From a macroeconomic standpoint, real GDP growth dropped to 1.1 percent in 2014 and 0.1
percent in 2015 respectively. The services and mining sectors were adversely affected by Ebola in 2015.
The mining sector is estimated to have contracted substantially in 2015 due to a combination of investor
aversion because of Ebola, declining international metal prices, and Guinea’s uncertain policy regime in
this sector.    The epidemic and renewed political unrest in the run-up to the October presidential
elections in 2015 also resulted in declining activity in the services sector. On a positive note, electricity
production has improved following the start of operations of the new Kaleta hydroelectricity power
plant by mid-2015.

3.      As part of the international effort to understand and manage the Ebola crisis and to obtain
microeconomic data, the World Bank partnered with Guinea’s National Institute of Statistics (INS) to
conduct a mobile phone survey to measure the socioeconomic impact of Ebola on households,
following in the footsteps of similar mobile surveys conducted in Liberia and Sierra Leone in 2015.
From September 7 to 21, 2015, Guinea’s INS conducted a mobile phone survey on 2467 households,
with over 60 quantitative and qualitative questions, to assess the impact of the pandemic on incomes,
the labor market, education, health, agriculture, and quality of life. The sampling frame, the list of all
possible units from which selected households were drawn, was an existing list of phone numbers. Using
this sample drawn from the list of subscribers of the local telecommunications giant—Orange—the
survey was able to reach households using random digit dialling (RDD) among the 70 percent of the
population that own mobile phones, covering all provinces and ethnic groups in the country, It is
important to note that Orange is the biggest mobile telephone network in Guinea, with over 5,300,000
customers and a market share of nearly 60 percent in value terms (on December 31, 2015).

4.      Two strata were used based on classification from the Epidemiological Report on Ebola
Outbreak (January 20, 2015). The first stratum (or zone) covers areas severely affected by Ebola,
including the forested area where Ebola first started, the border areas with Sierra Leone, and Conakry
and its neighboring areas. The second zone includes areas not directly affected by Ebola, especially the
northern parts of the country. The later zone formed the control group for the analysis, A sample of
2,500 households was selected throughout the country. In the severely affected area, 1,500 households
were selected compared to 1,000 households in the area less or not at all affected by Ebola. Two
important limitations of the study were the inability to reach the 30 percent of very poor who do not


                                                     1
have cell phones, coupled with the challenges of undertaking a mobile survey versus a face to face
survey.

5.    The study finds that the pandemic had ripple effects on the economic fabric and that the
economic effects of Ebola have outlasted the epidemiological ones. The main findings of the survey
are:

    Overall impact. All parts of Guinea were economically impacted by Ebola, with greater impact in
   the southeast and the areas around Conakry. A quarter of respondents in the severely affected
   areas reported experiencing proven cases of Ebola in their neighborhood or village. One in twenty
   respondents in the less affected areas reported experiencing proven cases of Ebola in their
   neighborhood or village.
    Likelihood of Ebola. The probability of a household to experience Ebola increased significantly
   with poverty and being headed by a woman, while factors such as household size and population
   density, and the community standard of living may explain the occurrence of Ebola in
   neighborhoods. The bottom 40 percent of households in terms of wealth were more likely to
   contract Ebola compared with the richest 60 percent of households.
    Employment and incomes. Urban employment has deteriorated with Ebola outbreak. The
   unemployment rate appears higher in urban areas severely affected by Ebola than in urban areas
   less affected, at nearly 17 percent and 12 percent, respectively. In parallel, there has been a decline
   in rural incomes, with a disproportionate impact on women.
    Agriculture. Agriculture production remained resilient during the crisis. Compared to 2013,
   agricultural production in 2015 increased for 41 percent of households. Two possible explanations
   are the food security interventions of the government and the lack of migration of poor farmers
   who continued farming during the crisis.
    Food security. The increase in rice price was reported by 33 percent of Guinean households
   from severely affected areas against 13 percent of households from less affected areas. Food
   consumption declined significantly, with 30 percent households in Conakry and 23 percent in the
   other severely affected areas changing their food habits, compared to 17 percent in the less affected
   areas. It appears likely that the increasing pressure on food prices resulting from disruptions in
   production and trade limitations were offset by the diminishing effect of low domestic demand due
   to lower incomes.
    Education. Close to 7 percent of households withdrew their children from school, with the large
   majority citing Ebola as the main factor.
    Health. The survey showed that about 11 percent of households in the areas severely affected
   by Ebola were afraid to go to health facilities because of fear of contacting the pandemic, compared
   to only 2 percent of those living in less affected areas. However, in spite of Ebola, almost all
   individuals who needed treatment for malaria and diarrhea still visited a health facility.
    Knowledge. In Guinea, almost all households reported having heard of Ebola, regardless of
   whether they were severely affected or less affected by the pandemic.
    Comparisons with Liberia and Sierra Leone. There were a number of similar patterns, although
   magnitudes vary. First, in all three countries, Ebola had a pernicious effect on employment and
   incomes. Second, food consumption declined, with many households reducing the number of meals
   eaten in a day. Third, there was school drop-out, with a substantial share of households that include
   at least one school-aged child reporting that they are not in school due to Ebola. Ebola was cited by
   a substantial share of households as the reason for withdrawing their children from school. Fourth,
   the use of health facilities continued to increase in spite of Ebola. Finally, agriculture production
   remained resilient in all three, although there were some price fluctuations in local markets.
    Policy implications. There is a pressing need to continue mobilizing aid for Guinea even in the
   aftermath of Ebola in order to jumpstart its recovery and cushion the shocks. Greater supply of
   inputs to farmers, better social safety nets, and stronger government support for social sectors is
   needed.

                         I.      INTRODUCTION AND COUNTRY CONTEXT

6.       Serious challenges remain in addressing the impact of the Ebola epidemic that affected
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone since early 2014, despite great success in stopping the epidemic. By
end- December 2015, the epidemic had cost the lives of more than 11,300 people in the three countries,
including more than 500 health care workers. The number of new cases peaked at more than 50 per
week in early 2015 before gradually declining as containment efforts took effect. Liberia was declared
free of Ebola in May 2015, Sierra Leone in November 2015, and Guinea on December 29, 2015, by WHO.

7.      Guinea, where the Ebola crisis originated in December 2013, was the last to emerge free from
Ebola. The genesis of the Ebola virus was in Guinea in December 2013, starting in the southeast in the
forested areas of Macenta and Gueckedou, bordering Liberia and Sierra Leone (see figure 2). Strong
mobilization of efforts by the international community, coupled with government leadership in the
three countries, helped stem the pandemic. With the development of strong Ebola response plans,
establishment of treatment centers, inflow of medical supplies and personnel, and development of
robust systems of contact tracing, the epidemic was tackled. After more than a year, the pandemic was
defeated. In response to the apparent eradication of the disease, the authorities in the three countries
are preparing for a post-Ebola phase.

                                   Figure 1. Political Map of Guinea




   Source: World Bank
8.       In addition to the great loss of life, the epidemic has caused great damage to the countries’
economies. Total GDP losses for the three countries in 2015 alone are estimated at US$2.2 billion, of
which US$535 million is for Guinea, US$240 million for Liberia, and US$1.4 billion for Sierra Leone.
Inflation has moderated in all three countries, averaging below 10 percent, helped in large measure by
lower international food and fuel prices. The closure of borders by neighboring countries during the
pandemic had reduced international trade in goods and services and affected consumption in the short
term, due to the importance of food both on imports and exports. Commodities such as rice, palm oil,
potato, and banana were affected. The decline in production and economic activities resulted in the
closure of some businesses and caused an economic recession by boosting unemployment and poverty
in Guinea. In addition to the severe effects of Ebola, the economic downturn in the three countries has
been exacerbated by the sharp decline in global commodity prices.

                                               Figure 2. Map of Ebola Cases in Guinea

                                               Koundara

                                                                      Mali


                                           Gaoual                              Koubia
                                                                                                                           Siguiri
                                                                                                Dinguiraye
                                                          Lélouma                  Tougué
                                                                    Labé

                        Boké
                                           Télimélé          Pita     Dalaba
                                                                                            Dabola                                            Mandiana
                                                                                                             Kouroussa
                                        Fria                                 Mamou
                               Boffa

                                        Dubréka           Kindia                                                                     Kankan
                                                                                                 Faranah

                                            Coyah
                                       Conarky
                                                Forécariah
                                                                                                             Kissidougou         Kérouané


                                                                                                                                                     Beyla
                  Numbers of Ebola cases                                                                Guéckédou

                   (700,800]                                                                                                Macenta
                   (600,700]
                   (400,600]
                   (300,400]                                                                                                                         Lola
                   (200,300]                                                                                                             Nzérékoré
                   (100,200]
                   (50,100]
                   (10,50]                                                                                                           Yamou
                   [0,10]




9.       As part of the international response, the World Bank Group has significantly financed the
Ebola-affected countries. Overall, the Bank Group has mobilized close to US$1.6 billion in financing for
the countries hardest hit by the crisis, including US$400 million announced in August and September
2014 for the emergency response. The funds have financed Ebola-containment efforts in Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone; helped families and communities cope with the economic impact of the crisis;
and strengthened public health systems in the three countries to guard against future disease
outbreaks.

10.     Guinea was significantly affected by the Ebola pandemic, jeopardizing some of the gains in
macroeconomic stability and poverty reduction during the last few years. Real GDP growth in 2015
was 0.1 percent, compared to a pre-Ebola forecast of about 4 percent. While there has been some
rebound in agriculture and services, the mining sector continues to contract, and foreign investors
remain wary of new projects. The mining sector is estimated to have contracted substantially in 2015
due to a combination of investor risk aversion because of Ebola, declining international metal prices, and
Guinea’s uncertain policy regime. Pre-Ebola agriculture GDP growth was projected at 5 percent for 2015
compared to an actual growth of 3 percent, as the agricultural sector showed more resilience than
expected. On the whole, Ebola affected all sectors of the Guinean economy. This shock was further
compounded by the uncertainty in the legal regime of the mining sector and by the preparation for the
national elections held in November 2015. Electricity production has improved following the start of
operations of the new Kaleta hydroelectricity power plant by midyear. Reflecting low domestic demand
and the sharp decline in domestic fuel prices early in 2015, inflation continued to decline, reaching less
than 8 percent in 2015. In addition, the fiscal situation deteriorated sharply in 2015. Revenue and grants
were estimated to fall by almost 3 percentage points of GDP, principally as the result of lower external
budget support that has not been realized, and expenditures increased by 2 percentage points due to
Ebola-related transfers and public investment spending.

11.      The impact of the Ebola epidemic on economic well-being operates through several channels.
First, there are the direct and indirect effects of the sickness and mortality themselves, which consume
scarce health care resources and affect labor force participation rates. Second, are the behavioral effects
that result from peoples’ fear of contagion, which in turn lead to a fear of association with others and
reduces labor force participation, closes places of employment, disrupts transportation, and motivates
some government and private decision makers to close seaports and airports (World Bank 2015). In the
recent history of infectious disease outbreaks such as the SARS epidemic of 2002–2004 and the H1N1 flu
epidemic of 2009, behavioral effects have been responsible for 80 to 90 percent of the total economic
impact of the epidemic. Third, there are longer-term economic effects, due to possible changes in labor
markets, agricultural production, employment, school enrollment, and quality of life. The first of these
channels, consisting of the labor force and health expenditure impacts, closely tracks the number of
suspected and actual cases of the disease (see Error! Reference source not found.). The other two
channels are less sensitive to the actual number of cases of Ebola because they are is driven by aversion
behavior and perception. Human reaction varies depending on the perceived threats and the impact of
the pandemic.
                             Figure 3. Broad Channels of Short-term Impact




Source: World Bank (2015).
                                                II.       POVERTY CONTEXT

12.      In line with the deteriorating macroeconomic situation has been a worsening poverty
situation which has been exacerbated by the crisis. The goal of the survey has been to empirically
document that increase. Historically, the poverty rate in Guinea has remained high. With elusive and
volatile growth, the poverty rate increased from 53 percent in 2007 to 55 percent in 2012 (See table 1).
Declining average per capita consumption contributed to the increase in poverty, but a mild reduction in
inequality, notably in rural areas, somewhat contained the overall increase in poverty. Rural-urban
migrations and the sharp increase in food prices explain why rural areas fared better than urban areas in
terms of poverty reduction, even if poverty rates remain higher in rural areas than in urban areas, with
65 and 35 percent, respectively, in 2012. Poverty headcount that was almost the same in 2007 for zone
1 and zone 21 (around 58 percent), increased in the former to reach 63 percent in 2012, while it
decreased to 56.8 in the latter. Conakry also experienced a significant rise in poverty from 26 to about
36 percent. The proportion of poor individuals living in households with a mobile phone increased from
only 24 percent in 2007 to nearly 43 percent in 2012. The same trends are observed for the poverty gap
and poverty severity. This reflects that mobile phones, which were accessible only to some privileged
households a decade ago, have become widely accessible even to more deprived households. It
appears, however, that more than half of poor households do not have a mobile phone, which raises the
issue of the national representativeness of the Ebola survey. Table 2, based on the 2012 survey, shows
how the mobile survey sample may be biased. The differences in the main socioeconomic and
demographic characteristics between households with and without cell phone seem to be significant,
especially for the distribution by the place of residence. Unsurprisingly, more than 90 percent of
households without cell phone are located in rural areas against less than 50 percent for households
with cell phone.

              Table 1. Poverty of Households by Geographical Area and Mobile Phone Ownership
                                                       2007                                         2012
                                     Poverty          Poverty       Poverty        Poverty         Poverty          Poverty
                                    Headcount          Gap          Severity      Headcount         Gap             Severity
                                       (%)              (%)           (%)            (%)             (%)              (%)
      Place of residence
      Urban                             30.5           7.7            3.0             35.4           9.6             3.8
      Rural                             63.0           22.0           10.5            64.7           22.6            10.5
      Epidemiological zone
      Zone 1                            58.3           18.4           8.0             63.0           21.8            10.0
      Zone 2                            59.3           21.5           10.7            56.5           19.0            8.8
      Conakry                           26.3           6.1            2.3             35.6           9.9             3.9
      Ownership of mobile phone
      No                                61.2           21.0            9.9            70.0           25.6            12.3
      Yes                               24.0           5.7             2.1            42.6           12.2            5.0
      Guinea
      All                               53.0           17.6            8.2            55.2           18.4             8.4
      Source: Government of Guinea household survey (ELEP) 2007 and 2012.

13.     The poor people have increasing access to mobile phones in Guinea. Figure 4 shows that
poverty incidence in households with a mobile phone increased from about 19 percent in 2007 to nearly
52 percent in 2012. In fact, this reflects that the poor have experienced an increase in ownership of

1
    Zone 1 and Conakry are the areas severely affected by Ebola, while zone 2 represents the less affected areas.
                               mobile phones. Moreover, if households without a mobile phone appear to be mostly poor, nearly 30
                               percent of individuals from these households were not poor in 2012. Poverty appears to be higher for
                               the severely affected zone than the less affected zone and Conakry in 2012, with a poverty incidence of
                               51.2 percent, against 44.4 and 29.1 percent, respectively. This is consistent with the poverty incidence in
                               all households as shown by table 2. This is also the case for the breakdown by place of residence,
                               because the rural areas still show a higher poverty incidence.

                                               Table 2. Main Demographics of Households by cell phone access in 2012
                                                                      Proportion                                            Place of
                                                                                                                                            Sex of Household
                                       Cell phone access                  of          Average          Average            Residence
                                                                                                                                                Head (%)
                                             status                   Households        Age              Size                 (%)
                                                                         (%)                                            Urban     Rural      Male      Female
                                    No cell phone                        48.3          51.2               6.2            7.3       92.7      88.2       11.8
                                    Cell phone access                    51.7          49.8               6.7            53.3      46.7      85.5       14.5
                                    All                                  100           50.5               6.4            31.1      68.9      86.8       13.2



                                           Figure 4. Poverty of Households Owning a Mobile Phone by Geographical Area


                                               60
                                                                               53.9                                                         2007
                                                                                                       51.2                                                51.7
                                                                                                                                            2012
Proportion of households (%)




                                                                                                                       44.4


                                               40                       37.8

                                                               32.8
                                                                                                31.5
                                                                                                                                     29.1


                                                        22.3                                                                  22.7
                                                                                                                19.8                                18.8
                                               20




                                                0
                                                         Urban           Rural                  Zone 1          Zone 2        Conakry               Guinea

                                                                                                 Geographical area


                                          Source: ELEP (2012, 2017)

                                                                               III.   SURVEY METHODOLOGY

                               14.     The majority of economic impact studies on epidemics are desk studies, given the dangers
                               associated with pandemics. Because of risks of infection and travel limitations, field surveys are difficult
                               to conduct. Desk studies have typically used data from institutions such as the World Bank and WHO. In
                               the context of Ebola, it was important to obtain disaggregated data to analyze the socioeconomic
                               impact of Ebola on households in Guinea. While there was an urgent need to monitor the impacts of
Ebola on household welfare, the Ebola virus outbreak limited the movement of people and goods in the
three most affected countries (Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea). The health and security situation
made it not only risky, but also impossible to deploy interviewers to the field to collect information from
households.

15.      In high-risk environments such as this one where face-to-face data collection would be very
difficult or not feasible, mobile phone surveys offer a valuable alternative. This was the case in Mali,
where the Listening to Displaced People Survey used mobile phones to collect information on living
conditions from the displaced population in Mali and refugees in camps in Niger and Mauritania who
were displaced by the crisis in North Mali (Etang et al. 2015). Similarly, in Liberia and Sierra Leone,
Himelein (2015a; 2015b) and the World Food Programme’s mVAM project used a mobile phone survey
to collect data to monitor the Ebola crisis and its effects on food security and to provide estimates of its
socioeconomic impact. Box 1 provides more information on the advantages and experiences from
mobile phone surveys in other countries, suggesting the possibility for wider use of mobile phone
surveys for poverty and impact analysis.

Box 1: Advantages of Mobile Phone Surveys (from Dabalen et al., forthcoming)

In a forthcoming book entitled “Mobile Phone Panel Surveys in Developing Countries: A practical guide
for micro data collection?, Dabalen et al. stress that mobile phone surveys should not and cannot
replace completely face-to-face household surveys in developing countries. However, the authors note
mobile phone surveys can offer substantial benefits in specific circumstances and for specific data
needs. The book provides an overview of some of the main advantages of mobile phone surveys
summarized below and provides evidence where mobile phone surveys can be very useful tools to
obtain important evidence.
       Gathering data in volatile and high-risk environments where traditional data collecting methods
      present limitations:
             -   No ‘boots on ground’ (i.e. data collection in hard-to-access areas) and no deployed
                 personnel that is able to reach the most difficult parts of country
             - Political crisis/unrest i.e. to track living conditions from the displaced population (IDP’s
                 and returnees) in Mali for example (Etang et al. 2015) where violence precludes more
                 traditional analysis
             - Epidemic i.e. to monitor the Ebola crisis where risks for surveyors are too high
      Quick response to new data needs in terms of flexibility is urgently needed to provide just-in
     time information, for example in relation to natural disasters (floods, droughts, etc.)
      Quick turnaround helps ensure timelineness of survey
      Cost effectiveness in terms of cheaper mobile phone surveys vs traditional household surveys
      Monitoring and impact evaluation efforts are possible with mobile phone surveys
Further details on mobile phone surveys can be found at
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/listening-to-africa


16.    Given the various constraints, a household survey was conducted in Guinea to measure the
socioeconomic impact of Ebola on Guinean households by using a mobile phone survey interview.
From September 7 to 21, 2015, Guinea’s INS conducted a mobile phone survey that allows estimation of
the socioeconomic impact of Ebola on the living conditions of households. The questionnaire was
modeled on the successful questionnaire used in Liberia. Given the constraints of conducting face-to-
face interviews because of Ebola’s pernicious impacts, a mobile phone approach was considered the
second-best solution to obtain timely and important data. Given the dangers associated with the
pandemic, the simplicity of the approach and the short duration, the team opted for a mobile phone
survey. Using a sample of 2,500 households, a household questionnaire was implemented to collect
both quantitative and qualitative data. Phone interviews limit the number of questions that can be
asked, relative to a face-to-face interview; but for the purpose of this study, the information collected
was sufficient.

17.     To build local ownership, ensure the involvement of good statistical teams, and ensure
knowledge of the local context, Guinea’s INS was chosen as the local partner and implementer of the
survey. Working closely with the Bank team, the INS had several functions: development of technical
tools and implementation of the data collection; the design of the methodology of the study, organizing
methodological workshops, validation of technical documents before the collection of data,
determination of the sampling frame, recruitment and training of a survey team; supervision of the
investigation; data analysis; and drafting a report with the key findings. Recruitment and training of the
survey team was held from August 27, 2015 to September 5, 2015. In terms of personnel, the survey
involved 20 agents/operators for data collection and entry, 2 supervisors, 3 statisticians/demographers
for the analysis of the data and quality control, and 4 experts for drafting the main report. The
combination of technical knowledge and experience in conducting surveys in Guinea allowed the INS to
be a strong partner to the Bank team.

18.     To have the most representative sample under the circumstances, the Bank/INS team worked
closely with the largest mobile company in Guinea, Orange, which has an extensive network and
phone lists. The sampling frame, the list of all possible units from which selected households were
drawn, was an existing list of phone numbers. There are four players in Guinea's mobile market—
Orange, MTN Areeba, Cellcom, and Intercel.2 Orange is the biggest mobile telephone network in Guinea,
with over 5,300,000 customers and a market share of nearly 60 percent in value terms (on December
31, 2015).3 The sampling frame for this survey was the list of subscribers to the Orange network from
which the study sample was drawn, randomly (see annex A). One of the advantages of using Orange was
that, in addition to its size, the Orange network has an average of three subscribers per household
throughout the country. In terms of eligibility criteria, the survey focused on those individuals who were
15 years of age or older and had resided for at least six months in the survey area4. The survey was
conducted in the eight administrative regions of Guinea (Conakry, Boké, Faranah, Kankan, Kindia, Labé,
Mamou, and Nzérékoré). Each subscriber was identified by region and prefecture.

19.     To analyze the impact of Ebola on households living conditions and ensure a degree of rigor,
two strata were used based on classification from the Epidemiological Report on Ebola Outbreak
(January 20, 2015). The first stratum (or zone) covers areas severely affected by Ebola, including the
forested area where Ebola first started, the border areas with Sierra Leone, and Conakry and its
neighboring areas. The second zone includes areas not directly affected by Ebola, especially the
northern parts of the country. The later zone formed the control group for the analysis, and it was
ensured that a significant number of the responders were from the north and central part of the
country, in provinces with no Ebola cases. We can also consider Conakry as another stratum from the


2
  http://www.telecomsinsight.com/market-overview-guinea-mobile-market-overview-feb-2014
3
  http://www.orange.com/en/About/Global-footprint/Orange/countries/Welcome-to-Orange-Guinea-Conakry
4
  Even though Ebola peaked in November–December 2014, it had ripple effects that exacerbated in 2015, so the six-month
period seemed acceptable in design of the survey.
severely affected areas. Figure 5 shows the three strata and the numbers of cases in each one by the
end of 2015.



                                       Figure 5. Map of Ebola by epidemiological zone

                                                    Koundara

                                                                           Mali


                                                Gaoual                            Koubia
                                                                                                                              Siguiri
                                                                                                   Dinguiraye
                                                               Lélouma                Tougué
                                                                         Labé

                             Boké
                                               Télimélé           Pita    Dalaba
                                                                                               Dabola                                            Mandiana
                                                                                                                Kouroussa
                                             Fria                                 Mamou
                                    Boffa

                                             Dubréka           Kindia                                                                   Kankan
                                                                                                   Faranah

                                                Coyah
                                            Conarky
                                                     Forécariah
                                                                                                                Kissidougou         Kérouané


                                                                                                                                                       Beyla
                                                                                                           Guéckédou
                           Epidemiological zone (%)
                                                                                                                               Macenta

                              Conakry (611 cases)
                              Less affected areas (277 cases)                                                                               Nzérékoré Lola
                              Severely affected areas (2916 cases)
                                                                                                                                        Yamou




20.      This survey, which uses the subscribers of the Orange network, attempted to compare the
results of the household survey in the third Population Census of 2014 (RGPH-3 of 2014) conducted by
the INS, but for methodological reasons the two surveys cannot be compared easily. From a
methodological standpoint, the sample drawn from the Orange subscriber base was not exactly
comparable with the 70 percent of households that have reported mobile phone ownership. The team
checked the risk of duplicate households by monitoring the ratio between the number of subscribers of
each prefecture and the number of households in the prefecture.5 However, given the differences in
means, ages, and household incomes, the team found that comparisons with previous surveys were not
methodologically robust enough.

21.      The methodology used by the team was the random digit dialing (RDD) approach, which has
several clear advantages including timeliness and lack of a clear selection bias. The RDD method refers
to a set of techniques for drawing a sample of households from the frame or set of telephone numbers.6
It was chosen because under the circumstances (inability to carry out a face-to-face survey), it was the

5
  To eliminate any bias, each person interviewed asked members of his household if another person had been subject to this
interview. Each respondent received GNF 10,000 of credit transfer. This approach allowed the participation of an adequate
number of households in the analysis.
6
  This particular RDD approach is distinguished from other RDD telephone sampling methods because it selects the sample from
the frame of telephone numbers in the operator’s (Orange’s) database, whereas the other methods select from lists of
numbers in directories or commercial lists (which may not include all phone owners). The ability to sample all telephone
households, not just those households on a list, is one reason for the popularity of RDD sampling. To incentivize households to
participate, call credit was given to those who already have mobile phones after the completion of the interview. For a detailed
look at the RDD methodology, there is a good review at http://www.pewresearch.org/methodology/u-s-survey-
research/sampling/#random-digit-dialing.
second-best option as noted earlier. This mobile phone approach had the advantage of collecting timely
information, which in special cases such as the Ebola context, might be more important than
representativeness. In addition, the approach seems to be relatively more cost-effective for collecting
data from the general population and potentially targeted subpopulations. Nevertheless, the RDD
methodology has its own limitations. Phone surveys based on RDD are the most common methodology
for data collection in developed countries7 (Waksberg 1978; Massey et al. 1997), because nearly
everyone has a phone number.8 This is not true in developing country contexts, where mobile phone
penetration is much lower and access to personal landlines is often negligible. RDD is not suitable for
contexts in which the target population has low coverage rates and the aim is to create a representative
sample.9 The mobile phone penetration rate in Guinea is such that close to 70 percent of the households
own at least one mobile phone.10 This level of mobile phone ownership represents some challenges in
the national representativeness of the data collected through phone surveys using RDD. For instance, to
the extent that mobile phone ownership is correlated with the household’s wealth and welfare status,
one would expect a lower probability of poorer households being included in the survey compared with
the actual proportion of them in the population. Indeed, as we show later in this report, the risk of
contracting Ebola decreases across the wealth quintiles from the poorest (highest risk) to the richest
(lowest risk) households; and poverty is more prevalent among households without a mobile phone
(although many poor households own mobile phones). In summary, given that there are households
that live in areas without a mobile phone network, it is not possible to have a fully nationally
representative sample from this method. In this case, there will almost certainly be an element of bias in
the estimates even after reweighting. Thus, we are probably underestimating the impact of Ebola on
households, if the poorest households are excluded from the sample. This was also the challenge with
the Liberia and Sierra Leone Ebola surveys (2015a; 2015b).

22.     To ensure a sufficient sampling size and geographic representativeness, a sample of 2,500
households was selected throughout the country. In the severely affected area, 1,500 households were
selected compared to 1,000 households in the area less or not at all affected by Ebola (see Table 3). The
sample was distributed proportionally according to the number of households in each prefecture.
Various eligibility criteria were set with regard to age, the duration of residence in the prefecture where
the person was interviewed, and the presence of the person in the locality during the Ebola crisis.
Because the survey was conducted by mobile phone, it was necessary to carry out tests of
representativeness of this sample compared to the national population. The census data was used to
allow the team to test to what extent mobile phone ownership varies with households’ welfare status.

                 Table 3. Sampling and Response Numbers from the Ebola Survey in Guinea
                                               Number of Households           Number of Households          Coverage
                     Strata
                                                    Sampled                     that Responded              Ratio (%)
                      Total                           2,500                          2,467                     99



7
  The term ’random digital dialing’ refers to the use of all possible telephone numbers as a sampling frame for telephone
surveys. A detailed review of RDD is provided in Lepkowski (1988).
8
  See Ferraro et al. (2016) on possible sources of bias in RDD surveys.
9
  There are always exceptions. This was the case for the World Food Programme’s mobile phone surveys on food security
during the Ebola crisis in West Africa, where timing was more important than representativeness. Under these circumstances,
analysts are encouraged to seek advice from an experienced statistician on the necessary modeling to mimic a representative
sample.
10
   Despite relatively slow growth for a country with a relatively low mobile penetration rate in 2012, the market picked up
considerably in 2013 and 2014.
     Zones severely affected by Ebola
                                                     1,500                          1,472             98
            (Zone 1 and Conakry)
     Zones less affected by Ebola
                                                     1,000                          995               99
                   (Zone 2)
23.     The survey included both qualitative and quantitative questions to assess the impact of Ebola
on consumption, employment, education, health, income, and quality of life, modelled on the various
transmission channels of the pandemic. Modelled on that of Sierra Leone, the questionnaire collected
information on the following parameters: individual characteristics of respondents, household
characteristics, assets owned by the household, employment, agriculture, food security, migration,
health, education, income, and quality of life. Key questions focused on (a) whether government
closures affected employment of the household members; (b) whether the Ebola pandemic affected
crop cultivation and harvesting activities; (c) whether households changed food intake due to Ebola and
whether food prices in the areas changed significantly; and (d) whether household member(s) migrated
to other areas to seek work and avoid Ebola exposure. The questionnaire also tried to ask the following
two direct questions about income:(a) What was your average monthly income in 2013? (Q29), and (b)
What is your average monthly income now? (Q30).

24.       To ensure success and community sensitization, the team tested the methodology on a
number of individuals in the country. The survey was expanded to the sample drawn from the Orange
lists. Furthermore, the INS team engaged in a campaign of sensitization involving a joint press
conference with the Bank, national radio, rural radios, and community radios. Free call credits were
offered to individuals to encourage their participation in the survey. Although it is estimated that
poorest populations are not represented in the Ebola survey because not having mobile phones, five ling
standard groups (quintiles) were defined in the survey sample, from poorest to richest, on the basis of
ownership assets and access to utilities by households. It appears that poor and poorest households are
living in all regions except Conakry where their proportions are almost null (see Table 4). This motivated
the choice to consider Conakry as a full stratum in the analysis of breakdown by epidemiological areas
(Box 2).

                 Table 4. Breakdown of Survey Responders by standard of living and Region
Administrative                       Quintiles in terms of standard of living (%)
    Region           Poorest           Poor            Middle         Better off            Richest
Boké                  24.2             17.2             18.4              23.5               16.6
Conakry                0.0              0.2              4.6              32.7               62.5
Faranah               32.9             13.3             23.2              19.2               11.4
Kankan                22.6             11.3             27.1              29.5                9.5
Kindia                16.6             15.6             26.0              23.5               18.4
Labé                  26.5             35.5             21.2              12.3                4.6
Mamou                 29.6             32.1             18.2              17.8                2.3
NZérékoré             20.9             38.4             26.0              10.3                4.4
Guinea                18.6             18.2             19.4              22.6               21.2


Box 2. Survey Analysis Sampling
Administrative region: Guinea is subdivided into eight administrative regions: Boké, Conakry, Faranah, Kankan,
Kindia, Labé, Mamou, and Nzérékoré.
Natural region: Lower Guinea, Middle Guinea, Upper Guinea, and Forest Guinea
Type of residence: Urban and rural
Status of the zone: Zones severely affected by Ebola and zones less affected by Ebola
Quality of life of household: This composite indicator was created based on a combination of multiple indicators
looking at asset endowment of households. This indicator was subdivided into three classes: very poor, poor, and
rich. The variables that have been used include main source of water for the household; source of electricity;
employment status of occupants; type of housing; type of toilet used by household; main material for walls and
floor of habitation; main roofing; possession of goods in the households, including radio, television, and Internet
connectivity; and possession of goods, including car, boat, livestock, motorcycle, bicycle, refrigerator, agricultural
machinery, provisions, solar panel, and generator.

25.     One of the main limitations of the survey was the exclusion of very poor households without
mobile phones. Pearson’s chi-square tests show that households with mobile phones have different
characteristics from those without phones, particularly on socioeconomic characteristics (quality of
dwelling, ownership of durable goods, and access to several utilities). These results were confirmed by
another multivariate descriptive test based on the multiple correspondence analysis. This is consistent
with the literature that the characteristics of individuals and households with phone access often differ
greatly from those without, with mobile phone owners more likely to be wealthier and living in urban
areas (Sauti za Wananchi 2012), and more educated (Pew Research Center 2015). The costs associated
with charging and maintaining call credit further exacerbate the gaps in the probability of responding
(Leo et al. 2015). The conclusion is that the results from the 2015 Ebola survey are valid only for
households with a mobile phone, which is a significantly large sample. The main demographic
characteristics of households with mobile phone are compared between the two previous surveys (ELEP
2007 and 2012) and the Ebola survey, and results are presented in table 5.

26.     Although the 2015 survey may be considered in some way as representative of households
with cell phone, the differences in its sample design make it not really comparable with the previous
household surveys. In fact, one could use the subsample of households with mobile phone in the 2012
survey to make comparisons. However, this approach does not ensure that both samples are
comparable. The means of the population were so different that it was hard to find exactly
corresponding samples. There is also no guarantee that the reweighting will function properly. The main
reason is that information potentially useful to build an appropriate counterfactual sample are missing
in the 2015 survey.

        Table 5. Main Demographics of Households with Mobile Phone by Epidemiological Zone
                                       Proportion                                  Place of
      Year/             Number                                                                     Sex of Household
                                           of          Average      Average       Residence
 Epidemiological           of                                                                          Head (%)
                                       Households        Age          Size            (%)
      Zone             Households
                                          (%)                                   Urban     Rural     Male      Female
       Zone 1             51,615          19.7           51.7         8.7        67.1     32.9      86.6       13.4
       Zone 2             49,079          18.7           53.5         7.3        75.8     24.2      85.3       14.7
2007




       Conakry           161,894          61.6           49.3         8.2        100        –       82.0       18.0
       All               262,588          100            50.5         8.1        89.0     11.0      83.5       16.5
       Zone 1            324,189          35.9           50.0         6.7        34.5     65.5      88.1       11.9
       Zone 2            327,237          36.3           50.9         6.8        41.6     58.4      84.8       15.2
2012




       Conakry           250,543          27.8           48.3         6.7        100        –       83.0       17.0
       All               901,969          100            49.8         6.7        53.3     46.7      85.5       14.5
       Zone 1            353,969          34.9           44.8         8.4        57.8     42.2      88.0       12.0
       Zone 2            446,652          44.0           47.4         7.8        43.7     56.3      86.0       14.0
2015




       Conakry           215,004          21.1           43.9         7.3        100        –       90.6        9.4
       All              1,015,625         100            45.7         7.9        60.4     39.6      87.7       12.3
                               IV.      KEY FINDINGS OF THE SURVEY

27.      The survey was conducted in all provinces of Guinea, with 60 percent of the respondents
residing in the areas strongly affected by Ebola. The results paint a very interesting picture of the
impact of the pandemic and provides real-time and new information for policymakers and international
donors. The survey was also able to use innovative mobile phone technology to access remote
households that were risky to reach with traditional face to face surveys. While the survey could not
reach the very poorest households, it was able to reach the 70 percent of the population who had
mobile phones. As in many other African countries, mobile phone ownership is concentrated among
younger, richer, male, and coastal populations, but there has been quite wide use of phones even in the
poorer regions. Close to 99 percent of the households interviewed were aware of Ebola and its impact
on health. Rich households (98.9 percent) believed more in the Ebola pandemic than rural households
(95.6 percent) did. One in five respondents in the severely affected areas and one in twenty respondents
in the less affected areas reported experiencing proven cases of Ebola in their neighborhood or village.
The survey focused on labor markets, food prices, household incomes, agriculture, education, health,
and quality of life.

28.     The survey collected important information on the perceptions of Ebola. Almost all households
reported having heard of Ebola, regardless of whether they were severely affected or less affected by
the pandemic. Nearly one quarter of households reported having a friend or an acquaintance who had
contracted Ebola. To avoid contracting Ebola, households described the following Ebola prevention
measures: avoid eating fruits bitten by a bat (38.5 percent); avoid eating bush meat (22.9 percent);
avoid contact with body fluids of Ebola patients (21 percent); avoid unsafe burials and funerals (15.5
percent). Eating bush meat and contact with body fluids have been identified as key channels of
transmission, and, apparently, some households followed these measures to avoid Ebola transmission.
In terms of communication through the media, more than 70 percent of households surveyed reported
having been informed of Ebola through media (see table 6).

                              Table 6. Sources of Information about Ebola
                                                                               Medical Personal/
                                           Sensitization
                              Media (%)                    Parent/Friend (%)   Nongovernmental
                                           Campaign (%)
                                                                               Organization (%)
       All                       73.2          14.1               8.9                3.6
       Place of residence
       Urban                     72.7          13.6               9.1                 4.4
       Rural                     73.9          14.8               8.6                 2.4
       Gender
       Male                      72.4          14.3               9.7                 3.7
       Female                    74.4          13.7               8.1                 3.5
       Epidemiological zone
       Zone 1                    67.3          17.0              12.1                 3.3
       Zone 2                    80.8          7.9               9.8                  1.4
       Conakry                   67.2          21.9              1.9                  8.8
       Education level
       None                      73.8          12.5              11.1                 2.5
       Primary                   73.7          14.5              9.0                  2.8
       Secondary                 72.2          15.7              6.4                  5.2
                        A. FACTORS INFLUENCING THE RISK OF BEING INFECTED WITH EBOLA

29.     Several socioeconomic and demographic factors may explain the risk for a household to be
infected with Ebola. The microeconomic determinants of the vulnerability of households to Ebola virus
infection are analyzed econometrically through logit regressions. Following convention, the dependent
variable is a binary variable that takes the value 1 if a household has experienced a case of Ebola, and 0
otherwise. The descriptive statistical analysis shows that the households that have experienced Ebola
account for about 5 percent of the total number of households in the sample, while they are a little
more than 8 percent of the sample in severely affected zones that have experienced this epidemic. The
regressions are performed by considering two regressions, the first on the whole sample and the second
on the subsample of households in severely affected zones (including Conakry). A second model is
considered to understand the main determinants of Ebola infection in the neighborhood. Households
that reported cases of Ebola in the neighborhood represent about 16 percent of households in the
whole sample and 25 percent in the severely affected zones. Tables 7 and 8 present the results of
regressions of both models.

30.     The gender and marital status of the household head, the standard of living, and the
population density are the main explanatory factors for the occurrence of Ebola in a household. The
main factors that significantly affects the likelihood of a household to experience a case of Ebola are
related to demographics (population density and gender and marital status of head of household) and
material welfare (wealth) of household. Compared to households headed by married persons, the risk of
being infected with Ebola decreases for households headed by single, divorced or widowed persons.
This could be explained by the fact that households headed by married persons are more likely to
receive patients from other locations than single households, which increases their risk of being
infected. Moreover, households headed by women have proven to be more vulnerable to Ebola
infection. The location also played an important role, insofar as the probability that Ebola occurs in a
household is higher in high population density areas. It also appears that the bottom 40 percent of
households in terms of wealth are more likely to contract Ebola compared to the richest 60 percent of
households.

              Table 7. Main Determinants of the Risk of Infection with Ebola in Households
                                                       Whole Sample            Severely Affected Zones
Explanatory Variables
                                                 Coefficient    Std. Err.     Coefficient      Std. Err.
Level of wealth
Household is part of the richest 60%               −0.44*          0.23          −0.34           0.24
Gender of household head
Household head is female                            0.53*          0.29         0.60**           0.31
Marital status
Polygamous married                                  0.00           0.23          0.08            0.24
Single, divorced, or widowed                       −1.09**         0.49         −1.03**          0.50
Population density
30–49 inhabitants                                   0.38           0.32           0.31           0.34
50 inhabitants or more                              0.58*          0.32           0.31           0.33
Epidemiological zone
Less affected zone                                −2.36***         0.38            –               –
Conakry                                             -0.10          0.28          −0.15           0.28
Constant                                          −2.56***         0.38        −2.62***          0.40
Number of Observation                                                   2107                                      1293
LR Chi2 (probability)                                                85.5 (0.00)                               13.4 (0.34)
Pseudo R2                                                               0.09                                      0.02
Note: *, **, and *** mean that coefficients are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

31.      The place of residence, the household size, the standard of living, and the population density
are the main explanatory factors of the occurrence of Ebola in neighborhoods. Results from table 7
show that rural neighborhoods have less risk of experiencing Ebola compared to urban neighborhoods.
This is corroborated by the effect of population density, because the population concentration is a risk
factor for the spread of the epidemic. This finding is also consistent with those from Liberia and Sierra
Leone. In addition, when the average household size in the neighborhood is relatively high, this
increases the risk of occurrence of Ebola. The richest neighborhoods, based on the proportion of the
richest 60 percent households, are less vulnerable to the epidemic than those including most of the
bottom 40 percent households.

                          Table 8. Main Determinants of Ebola Infection in Neighborhoods
                                                                  Whole Sample                    Severely Affected Zones
                 Explanatory Variables
                                                            Coefficient    Std. Err.             Coefficient      Std. Err.
Place of residence
Household is in rural area                                    −0.39**              0.15                −0.31*                0.17
Level of wealth
Share of the 60% richest households in the
                                                             −1.25***              0.35           −1.61***                   0.39
prefecture
Household size
Average household size in the prefecture                      1.27**               0.59                1.18*                 0.67
Population density
30–49 inhabitants                                             0.95***              0.22            0.88***                   0.24
50 inhabitants or more                                        1.17***              0.22            1.30***                   0.24
Epidemiological zone
Less affected zone                                           −2.56***              0.21               –                        –
Conakry                                                        −0.18               0.25             −0.09                    0.25
Constant                                                     −1.67***              0.52            −1.50**                   0.60

                                B. EFFECTS ON EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS

32.     The situation of urban employment has deteriorated with Ebola outbreak. In line with the
International Labour Organization definition, the unemployed are defined as all persons ages 15 to 64
who are available to work but who are without work during a reference period.11 These persons are also
supposed to have looked for work in the previous weeks and be available to work immediately.
However, if the unemployment rate based on this definition may be relevant for urban areas, this is not
the case in rural areas where the decision to work for seven days may vary depending on the agricultural
season. In the 2015 survey, the unemployment rate appears higher in urban areas severely affected by
Ebola (urban zone 1 and Conakry) than in urban areas less affected (urban zone 2), with about 17
percent and 12 percent, respectively (see figure 6). The negative effect on employment is in line with
findings from the study on the economic impact of the 2014 Ebola epidemic in Liberia that Ebola
severely constricted the Liberian economy across all sectors of employment (Himelein 2015a). Large
percentages of wage workers were either asked to stay at home or lost their positions completely.

11
     The reference period in both surveys (ELEP 2012 and Ebola survey 2015) is seven days.
                        Similarly, people involved in non-agricultural self-employment, such as small-scale traders, saw their
                        business fall as markets were closed. Similar impacts might have been experienced in Guinea.

                                             Figure 6. Unemployment Rates for Urban Individuals over 17 Years

                                   20

                                                                       16.9              16.8                        16.9
                                                                                                                                15.7                 15.4
                                                                                                                                              14.9
Unemployment rate (%)




                                   15       13.9          14

                                                                                                       12.2


                                   10




                                    5




                                    0
                                                                       y




                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                         1


                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                                     y
                                                           y




                                                                                                                              e
                                           e




                                                                                                                                            e




                                                                                                                                                     Al
                                                                    ar




                                                                                                                  kr
                                                        ar




                                                                                                                            al


                                                                                                                                          al
                                        on




                                                                                     e


                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                 a




                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                  nd
                                                    im




                                                                                     n


                                                                                                   n
                                        N




                                                                                                              on
                                                                                  Zo


                                                                                                Zo




                                                                                                                                       Fe
                                                   Pr


                                                                co




                                                                                                              C
                                                               Se




                                                                              Education level, epidemiological zone and gender

                        33.     The results could be explained (at least in part) by Ebola, although it is believed that other
                        factors such as seasonality should not be overlooked. In fact, a qualitative analysis based on individuals
                        without work and not available for work shows that sometimes Ebola is cited among the reasons for the
                        unavailability. Specifically, about 18 percent of these individuals attribute the reason for not wanting to
                        work to Ebola in urban areas that were severely affected against approximately 7 percent in less
                        affected areas.

                        34.     The impact on overall country employment has been negative. Nationally, 16 percent of
                        employed individuals felt that their economic activity has deteriorated since March 2014, of which 19
                        percent are in areas severely affected (excluding Conakry), 21 percent in less affected areas (see figure
                        7), and only 6 percent in Conakry. Generally, the situation has deteriorated in the country, but relatively
                        more significantly in rural areas than in urban areas, with 21 percent against 14 percent. Educated
                        people seem to be more resilient with a proportion of 12.5 percent for those with at least a secondary
                        level versus 19 percent for people with no education. On the other hand, women appear to be slightly
                        more affected than men.
                          Figure 7. Proportion of Individuals whose Activities have Deteriorated

                                      20.9                                                      20.9

                 20                              19                                  18.9
                                                                                                                              17.6
                                                           17.2
                                                                                                                                     15.9
                                                                                                                     15.2
                 15        13.9
                                                                       12.5



                 10


                                                                                                           5.6
                  5



                  0
                                                                       y




                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                     1


                                                                                                2


                                                                                                           y
                        an




                                                            y




                                                                                                                   e
                                      l




                                                e




                                                                                                                              e




                                                                                                                                     Al
                                     a




                                                                  ar




                                                                                                        kr
                                                         ar




                                                                                                                 al


                                                                                                                            al
                                             on
                                  ur




                                                                                e


                                                                                            e
                      rb




                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                                          m
                                                                  nd
                                                      im




                                                                                 n


                                                                                            n
                                  R




                                             N




                                                                                                    on
                                                                              Zo


                                                                                         Zo
                      U




                                                                                                                       Fe
                                                    Pr


                                                                co




                                                                                                    C
                                                           Se




                                             Place of residence, education level, epidemiological zone and gender


35.     The decline in income during the period of Ebola has mostly affected women and residents of
rural areas. A deterioration in working conditions, including a high rate of absenteeism at work, will
generally result in a decrease in income, particularly when accompanied by price increases. The
proportion of individuals who reported absence from work since March 2014 are quite high, with a
national level of about 35 percent (see figure 8). This rate appear to be relatively high for Conakry, with
42 percent against 35 and 28 percent, respectively, for the less affected and the other severely affected
areas. The reason of this absence is explained in 30 percent of cases as Ebola in the severely affected
areas, excluding Conakry, and for only 11 percent in less affected areas. When considering all individuals
who report a deterioration in working conditions, almost all or 96 percent of them declare a loss of
monthly income between 2013 and 2015. Considering that the consumer price rose by nearly 10
percent and 8 percent12 respectively in 2014 and 2015, the situation could be worse when analyzed in
terms of real income. In fact, this inflation, which results in a decrease in real income, is expected to
exacerbate the situation, including welfare reduction even for individuals reporting unchanged working
conditions.




12
     Joint mission of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in Guinea.
                                    Figure 8. Proportion of Individuals who were Absent from Work since March 2014
                                                                                                                               41.8
                                                                               39
                                      40                                                   37.2
                                               35.3                                                                 34.8                  34.7          34.6
                                                                                                                                                 34.1
                                                          32.7
Absenteeism at work (%)




                                                                     30.6
                                      30                                                                 28.3




                                      20



                                      10



                                       0




                                                                                           y




                                                                                                                                                        ll
                                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                               y
                                             an




                                                                                y




                                                                                                                                             e
                                                          l




                                                                     e




                                                                                                                                             e
                                                         a




                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                      ar




                                                                                                                            kr
                                                                             ar




                                                                                                                                           al


                                                                                                                                          al
                                                                  on
                                                      ur




                                                                                                    e


                                                                                                                e
                                           rb




                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                           a




                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                       d
                                                                         rim




                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                n
                                                      R




                                                                 N




                                                                                                                        on
                                                                                    on




                                                                                                  Zo


                                                                                                             Zo
                                           U




                                                                                                                                      Fe
                                                                         P




                                                                                                                        C
                                                                                ec
                                                                               S


                                                                 Place of residence, education level, epidemiological zone and gender

                          36. The employment findings in Guinea are similar to those in Liberia and Sierra Leone. Indeed several
                              findings of the Guinea survey (including those discussed below) are consistent with results of the
                              Ebola surveys in Liberia and Sierra Leone (Himelein, 2015a; 2015b). Box 3 summarizes common
                              findings and lessons learned in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

                             Box 3: Common findings in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone

                                 Knowledge of Ebola: In Guinea, almost all households reported having heard of Ebola,
                                  regardless of whether they were severely affected or less affected by the pandemic. In Liberia,
                                  the results showed that nearly all respondents had heard of Ebola.
                                 Migration: In Guinea, individuals in severely affected areas appear to be relatively less mobile
                                  than in the less affected areas. In Sierra Leone, 93 percent of respondents indicate living in the
                                  same district they lived in prior to Ebola. In Liberia, although migration increased, migrants
                                  were most likely to remain within their original county.
                                 Unemployment worsened, and unemployment rate was higher in urban areas
                                 Food consumption declined: For example, households had to reduce the number of meals
                                  eaten in a day
                                 Coping strategies: households adapt strategies to cope with Ebola, including selling key assets,
                                  borrowing (get into debt), reducing their food consumption.
                                 School drop-out: Substantial share of households that include at least one school-aged child
                                  report that they are not in school. Ebola was cited by a substantial share of households as the
                                  reason for withdrawing their children from school. .
                                 Health: Use of health facilities continues to increase. 89 percent of households reported that a
                                  household member gave birth in the two months prior to the survey and did so in a hospital or
                                  clinic (Sierra Leone). In Guinea, almost all individuals who needed treatment for malaria and
                                  diarrhea still visited a health facility.
                                 Agriculture production remained resilient. Food production did not decrease in Guinea. In
                                  Sierra Leone, rice harvest in 2014 were similar to harvest in the previous years.
                                 Rice prices increased - more so in severely affected areas of Guinea, and parts of Sierra Leone
                                  outside of Freetown.
                                     C. EFFECTS ON AGRICULTURAL OUTPUTS

37.     The survey also assessed the impact on the agricultural sector. For this sample of households
with mobile phones, it appears that about 37 percent of households have at least one member involved
in some form of agricultural activity, including 44 percent in severely affected zones (without Conakry)
and 48 percent in less affected zones. The crops mainly grown by households are rice (68 percent of
households), fonio (10 percent), and maize (8 percent). While less affected zones are more agricultural,
severely affected zones are grow more rice, with 87 percent of households in the latter zones growing
rice compared to 52 percent in the former zones. On the other hand, the less affected zones grow more
maize and fonio.

                         Figure 9. Proportion of Households by Main Crops Grown

                    87

                                                        Rice
           80                                           Maize
                                                        Fonio
                                                                            68


           60
                                                 52




           40




           20                                                      18

                                                          12
                                                                                           10
                                                                                    8
                              3
                                        1
            0
                    Severely affected zones       Less affected zones              All


38.     The pandemic has not had as negative an impact on the agricultural sector as expected. As
shown in figure 10, about 45 percent of households did not have sufficient quantities of seed for the
2015 crop year. Not surprisingly, these households were more likely to be in the severely affected areas.
Compared to 2013, agricultural production in 2015 increased for 41 percent of households, while it
remained unchanged for 45 percent and decreased for 15 percent (see figure 11). The finding that food
production did not decrease significantly in 2015 is surprising. A potential explanation for this, according
to FAO/WFP (2015), is that the impact of Ebola on food production was localized, with most of the
disruption taking place in the forest zone. The results also show that households in less affected zones
were more likely to report that their agricultural production remained unchanged or decreased,
compared to their counterparts in severely affected zones. Although, the differences between the two
zones are small, this is consistent with the fact that agricultural productivity suffered a bit more in
severely affected areas. This is probably a reflection of the fact that movement (which is likely to include
going to farms) was limited during the Ebola crises, even more so for severely affected areas. This is also
the case of households headed by men which do better than those headed by women, with proportions
of 41 and 31 percent, respectively.
   Figure 10. Proportion of Households with Sufficient Quantities of Seed for the Current Crop Year

                                      60
             60                                                                         58.2
                          55.5                                                                                  56.5          55.9        55.6
                                                     54                   52.9




             40




             20




              0
                                                    y




                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                          1



                                                                                        2
                                       y




                                                                                                             e
                           e




                                                                                                                            e




                                                                                                                                          Al
                                                   ar
                                    ar




                                                                                                           al



                                                                                                                          al
                        on




                                                                      e



                                                                                   e




                                                                                                          M



                                                                                                                          m
                                               nd
                                  im




                                                                      n



                                                                                    n
                    N




                                                                   Zo



                                                                                 Zo




                                                                                                                       Fe
                                 Pr



                                             co
                                           Se




                                                           Education level, epidemiological zone and gender



          Figure 11. Evolution of the Agricultural Production in the Market Compared to 2013


          Zone 1                                    43.8                                                  40.3                            15.9


          Zone 2                                  39.6                                                   46.1                             14.1




            Male                                  40.7                                                   44                               15.3


          Female                           31.2                                                   55.7                                     13.1




              All                                 40.8                                                   44.6                             14.6



                    0                             20                      40                       60                                80           100
                                                                                        Percent

                                                            Increase                        Unchanged                         Decrease



                                      D. EFFECTS ON FOOD SECURITY AND COPING STRATEGIES

39.     The impact of Ebola on food security was also examined through is effect on food prices,
especially on rice—the most common staple in the Guinean diet. The results show that the price of rice
increased over the last 12 months for 33.4 percent of households in the severely affected areas without
Conakry (zone 1), against 12.5 percent for households in less affected areas (zone 2). Paradoxically,
these areas experience price decrease for 21 percent of households versus 9.4 percent in the less
affected areas (see figure 12). This relatively strong fluctuation in the price of rice in areas with high risk
of Ebola could be explained in part by the pandemic, especially if it restricts the movement of persons
and goods, including foods products, which could lead to an imbalance between the supply and demand
of rice.13 We can thus observe greater price stability in less affected areas (78 percent of households),
and in Conakry (85 percent of households) which has a more developed market. Finding that food retail
prices remained stable for most households is consistent with the argument that the increasing pressure
on food prices resulting from disruptions in production and trade limitations was offset by the diminishing
effect of low domestic demand (FAO/WFP 2015).

                          Figure 5. Evolution of the Price of Rice during the Last 12 Months


                Zone 1                            33.4                                       45.5                   21.2


                Zone 2              12.5                                             78.1                                    9.4


               Conakry        5.5                                             84.9                                           9.6




                 Urban                16.7                                       68.8                                  14.5


                  Rural                    20.7                                         67.3                                12




                    All                18.3                                           68.2                                 13.5



                          0                              20              40                         60       80                    100
                                                                               Percent

                                                              Increase           Unchanged               Decrease



40.      An important finding was that there has been a negative impact on food consumption at the
household level, with households using a variety of coping strategies when hit by the Ebola shock. The
proportion of households with only one meal a day is slightly higher in severely affected areas without
Conakry than in less affected areas and Conakry, with proportions of 12.4, 10, and 9.6 percent,
respectively (see figure 13). There was a marked impact, with households changing their food habit. It is
interesting that 22.6 percent of households changed their eating habits (compared to the 12 months
before the survey) in areas severely affected by Ebola, compared to 17 percent in the less affected areas
(figure 14), and many households made dietary changes (figure 15). About 67 percent of households eat
less expensive food; 61 percent will get into debt; 53 percent reduce the number of meals; 48 percent
restrict consumption of adults; and 36 percent sell a durable good, 32 percent sell pets, and 7 percent
sell land. These strategies were generally less expressed in the severely affected areas than in the other
areas, meaning that severely affected areas had fewer coping strategies (see figure 16 and 17).




13
  The "scarcity and price theory" suggests that if the supply of a good is limited (which is what might be expected in Ebola
severely affected areas – because of low business activity, restrictive movement, among other factors) and there is a high or
constant demand for the food item (especially rice being a main staple in Guinea), then the price of the scare good (rice) should
increase.
                                                        Figure 6. Proportion of Households with Only One Meal a Day

                               15

                                                                                        12.4                                              12.4
                                                     12.1                                                                                                    12
                                        10.9                                                                                                                                        10.8
                                                                10.1                                10                           9.9
                               10                                                                               9.6
                                                                                                                                                                         8.8




                                5




                                0
                                                                y




                                                                                                                                                                                    ll
                                                                                        1


                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                                y
                                                    y




                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                          an
                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                      a




                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                                                            ar




                                                                                                           kr
                                                 ar




                                                                                                                             al


                                                                                                                                        al
                                    on




                                                                                                                                                                   ur
                                                                                   e


                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                        rb
                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                            a




                                                                                                                                      m
                                                            d
                                               rim




                                                                                    n


                                                                                               n
                                    N




                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                         on
                                                         on




                                                                                 Zo


                                                                                            Zo




                                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                   Fe
                                           P




                                                                                                       C
                                                      ec
                                                     S




                                                                       Education level, epidemiological zone, gender and place of residence



                                                Figure 7. Proportion of Households which Changed their Food Habit

                                                                                                                      29.5
                                        30

                                                                          25.7                                                                                   25.4
                                                                24
Proportion of households (%)




                                                                                                22.6                                   22.2
                                                                                                                                                 21.1                                   21.7
                                                     19.4
                                        20
                                                                                                           17.2
                                                                                                                                                                             16.1




                                        10




                                           0
                                                                          y




                                                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                                 y
                                                               y




                                                                                                                                     e




                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                  ne




                                                                                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                                                    Al
                                                                                                                                                                          ra
                                                                        ar




                                                                                                              kr
                                                            ar




                                                                                                                                   al

                                                                                                                                              al




                                                                                                                                                            ba
                                                                                               e

                                                                                                             e
                                                No




                                                                                                                                                                        Ru
                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                           na




                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                     nd
                                                           im




                                                                                            n

                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                                            Ur
                                                                                         Zo

                                                                                                    Zo




                                                                                                                                         Fe
                                                                                                         Co
                                                         Pr

                                                                   co
                                                                Se




                                                                                 Education level, epidemiological zone, gender and place of residence
                  Figure 8. Proportion of Households by Food, Subject to Dietary Change

                  64.5
                                                                                                                      Rice
60                                                                                                                    Cassava
                                                                                                                      Bushmeat
                           50.7



                                                                40.3
40
                                                                                                             36                                                                   35.2
                                                                                                                                  33.3
                                                                                               29.9                  30.5                                             30
                                                  28.7




20                                16.3
                                                                                                      13.3
     11.3                                                                                                                                                                  11.1
                                                          9.3
            7.5
                                                                                                                            5.6

                                         .6
 0
       Zone 1                    Zone 2                Conakry                                    Urban                    Rural                                           All

                                                          Epiedemological zone and place of residence

                  Figure 9. Possible Coping Strategy of Households by Place of Residence

       80                                                Urban
                                                         Rural                                                                                          72.1
                                                         All                                                                                                   66.8
                                                                                                             63.4                                63.3                         63.9
                                                                                                                                                                                     61.2
                                                                                        58.3                                                                           59.3
       60                                                                                                           57.1
                                                                                               52.6     53                         52.1
                                                                                 48.9                                                     47.6
                                                                                                                            44.7
                                                42.7
                          41.1
       40                        35.5
                   31.9                                31.6

                                         24.4

       20

                                                                       8.1 7.2
                                                                6.5


        0
                    Sale of a              Sale of               Sale of          Reducing   Reducing    Restrict                                  Opt for                   Get
                    durable                 pets                  land           the number the quantity  adult                                    cheap                     into
                     good                                                         of meals    of meals consumption                                  food                     debt

                                                                                        Coping strategies
              Figure 10. Possible Coping Strategy of Households by Epidemiological Zone


         80                                       Zone 1                                                                                  76.3

                                                  Zone 2
                                                                                                                                                             66.5
                                                  Conakry                                         64
                                                                                                                                                 62.2   61
         60                                                                    56.3                                  56.4          57.4
                                                                                      54.2             54.5
                                                                                             50                                                                     50.3
                                                                        46.8
                                                                                                              43.3
                     38.9
         40   36.1                 37.3                                                                                     36.6
                                          31.8
                            27.5
                                                 22
         20

                                                      8.5         8.9
                                                            5.2

          0
               Sale of a             Sale of           Sale of           Reducing Reducing      Restrict                             Opt for                 Get
               durable                pets              land            the number the quantity  adult                               cheap                   into
                good                                                      of meals   of meals consumption                             food                   debt

                                                                               Coping strategies


                                             E. EFFECTS ON MIGRATION AND CASH TRANSFERS

41.      The survey finds evidence of a small but significant impact on migration and some evidence of
cash transfers. The mobility of individuals within households is quite high in Guinea. Close to 38 percent
of households experienced at least a migratory movement in the last 12 months, with departures only,
arrivals only, or both (figure 18). In an epidemic situation, where the restriction of movement of persons
is considered a good behavior to curb the spread of the disease, migration should be less important in
areas at risk. From this Ebola survey, individuals in severely affected areas indeed appear to be relatively
less mobile than in the less affected areas. The proportions of households having experienced migration
are 36 and 32 percent, respectively, for zone 1 and Conakry, which is lower than the 42 percent of
households for the less affected areas (zone 2). In terms of cash transfers, the proportion of households
who received financial assistance from family or friends (from within or outside the country) is higher for
less affected areas (20.5 percent compared to 12.5 percent for severely affected areas) (figure 19). This
is probably because the severely affected are relatively poor and are from households that could not
afford to send a family member outside the household because of the costs associated with such
migration.
                                   Figure 11. Migrations within Households in the last 12 months


                  Zone 1                                                          63.9                                                  12.8                13.4           9.9


                  Zone 2                                                  57.9                                                   17.5                    13.5             11.1


              Conakry                                                                67.7                                                       15.8               8.7      7.8




                  Urban                                                        63.2                                                     14.2                13.0           9.6


                   Rural                                                      60.4                                                     17.4                 11.6          10.6




                         All                                                  62.0                                                     15.5                 12.5          10.0



                               0                           20                                  40                         60                           80                         100
                                                                                                        Percent

                                                  No migration                        Leaving only                      Arrival only                   Both leaving and arrival



              Figure 12. Proportion of Households Receiving Assistance in the last 12 months

         20                                                               19.3                                                                  19.1
                                                                                                                 18.6

                  16.5
                                                                                                                                                                   15.1
         15                                                    13.9                                     14.2
                                           13.1
                                                                                                                                   12.5
                               12.1


         10
                                                                                         8.5




          5




          0
                                           y




                                                                                                                                                                   ll
                                                               1


                                                                          2


                                                                                      y
                             y




                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                  an
                 e




                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                                                 a




                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                        ar




                                                                                     kr
                          ar




                                                                                                    al


                                                                                                               al
              on




                                                                                                                                              ur
                                                           e


                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                rb
                                                                                                    M
                                                                                  a




                                                                                                             m
                                       d
                     ri m




                                                           n


                                                                      n
              N




                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                               on
                                    on




                                                        Zo


                                                                   Zo




                                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                          Fe
                     P




                                                                              C
                                   ec
                               S




                                                  Education level, epidemiological zone, gender and place of residence




                                                                           F. EFFECTS ON HEALTH

42.     The onset of the Ebola pandemic was feared to dissuade people from visiting health clinics,
given the dangers of contagion and the scarcity of resources to handle non-Ebola illnesses, but the
fear did not materialize. Fear of contracting the disease and restricted movement could have led to a
decrease in the use of health facilities by individuals who suffer from other illnesses (such as malaria and
diarrhea) during that period. Indeed, 22 percent of households reported that at least one member of
their household suffered from malaria during the two weeks preceding the survey. For diarrhea, this
proportion was 1 percent. For zone 1 and Conakry which are the severely affected areas, the proportion
of households reporting malaria was 18 and 14 percent, respectively, while it was about 28 percent in
less affected areas (zone 2). Surprisingly, despite the prevalence of Ebola, people continued to visit
health facilities. Nearly all households (94 percent) in the severely affected areas, excluding Conakry,
reported that they went to a health facility for treatment of malaria or diarrhea, while the
corresponding proportion was close to 96 percent in the less affected areas (figure 20).

               Figure 20. Use of Health Facilities and Concerns about Facility Attendance
                                          98.5                            97.1
         100      93.6        95.6                                                 93.4                        95.4



          75



          50



          25



           0
                              1.8            0.7
                                                                           4.9      4.2                             4.6
                  10.6
          25
                 Zone 1    Zone 2        Conakry                         Urban   Rural                          All

                                           Epidemiological zone and place of residence
                          Use of health facilities by malaria patients           Fear to attend health facilities


43.       Nonetheless, there was a significant impact of Ebola on use of clinics and health facilities. The
survey showed that about 11 percent of households in the areas severely affected by Ebola were afraid
to go to health facilities because of fear of contacting the pandemic, compared to only 2 percent of
those living in less affected areas. Compared to 2013, the proportion of households that reduced the
frequency of use of health facilities in 2015 appears substantially higher for the severely affected areas
than for the less affected ones, with a proportion of 46 percent against 37 percent of households,
respectively (figure 21). This proportion is even higher for Conakry, which is also a severely affected
area, reaching a level of 78 percent. This means that, even if individuals continue to attend health
facilities for relatively serious illnesses such as malaria, their attendance at these facilities for other
minor health concerns have importantly decreased.
                  Figure 21. Frequency of Household's Visits to Health Facilities Compared to 2013

                            100


                                                                  36.6                                                                     38.1
                             80
                                              45.6                                                                                                                            47.9
                                                                                                                     54.5


                             60                                                      78.2
        Percent




                                                                   35                                                                      34.5
                             40               32.1                                                                                                                            30.3
                                                                                                                     27.5


                             20
                                                                  28.4               16.3                                                  27.4
                                              22.4                                                                                                                            21.8
                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                     5.5
                               0
                                          Zone 1                 Zone 2            Conakry                          Urban                 Rural                               All

                                                                                    Epidemiological zone and place of residence

                                                                  More attendance                             Same attendance                     Less attendance


                                                                               G. EFFECTS ON EDUCATION

                              Figure 13. Proportion of Households Experiencing School Drop-out

                   15
                                                                                                                 Drop-out of children already in school
                                                                                            13.1
                                                                                                                 Drop-out of children who should have started school
                                                                                                                                                                       11.6
                                                                                     11.1
                                                                                                                                         10.8
                                                                                                                                                                 9.9
                   10                                                                                                              9.3
                               8.9
                        8.2
                                                                                                                                                                                           7.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.8
                                                                                                                             6.2
                                                                                                                     5.6
                                              4.9          4.9
                                        4.8          4.6                   4.7 4.4                                                                    4.7 4.5
                    5


                                                                                                   1.6
                                                                                                         .8

                    0
                                                     y




                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                               1


                                                                                          2


                                                                                                     y
                                        y




                                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                    an
                           e




                                                                                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                     e




                                                                                                                                                                                     Al
                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                     ar




                                                                                                   kr
                                     ar




                                                                                                                     al


                                                                                                                                   al
                        on




                                                                                                                                                                ur
                                                                          e


                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                  rb
                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                 a




                                                                                                                                m
                                                nd
                                   im




                                                                           n


                                                                                      n
                        N




                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                              on
                                                                        Zo


                                                                                   Zo




                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                             Fe
                               Pr


                                              co




                                                                                              C
                                         Se




                                                            Education level, epidemiological zone, gender and place of residence


44.     On education, Ebola had an adverse effect, with potential adverse longer-term implications.
At the national level, 58.7 percent of households had children school (ages 6–12 years). About 7 percent
of them pulled their children out of school (figure 22). Of these almost three quarters of the households
with school-age children, reported that the children did not return to school in 2014–2015 because of
Ebola-related reasons, especially in severely affected areas where the proportion is about 75 percent,
compared to the 69 percent recorded in the less affected areas (see figure 23). The analysis according to
area shows that, regardless of the area, the main reason that prevented children of school age from
                         attending school in 2014–2015 is the Ebola context. The lack of attendance of schools can have a
                         negative longer-term impact on human capital formation and labor productivity.

                                                                                              Figure 14. Proportion of Households by the Causes of School Dropout

                                                                                                A - For children already in school                                               B - For children who should have started school

                                        None                                                            67                                           33                           None                   69                             31

                                      Primary                                                                     84                                           16               Primary            52                         48
                                          Education level, epidemiological zone, gender




                                    Secondary                                                                 80                                              20              Secondary                  70                             30



                                       Zone 1                                                                76                                           24                     Zone 1                      75                          25




                                                                                                                           and place of residence
and place of residence




                                       Zone 2                                                           69                                               31                      Zone 2                 66                          34

                                      Conakry                                                                75                                           25                   Conakry             50                         50



                                        Male                                                             72                                              28                       Male                   68                             32

                                      Female                                                                       91                                               9           Female                       74                          26



                                       Urban                                                             74                                               26                     Urban                       74                          26

                                        Rural                                                           69                                               31                       Rural                 64                          36



                                                                    All                                  71                                              29                         All                  68                             32


                                                                                          0       20          40          60                        80                  100               0   20              40         60        80         100
                                                                                                                   Percent                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                                       Ebola context                                 Other                                              Ebola context               Other




                                                                                                                                                     H. EFFECTS ON ASSETS

                         45.      An asset index is generally considered an indicator of permanent income and therefore less
                         subject to cyclical fluctuations than current income or consumption of households. While we recognize
                         that poor households are more likely than non-poor households to experience cases of Ebola, the
                         pandemic may in return reduce the welfare of many households, including those who are not directly
                         affected by the disease. Sometimes, in the event of a major shock or crisis, the sale of certain assets are
                         part of the household’s strategies to cope with urgent consumption needs.14 In these circumstances it is
                         possible to observe a decline in this welfare indicator over a short period. However, due to the
                         comparability issue, we may not analyze the trends between 2012 and 2015. Moreover, even if a
                         decrease in asset index is observed during a period, it could not be necessarily attributed to the
                         emergence of Ebola. An asset index is derived based on the ownership of several durable goods (car,
                         motorcycle, bicycle, refrigerator, power generator, solar panel, TV, radio, sewing machine) and using the
                         multiple correspondence analysis. Results of the comparison of the three epidemiological zones in 2015
                         are shown in figure 24. It appears that, if welfare, measured by asset index, is significantly higher for
                         Conakry, there is no significant difference between the severely affected zone (excluding Conakry) and
                         the less affected zone, as evidenced by their fairly similar poverty curves. Figure 25 shows the same
                         situation for 2012, with the caveat that the only comparison being made is the respective gaps in the
                         two surveys.




                         14
                           As shown in the figure 15, nearly a third of households from the Ebola survey are willing to sell durable goods to deal with an
                         adverse situation.
                                                   Figure 15. Wellbeing Based on Asset Ownership by Epidemiological Zone in 2015

                                                  A - Poverty curves, without confidence interval                                                                       B - Poverty curves, with confidence interval
                                         1                                                                                                                    1




                                         .8                                                                                                                   .8
           Poverty incidence




                                                                                                                 Poverty incidence
                                         .6                                                                                                                   .6




                                         .4                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                     Zone 1                                                                             Zone 1
                                                                                                                                     Zone 2                                                                             Zone 2
                                                                                                                                     Conakry                                                                            Conakry
                                         .2                                                                                                                   .2




                                         0                                                                                                                    0
                                              0              .2                .4           .6                                              .8       1             0              .2             .4            .6                 .8       1


                                                                      Poverty line (asset index)                                                                                          Poverty line (asset index)




                                                   Figure 16. Wellbeing Based on Asset Ownership by Epidemiological Zone in 2012

                                              A - Poverty curves, without confidence interval                                                                          B - Poverty curves, with confidence interval
                                     1                                                                                                                   1




                                    .8                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                 Poverty incidence
Poverty incidence




                                    .6                                                                                                                   .6



                                                                                        Zone 1
                                                                                        Zone 2
                                    .4                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                        Conakry                                                                                                                     Zone 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zone 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Conakry
                                    .2                                                                                                                   .2




                                     0                                                                                                                   0
                                          0             .2                .4           .6                                              .8        1            0              .2             .4            .6                 .8        1


                                                                  Poverty line (asset index)                                                                                           Poverty line (asset index)



                                                                                                                                       V.        CONCLUSION

                               46.    Using newly collected data through a mobile phone survey, this study analyzes the
                               socioeconomic impact of Ebola on households in Guinea. The survey was conducted in September
                               2015. The pandemic led to worsening employment and loss of incomes, especially rural incomes,
                               confirming the declines in output emerging from the macroeconomic data. The survey shows that all
parts of Guinea were economically affected by Ebola, with greater impacts in the southeast and the
areas around Conakry. It is interesting to note that a quarter of respondents in the severely affected
areas reported experiencing proven cases of Ebola in their neighborhood or village. The survey also
confirmed the strong correlation between poverty and the impact of Ebola. The probability of a
household experiencing Ebola increased significantly with poverty and also if the household was headed
by a woman, while factors such as household size and population density, and the community standard
of living may explain the occurrence of Ebola in neighborhoods. The survey also showed that the
economic impact of the pandemic may outlast the epidemiological impact, suggesting the need to
continue to seek grant aid inflows.

47.     In relation to agriculture, it is found that Ebola did not negatively affect agricultural
production and food price. Food production (rice, maize, and fonio) increased and food prices were
stable, minimizing the impact of Ebola on famine risk and food insecurity in Guinea. This is perhaps
contrary to expectations. Possible explanations for these results, as proposed in the FAO/WFP (2015)
report, include the following: (a) the impact of Ebola on food production was localized rather than
spread across the country, with most of the disruption taking place in the forest zone; and (b) food
prices remained stable in general because the increasing pressure on food prices resulting from
disruptions in production and trade limitations was offset by the diminishing effect of low domestic
demand. Nevertheless, agricultural productivity was slightly more affected in severely affected areas
compared to the less affected areas. This may be related to the finding that more households in the less
affected areas reported having sufficient agricultural inputs (seeds) than those in severely affected
areas. This has policy implications. Programs that aim to improve agricultural productivity by providing
farming inputs such as seeds should pay particular attention to the severely affected areas, which also
tend to be the poorest areas of Guinea, and food security interventions need to be scaled up in
backward parts of the country.

48.      Another surprising finding is that despite Ebola and risk of contamination, households that
needed treatment for malaria and diarrhea still visited a health facility, whereas a significant
proportion of households reduced their attendance of health facilities. This finding also has
implications for policy. Given that households continue to visit health facilities to seek treatment for
malaria, the authorities should prioritize prevention measures to minimize the risk of contracting
illnesses at hospitals. Further, this result highlights the seriousness of malaria, which has proven to be
very deadly, and thereby empathizes the need to expand efforts to eliminate malaria, which can also
help minimize the risk of contracting other illness as a result of trying to seek treatment for malaria at
health facilities.

49.     Income loss for rural households was much more related to difficulties in selling their
production, than to lower agricultural production or lower food prices. However, Ebola has had a
larger effect on urban employment, as illustrated by the increase in the urban unemployment rate. On
the other hand, due to Ebola, children dropped out of school, and households adopted coping strategies
by reducing their food consumption and selling key assets. Though these strategies have helped
households to cope with the crisis, they will have long-lasting effects on malnutrition, education, and
poverty. From a policy standpoint, continued social protection support from both the donors and the
government                                          are                                        needed.
REFERENCES

Dabalen, Andrew, Alvin Etang, Johannes Hoogeveen, Elvis Mushi, Youdi Schipper, and Johannes von
       Engelhardt. 2016. “Mobile Phone Panel Surveys in Developing Countries: A Practical Guide for
       Microdata Collection.? Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
       doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0904-0. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO.

Etang Alvin., Johannes Hoogeveen, and Julia Lendorfer. 2015 “Socioeconomic Impact of the Crisis in
       North Mali on Displaced People.? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7253 (May
       2015), Washington, DC.

FAO/WFP (Food and Agriculture Organization/World Food Programme). 2015. “Special Report -
      Synthesis: FAO/WFP Crop and Food Security Assessment - Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea.?
      Accessed April 6, 2016, at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4311e.pdf.

Ferraro, David, Tom Krenzke, and Jill Montaquila. 2016. “RDD Telephone Surveys: Reducing Bias and
        Increasing     Operational      Efficiency.?     Accessed     January      19,      2016.
        https://www.amstat.org/Sections/Srms/Proceedings/y2008/Files/301280.pdf.

Himelein, Kristen. 2015a. “The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola in Liberia: Results from a High-
       Frequency Cell Phone Survey, Round 4. February 24, 2015.? Survey report with the Liberian
       Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services and the Gallup Organization, World
       Bank,Washington, DC.

Himelein, Kristen. 2015b. “The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola in Sierra Leone: Results from a High-
       Frequency Cell Phone Survey, Round 3. June 15, 2015.? Survey report with Statistics Sierra
       Leone and the Gallup Organization, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Leo, Benjamin, Robert Morello, Jonathan Mellon, Tiago Peixoto, and Stephen Davenport. 2015. “Do
       Mobile Phone Surveys Work in Poor Countries?? Center for Global Development Working Paper
       398.

Lepkowski, James M. 1988. “Telephone Sampling Methods in the United States.? Chapter 5 in Telephone
      Survey Methodology, pp.73–98. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Massey, J. T., D. J. O’Connor, and K. Krotki. 1997. “Response Rates in Random Digit Dialing (RDD)
       Telephone Surveys.? Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Section on Survey
       Research Methods, 707–712.

Pew Research Center. 2015. Cell Phones in Africa: Communication Lifeline.

Sauti za Wananchi. 2012. Collecting National Data Using Mobile Phones. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Waksberg, J. 1978. “Sampling Methods for Random Digit Dialing.? Journal of the American.

World Bank. 2015. “Update on the Economic Impact of the 2014 Ebola Epidemic on Liberia, Sierra
       Leone, and Guinea.? Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management Global Practice, World Bank.
WHO (World Health Organization).2015. Epidemiological Report on Ebola Outbreak.
ANNEX A: NUMBER OF ORANGE NUMBERS DRAWN BY PREFECTURE FOR THE WORLD BANK SURVEY
ON THE IMPACT OF EBOLA IN GUINEA

   Zone A: Severely Affected by Ebola    Number of Households   Number of Numbers to Draw
Conakry,                                       238,134                    876
Boké,                                           61,731                    227
Nzérékoré                                       62,095                    228
Coyah                                           36,165                    133
Macenta                                         45,458                    167
Faranah                                         34,707                    128
Beyla,                                          38,182                    140
Dubreka                                         45,525                    167
Kissidougou                                     40,133                    148
Gueckedou                                       45,397                    167
Forecariah                                      35,186                    129
Kerouane                                        27,967                    103
Yomou                                           18,124                     67
Lola,                                           29,205                    107
Kouroussa,                                      29,704                    109
Boffa,                                         27,785                      102
Total                                          815,498                    3,000

        Zone B: Less Affected by Ebola   Number of Households   Number of Numbers to Draw
Kankan                                          47,005                    140
Mandiana                                        22,528                     67
Siguiri                                         63,850                    190
Mamou                                           58,941                    175
Pita                                            56,049                    167
Téléméle                                        49,116                    146
Dinguiraye                                      26,875                     80
Dabola                                          25,797                     77
Labé                                            56,910                    169
Tougué                                          21,859                     65
Lélouma                                         29,838                     89
Koubia                                          16,787                     50
Mali                                            42,699                    127
Koundara                                        19,284                     57
Gaoual                                          28,716                     85
Fria                                            16,601                     49
Dalaba                                          27,171                     81
     Zone B: Less Affected by Ebola   Number of Households   Number of Numbers to Draw
Kindia                                      62,612                      186
Total                                       672,638                    2,000
        ANNEX B: BREAKDOWN OF HOUSEHOLDS RESPONDENTS BY ADMINISTRATIVE REGION

                          Level of Analysis            Number         Percentage
Total                                                   2,467            100
Région Administrative
Boké                                                    255              10.3
Conakry                                                 437              17.7
Faranah                                                 209              8.5
Kankan                                                  299              12.1
Kindia                                                  375              15.2
Labé                                                    252              10.2
Mamou                                                   215              8.7
Nzérékoré                                               425              17.2
Région Naturelle
Basse Guinée                                             996             40.4
Moyenne Guinée                                           538             21.8
Haute Guinée                                             435             17.6
Guinée Forestière                                        498             20.2
Total                                                   2,467            100
Residence
Urban                                                   1,445            58.6
Rural                                                   1,022            41.4
Status of the Zone
Zone severely impacted by Ebola                         1,472            59.7
Zone less affected by Ebola                              995             40.3
Quality of Life of Households
Very poor                                               497              20.1
Poor                                                    495              20.0
Medium income                                           490              19.8
Rich                                                    524              21.2
More rich                                               464              18.8
       ANNEX C: EBOLA SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE (2015)


                 REPUBLIQUE DE GUINEE
                  Travail-Justice-Solidarité



                  MINISTERE DU PLAN



         INSTITUT NATIONAL DE LA STATISTIQUE



 ENQUETE MOBILE SUR L’IMPACT D’EBOLA SUR LES
       CONDITIONS DE VIE DES MENAGES
            QUESTIONNAIRE MENAGE




                       Septembre 2015


INS
                       N° du Questionnaire |______||______||______||______||______|

CONSENTEMENT : Bonjour Monsieur/Madame, je m’appelle ……………………………………….
L’Institut National de la Statistique (INS) est entrain de mener une étude sur l’impact
d’Ebola sur les conditions de vie des ménages. Votre numéro a été tiré dans l’échantillon.
Je dois m’entretenir avec vous en vous posant quelques questions sur l’impact de cette
maladie sur les conditions de votre ménage.
L’entretien se fait par téléphone et durera 20 minutes environs. A la fin nous vous
transférons un crédit de 10.000 GNF sur votre numéro de téléphone
Etes-vous disponible ?
Oui maintenant = 1 Oui mais rappelez moi a ………..heure =2 Oui mais demain=3; Non je ne
veux pas participer=4

   I. IDENTIFICATION
   REGION ADMINISTRATIVE: ___________________________________________________/____________/
   Vous résidez dans quelle Préfecture: _______________________________________/____/______/
   Vous résidez dans quelle Sous-Préfecture ou Commune urbaine_____/____/______/
   Vous êtes dans quel District ou Quartier ________________________________/____/______/
   Quel est le nom de votre Village ou Secteur ____________________________/____/______/
   Milieu de résidence _____________________________________/_____/ (1=urbain, 2=rural)

   I-Vous avez fait combien de mois vous vivez dans cette préfecture ? /_____/_____/ (mois)
   (Si moins de 6 mois dans la préfecture, fin d’interview)
   II-Quel est votre âge (/_____/_____/ (année)
   (Si moins de 15 ans, fin d’interview)
   II.    CARACTERISTIQUES INDIVIDUELLES
    №    Questions                                Modalités de Réponses                   Codes
                                                  1=Homme
   Q1    Vous êtes un homme ou une femme?                                               /__________/
                                                  2=Femme
   Q2    Vous avez quel âge?
                                                  01= Guinée
                                                  02=Côte d’Ivoire
                                                  03=Libéria
                                                  04=Sierra Léone
                                                  05=Sénégal
   Q3    Vous êtes guinéen?                       06=Mali
                                                  07=Guinée Bissao
                                                  08=Autre pays CEDEAO
                                                  09=Autre pays Africain
                                                  10=Autre Continent
                                                  1=aucun
                                                  2=Primaire
   Q4    Quel est votre niveau d’instruction?     3=secondaire
                                                                                        /__________/
                                                  4= Professionnel
                                                  5= Supérieur
   Q5    Quel est votre état matrimonial?         1= Célibataire
                                                   2=Marié                                     /__________/
                                                   3= Divorcé/Séparé
                                                   4=Veuf /Veuve
                                                   5=Union Libre
                                                   1=Occupé
                                                   2= Chômeur
                                                   3= Elève/étudiant
Q6     Quelle est votre situation d’activité?      4= Rentier
                                                                                               /__________/
                                                   5= Retraité
                                                   6=Ménagère
                                                   7=vieillard
III.    CARACTERISTIQUES DU MENAGE
       Questions                                   Modalités de Réponses                         Codes
       Combien de personnes vivent dans votre
Q7                                                                                             /__________/
       ménage?
       Combien de personnes parmi elles
Q8                                                                                             /__________/
       travaillent?
       Combien d’élèves vivent dans votre
Q9                                                                                             /__________/
       ménage?
       Combien d’enfants de moins de 5 ans
Q10                                                                                            /__________/
       vivent dans votre ménage?
                                                   1=Robinet
                                                   2=Forage
       Quelle est la principale source
                                                   3=Puits/Sources aménagées
Q11    d’approvisionnement en eau de boisson                                                   /__________/
                                                   4=Puits traditionnels
       de votre ménage?
                                                   5=Eau de surface (rivière, marigot, etc.)
                                                   6=Eau minérale
       Quelle est votre principale source          1=Electricité/Energie Solaire
Q12    d’éclairage?                                2=Torche, Lampe à pile                      /__________/
                                                   3=autres
                                                   1=Propriétaire
Q13    Statut d’occupation du logement             2=Location                                  /__________/
                                                   3= Logé gratuitement
                                                   1=Case
       Type de logement (considérer ou vivent      2=Maison
Q14                                                                                            /__________/
       la majorité des membres du ménage)          3=Immeuble
                                                   4=Baraque
Q15    Nombre de pièces à coucher                                                              /__________/
                                                   1=Tôle
       Quel est le principal Matériau du toit de   2=Béton
Q16                                                                                            /__________/
       votre habitation                            3=Paille/Feuille
                                                   4=Bâche/Plastique/Toile
                                                   1=Terre Battue
       Quel est le principal Matériau du sol de    2=Ciment
Q17                                                                                            /__________/
       votre habitation                            3=Carreaux
                                                   4=Planche/Bois
                                                   1=Briques en ciment
                                                   2=Briques en terre cuite
                                                   3=Terre battue
       Quel est le principal Matériau des murs
Q18                                                4=Bois/Bambou/Planche/Paille                /__________/
       de votre habitation
                                                   5=Pierre
                                                   6=Tôle
                                                   7=Bâche/Plastique/Toile
                                               1=WC avec chasse eau
      Quel est le type de toilette que votre   2=latrine couverte
Q19
      ménage utilise?                          3=Latrine non couverte   /__________/
                                               4=Autres
IV.    BIENS POSSEDES PAR LE MENAGE
      Questions                                Modalités de Réponses      Codes
      Est-ce votre ménage ou un membre de      Radio                         A
Q20   votre ménage possède : (Réponses         Télévision                    B
      multiples)                               Internet                      C
                                               Camion                    /___/____/
                                               Voiture                   /___/____/
                                               Pirogue                   /___/____/
                                               Bétails                   /___/____/
                                               Moto                      /___/____/
                                               Vélo                      /___/____/
      Combien votre ménage ou un membre de     Télévision                /___/____/
Q21
      votre ménage possède de:                 Congélateur /frigo        /___/____/
                                               Machine à coudre          /___/____/
                                               Machine agricole          /___/____/
                                               Domaine agricole          /___/____/
                                               Panneau solaire           /___/____/
                                               Forage                    /___/____/
                                               Groupe électrogène        /___/____/
V.     EMPLOI.
      Avez-vous fait un travail quelconque
      pendant la dernière semaine pour une
                                                     1=Oui          Q26
Q22   rémunération quelconque (en argent ou                                          /____________/
                                                     2=Non
      en nature), même si c’est seulement une
      heure?
       Bien que vous n’ayez pas travaillé, êtes-     1=Oui           Q25
Q23                                                                                  /____________/
      vous disponible à travailler?                  2=Non
      Quelle est la raison principale qui vous       1=Contexte Ebola
Q24                                                                                  /____________/
      empêche de travailler?                         2=Autres à préciser
      Est-ce que vous avez cherché un travail        1=Oui          Q34
Q25   quelconque au cours des quatre                 2=Non           Q34             /____________/
      dernières semaines?
      Quel type de travail exercez dans cette
Q26                                                                                  /____________/
      activité?                                      __________________________
                                                     1=Administration publique
                                                     2=Entreprise privée
                                                     3=PME Non agricole
      Dans quel type d’institution travaillez-
Q27                                                  4=ONG                           /____________/
      vous?
                                                     5=Organisation internationale
                                                     6=Exploitation agricole
                                                     9=Autre
      Votre activité a-t-elle connu une              1=détériorée
Q28   amélioration ou une détérioration ou           2=constante            Q31      /____________/
      est- elle constante depuis Mars 2014?          3=Améliorée
      Quel était votre revenu mensuel moyen                                          /__/__/__/__/
Q29                                                  En millier de FG
      en 2013? (SVP, faites une estimation)
      Quel est votre revenu mensuel
Q30   moyen maintenant? (SVP, faites une             En milliers de FG               /__/__/__/__/
      estimation)
                                                     1=indépendant
                                                     2=Employeur
                                                     3=Salarié
Q31   Quel est votre statut dans l'emploi?
                                                     4=Travailleur à la tache
                                                                                     /____________/
                                                     5=Apprenti
                                                     6=Aide familial
      Est-ce que depuis mars 2014 vous vous          1=Oui
Q32                                                                                  /____________/
      êtes absenté de votre travail?                 2=Non         Q34
      Quelle était la raison principale de votre     1=Contexte Ebola
Q33                                                                                  /____________/
      absence?                                       2=Autres à préciser
      Est-ce qu’un ou plusieurs membres de
      votre ménage a exercé une activité ou          1=Oui
Q34   des activités non agricoles (commerce,         2=Non               Q37         /____________/
      services, affaires ….) au cours des 12
      derniers mois (depuis Mars 2014)
      Quel est le montant total des revenus tiré                                     /__/__/__/__/
Q35   de cette ou de ces activités au cours du       En milliers de FG
      dernier mois?
                                                     1=Oui pour toutes
      Cette activité a-t-elle ou ces activités ont
Q36                                                  2= Oui pour certaines           /____________/
      elles connu un arrêt?
                                                     3=Non           Q38
                                                     1= Contexte Ebola
Q37   Quelle était la raison principale?
                                                     2= Autres à préciser
VI.   AGRICULTURE
      Est-ce que un membre de votre ménage a       1=Oui
Q38   exercé de l’activité agricole au cours des   2=Non          Q48               /________/
      12 derniers mois?
                                                   1=riz
                                                   2=fonio
      Qu’est ce que vous cultivez
Q39                                                3=mil/sorgho
      principalement?                                                               /________/
                                                   4=mais
                                                   5=manioc
                                                                                    /________/
      Quelle quantité avez-vous récolté la
Q40                                                                                   Sacs de
      saison dernière(2014) ? (en sac de 50 kg)
                                                                                       50kg
                                                                                    /________/
      Quelle quantité avez-vous vendu ? (en sac
Q41                                                                                   Sacs de
      de 50 kg)
                                                                                       50kg
                                                                                    /________/
      Quelle quantité avez-vous acheté ? (en
Q42                                                                                   Sacs de
      sac de 50 kg)
                                                                                       50kg
                                                                                    /________/
      Quelle quantité aviez- vous récolté
Q43                                                                                   Sacs de
      l’année d’avant ?(2013) (en sac de 50 kg)
                                                                                       50kg
                                                   1=Oui en quantité suffisante
      Disposez-vous de semences pour la
Q44                                                2=Oui en quantité insuffisante   /________/
      saison en cours?
                                                   3=Non
      Cette ou ces activités agricoles est/sont-   1=inchangées
Q45   elle(s) restée(s) inchangées ou ont-elles    2=changées positivement
                                                                                    /________/
      subies des changements?                      3=changées négativement
      Selon vous les quantités des produits
                                                   1=oui
Q46   agricoles ont-elles augmenté ou diminué
                                                   2=non                            /________/
      sur le marché par rapport à 2013?
                                                   1=faible
Q47   Si oui à quelle proportion?                  2=normale
                                                                                    /________/
                                                   3=forte
VII.    SECURITE ALIMENTAIRE/STRATEGIE DE SURVIE
       Est-ce que le riz est actuellement
       disponible pour vente dans votre localité   1=Oui
Q48
       (village ou commune urbaine) ou             2=Non                                      /________/
       localités voisines?
       Combien coute le kg de riz sur le marché  1=riz local étuvé……..………... FG
Q49
       actuellement?                             2=riz importé……………………… FG
       Le prix du riz a-t-il baissé ou augmenté  1=augmenté
Q50    ou est resté constant ces 12 derniers     2=constant         Q52
                                                                                              /________/
       mois?                                     3=baissé
Q51    De combien de franc environ?              En franc guinéen                             /__/__/_/_/
                                                 A=Riz
                                                                                              Nombre
    Combien de repas prenez-vous par             B=Fonio
                                                                                               de fois
Q52 jour dans le ménage?                         C=Manioc/Tôô
                                                                                              /________/
    (repas : riz, fonio, manioc, mais)           D=Maîs
                                                 Z=Autres
                                                 A= Riz /___/___/ kg
    Quelle quantité préparez-vous ou prenez B= Fonio /___/___/ kg
Q53 vous par jour pour le repas dans le          C=Manioc/Tôô /___/___/ kg
    ménage?                                      D=Maîs /___/___/ kg
                                                 Z=Autres /___/___/ kg
    Cette quantité de repas de riz a-t-elle      1=augmentée
Q54 augmenté, baissé ou reste constante par      2=baissée                                    /________/
    rapport à l’année 2013?                      3=constante
    Cette quantité de repas de fonio a-t-elle    1=augmente
Q55 augmenté, baissé ou reste constante par      2=baisse                                     /________/
    rapport à l’année 2013?                      3=constant
    Cette quantité de repas de manioc a-t-       1=augmente
Q56 elle augmenté, baissé ou reste constante     2=baisse                                     /________/
    par rapport à l’année 2013?                  3=constant
    Cette quantité de repas de maïs a-t-elle     1=augmente
Q57 augmenté, baissé ou reste constante par      2=baisse                                     /________/
    rapport à l’année 2013?                      3=constant
    Est-ce que vos habitudes alimentaires        1=Oui
Q58                                                                                           /________/
    ont changé ces 12 derniers mois?             2=Non            Q60
                                                  1=riz
                                                  2=Manioc
     Par rapport à quel aliment ? c'est-à-dire
                                                  3=Fruits
Q59 qu’est ce que vous ne mangez pas                                                           /________/
                                                  4=Viandes de brousse
     maintenant comme avant?
                                                  5=Mais
                                                  9=Autres
                                                  A=Vendre un bien durable ;
                                                  B=Vendre animaux domestiques ;
     Au cas où votre ménage rencontre des         C=Vendre des terres ;
     difficultés pour satisfaire ses besoins que D=réduire le nombre de repas ;
Q60                                                                                            /________/
     faites-vous?                                 E=réduire la quantité de repas ;
     (Réponses multiples)                         F=restreindre la consommation des adultes
                                                  G=Manger des aliments moins couteux
                                                  H=S’endetter
VIII.    MIGRATION/TRANSFERT
        Combien de personnes ont quitté votre
        ménage pour aller s’installer ailleurs ?
Q61                                                                                                 /___________/
        (y compris l’extérieur) au cours des 12
        derniers mois
        Combien de personnes votre ménage a-
Q62     t-il reçu venant d’ailleurs au cours des                                                    /___________/
        12 derniers mois?
        Est-ce que vous avez reçu de l’intérieur
        ou de l’extérieur une aide (argent ou        1=Oui
Q63                                                  2=Non          Q65
        nature) de la part d’un parent ou d’un                                                      /___________/
        ami?

Q64     Estimer en chiffres le montant de l’aide     En Miliers de GNF                              /__/__/__/__/

IX.      SANTE/HYGIENNE
        S’il y a des enfants de moins de 5ans
        dans votre ménage, au cours de deux           1=Oui
Q65                                                   2=Non        Q68                                 /________/
        dernières semaines au moins un de ces
        enfants a-t-il souffert de diarrhée?
                                                      1=Oui
Q66     A-t-il été traité?                                                                             /________/
                                                      2=Non        Q68
                                                      1=Poste/Centre de sante
                                                      2=Hôpital
Q67     Où a-t-il été traité?                         3=Clinique/cabinet de soins                      /________/
                                                      4=Guerrisseur/Marabout
                                                      5=Auto medication
                                                      1=Oui, paludisme
        Vous ou un membre de votre ménage
                                                      2=Oui, diarrhée
Q68     est il tombé malade de palu ou diarrhée                                                        /________/
                                                      3=Oui, paludisme et diarrhée
        au cours des deux dernières semaines?
                                                      4=Non………….. 71
                                                      1=Oui
 69     A-t-il été traité ?                                                                            /________/
                                                      2=Non 71
                                                      1=Poste/Centre de sante
                                                      2=Hôpital
Q70     Où a-t-il été traite ?                        3=Clinique/ cabinet de soins
                                                      4=Guérisseur/Marabout
                                                                                                       /________/
                                                      5=Auto medication
        Selon vous les habitants de votre localité
        (quartier/village ou district)                1=Oui
Q71
        fréquentaient ils régulièrement les           2=Non                                            /________/
        structures de santé en 2013?
                                                      1=Oui, fréquentent plus qu’en 2013
                                                      2=Oui, fréquentent comme en 2013
        Fréquentent-ils actuellement ces
Q72                                                   3=Oui, fréquentent moins par rapport à 2013      /________/
        structures comparativement à 2013?
                                                      4=fréquentent peu maintenant
                                                      5=Ne fréquentent plus
        Utilisez-vous régulièrement le savon
                                                      1=Oui
Q73     et/ou le chlore pour le lavage des mains
                                                      2=Non                                            /________/
        dans votre ménage?
        Utilisez-vous le chlore pour le
                                                      1=Oui
Q74     traitement de l’eau de boisson dans                                                            /________/
                                                      2=Non
        votre ménage?
X.      FREQUENTATION SCOLAIRE
      Est-ce qu'il y a des enfants d'âge scolaire    1=Oui
Q75
      (6 à 12ans) dans votre ménage?                 2=Non ………Q78                                        /________/
      Parmi ces enfants y a-t-il des élèves qui      1=Oui
Q76   n’ont pas repris l’école cette année (en       2=Non……… Q78                                        /_________/
      2014)?
                                                     1=Contexte Ebola
Q77   Pourquoi?
                                                     2=Autres raisons à préciser
      Y a-t-il des enfants qui devraient être        1=Oui
Q78   scolarisés cette année et qui ne l’ont pas     2=Non……….Q80                                        /_________/
      été?
                                                     1=Contexte Ebola
Q79   Pourquoi?                                                                                          /_________/
                                                     2=Autres raisons à préciser
XI.     INFORMATIONS SUR EBOLA
      Avez-vous entendu parler               1=Oui
Q80                                                                                                      /_________/
      d’Ebola?                               2=Non…… Fin
      Avez-vous eu des informations
                                             1=Oui
Q81   sur comment se protéger contre                                                                     /_________/
                                             2=Non……….. Q84
      Ebola?
                                             A=Medias (radios, télévision)
                                             B=Parent /amis/voisins
      De quelles sources avez-vous reçu
Q82                                          C=Personnel médical/ONG                                     /_________/
      ces informations?
                                             D=Campagne de sensibilisation
                                             Z=Autres
                                             A=Se laver les mains avec du savon et du chlore
                                             B=Eviter le contact avec les vomissures, les selles, les
                                             urines, le sang, la sueur, les larmes d’un malade d’Ebola
                                             C=.Eviter les fluides corporels d’un malade d’Ebola
      Citez les moyens de prévention
                                             D=Eviter les enterrements non sécurisés d’un malade
Q83   contre Ebola que vous connaissez
                                             d’Ebola
      (Réponses multiples)
                                             E=Eviter la viande de brousse
                                             F=Eviter de manger des fruits mordus par une sauve
                                             souris
                                             G=Autre à préciser__________________________
      Croyez-vous à l’existence              1=Oui………. Q86
Q84                                                                                                      /_________/
      d’Ebola?                               2=Non
                                                 a. ___________________________________
Q85   Pourquoi?                                  b. ___________________________________
                                                 c. ___________________________________
                                             1=Oui
Q86   Avez-vous peur d’Ebola?                                                                            /_________/
                                             2=Non
      Y a t-il eu un cas avéré d’Ebola       1=Oui
Q87                                                                                                      /_________/
      dans votre ménage?                     2=Non
      Y a-t-il eu un parent ou un ami ou
                                             1=Oui
Q88   une connaissance qui a été atteint                                                                 /_________/
                                             2=Non
      d’Ebola?
                                             1=Oui
      Y a t-il eu un cas avéré d’Ebola
Q89                                          2=Non                                                       /_________/
      dans votre village/quartier?
                                             3= Ne sait pas
      Avez-vous peur de fréquenter les       1=Oui
Q90                                                                                                      /_________/
      structures sanitaires actuellement?    2=Non…………...FIN
                                                 a. ___________________________________
Q91   Pourquoi?                                  b. ___________________________________
                                                 c. ___________________________________
                          MERCI POUR VOTRE DISPONIBILITE
Nous allons vous transférer des unités de 10.000 francs sur votre numéro Orange.
SVP, Veuillez nous rappeler demain ou après-demain lorsque l’un des membres de votre
ménage sera appelé pour être interviewé dans le même cadre. Dans le cas contraire,
excusez-nous de voir rappeler pour vous demander de cette information.
Nom de l’enquêteur :………………………………………………. …………CODE |____||____|
N° de téléphone du répondant : |____||____||____||____||____||____||____||____||____|
Nom du répondant:……………………………………………….………
