     Report No: ACS12222
 .




     World
     BNPP-Governance: Community-based Paralegals
     and Demand for Good Governance
     Community Based Paralegalism in the Philippines:
     From Social Movements to Democratization

 .
     27/2014


 .
     GGODR
     OTHER
 .




Document of the World Bank
.
.


.
    Standard Disclaimer:


    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
    World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
    its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance
    Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
    1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Public Disclosure Authorized


                                                                                 86000



                                                  J&D
                                                   justice&development
                                                   working paper series
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                27/2014 								
                                                            
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                     Community Based Paralegalism
                                            in the Philippines:
                                                     

                               From Social Movements to Democratization
                                                                  
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                  Jennifer Franco, Hector Soliman, and Maria Roda Cisnero




                                                       Legal Vice Presidency
                                                       The World Bank
About the Justice and Development Working Paper Series

The Justice and Development Working Paper Series serves as a platform for innovative thinking
on justice and development that features work from World Bank and external authors. It is a
product of the World Bank’s Justice Reform Practice Group, which generates knowledge and
provides advice and assistance to Bank staff and Bank client countries on improving state and
nonstate justice system institutions and mechanisms. Justice and Development disseminates the
findings of works in progress to facilitate a more rapid exchange of ideas about development
issues and justice reform.

Editorial Policy

The Justice and Development Working Paper Series publishes original research papers on law,
justice, and development. Publication proposals may be made by Bank staff and external
contributors. Manuscripts must be in English and no longer than 25–40 pages. They can be
submitted at any time. All submitted papers will be acknowledged and carefully reviewed by the
editorial committee. Criteria for selection include rigorous scholarship and topics about
innovative approaches to law, justice, and development generally, particularly topics related to
     institutional reform of justice sector agencies
     justice in development, including community legal empowerment and access to justice
        programming
     criminal justice reform and administration
     justice systems in conflict-affected and fragile areas
     monitoring and evaluation of justice systems and projects.

Inquiries:                                           Telephone: +1 202 473 5941
Justice Reform Practice Group                        Email: justicedevelopmentworkingpapers@worldbank.org
The Legal Vice Presidency                            Website: www.worldbank.org/lji
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433, USA


Disclaimer:
This working paper is published to promote the World Bank’s work to the development community with the least possible delay.
The manuscript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formally edited
texts. Some sources cited in this paper may be information documents that are not readily available. The findings, interpretations
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors of the
World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this
work. The boundaries, colors, denominations and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of the World Bank of the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
Table of Contents

About the Authors ................................................................................................................................. ii
List of Acronyms ................................................................................................................................... iii
Abstract .................................................................................................................................................... 1
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 1
2. Methodology ...................................................................................................................................... 2
   2.1. Study Participants ................................................................................................................................... 3
   2.2. Study Goal ................................................................................................................................................... 5
3. Background........................................................................................................................................ 5
4. Paralegals Today: Definition, Work, Tools, and Training ................................................. 7
   4.1. Definition .................................................................................................................................................... 7
   4.2 Substance of Work and Underlying Legislation ............................................................................ 8
   4.3 Affiliation and Accountability ............................................................................................................. 8
   4.4 Recognition and Training ...................................................................................................................... 9
5. Types of Paralegals ........................................................................................................................ 11
6. Facilitating and Hindering Circumstances ........................................................................... 12
   6.1. Facilitating Circumstances ................................................................................................................ 13
   6.2 Hindering Circumstances ................................................................................................................... 16
   6.3 Selected Issues for Debate .................................................................................................................. 20
7. The Work of Paralegals: Three Dimensions......................................................................... 21
   7.1 Building Rights Awareness ................................................................................................................ 21
   7.2 Settling Private Disputes ..................................................................................................................... 23
   7.3 Increasing State and Corporate Accountability ......................................................................... 25
8. Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................ 28
   8.1. Issues for Consideration..................................................................................................................... 28
   8.2 Recommendations ................................................................................................................................. 31
   8.3 Concluding Remarks ............................................................................................................................. 32
Annex A. Anatomy of a Typical Paralegal Training ................................................................. 33
Annex B. List of Organizations Participating in the Study .................................................... 35
References ............................................................................................................................................. 37




                                                                                                                                                                       i
About the Authors

JENNIFER FRANCO has been doing research on Philippine rural politics for the past 20 years.
She has published articles in numerous international academic journals, including Journal of
Development Studies, World Development, Third World Quarterly, and Critical Asian Studies.
Her new book on law and the rural poor is forthcoming with Ateneo de Manila University Press.
She currently resides in the Netherlands and works with the Amsterdam-based Transnational
Institute.

HECTOR SOLIMAN is a public interest lawyer of 30 years based in Manila and has been
involved in the training and funding of community paralegals. He was one of the founders of the
Alternative Law Groups (ALG). He was Undersecretary of the Department of Agrarian Reform
from 1993 to 1997. He was also Project Director of the Justice Reform Initiatives Support
(JURIS) Project, a Canadian-funded undertaking, from 2003 to 2008.

MARIA RODA L. CISNERO is an alternative lawyer by vocation. Her internships in three
ALG member organizations while in law school through the Ateneo Human Rights Center
opened the doors to her current work in the world of development and alternative lawyering.




                                                                                             ii
List of Acronyms

AHRC                Ateneo Human Rights Center
ALG                 Alternative Law Groups Inc.
ASEAN               Association of Southeast Asian Nations
ASSO                Arrest Search Seizure Orders
BALAOD – Mindanaw   Balay Alternative Legal Advocates for Development in Mindanaw,
                    Inc.
BDC                 Barangay Development Council
BFAR                Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
BJS                 Barangay Justice System
BPO                 Barangay Protection Order
CADT                Certificate of Ancestral Domain Title
CARL                Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law
CARP                Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
CARPER              Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Extension with Reforms
CEDAW               Committee for the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
CLB                 Children’s Legal Bureau, Inc.
CLOA                Certificate of Land Ownership Award
CO                  Community Organizing or Community Organization
CORDAID             Catholic Organization for Relief and Development Aid
CSO                 Civil Society Organization
DAR                 Department of Agrarian Reform
DARAB               Department of Agrarian Reform Adjudication Board
DENR                Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DLA                 Developmental Legal Advocacy
DOLE                Department of Labor and Employment
EnDefense           Environmental Defense Program
ELAC                Environmental Legal Assistance Center
FLAG                Free Legal Assistance Group
IBP                 Integrated Bar of the Philippines
IPRA                Indigenous Peoples Rights Act
JJWA                Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act
KAISAHAN            Solidarity towards Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
                    (Kaisahan Tungo sa Kaunlaran ng Kanayunan at Repormang
                    Pansakahan)
KANLUNGAN           Kanlungan Foundation Inc. / Center for Migrant Workers
LDC                 Local Development Council
LGC                 Local Government Code
LGU                 Local Government Unit
MABINI              Movement of Attorneys for Brotherhood, Integrity and
                    Nationalism, Inc.
MISEREOR            German Catholic Bishops’ Organisation for Development
                    Cooperation

                                                                                iii
M&E         Monitoring and Evaluation
NGO         Nongovernmental Organization
NIPAS       National Integrated Protected Areas System
NLRC        National Labor Relations Commission
NOVIB       Netherlands Organization for International Assistance
PANLIPI     Legal Assistance Center for Indigenous Filipinos
PAO         Public Attorney’s Office
PESANTEch   Paralegal Education Skills Advancement and Networking
            Technology
PI          Public Interest
PLL         Protestant Lawyers League
PO          Peoples’ Organization
RIGHTS      Rural Poor Institute for Land and Human Rights Services
SALIGAN     Alternative Legal Assistance Center (Sentro ng Alternatibong
            Lingap Panligal)
SWS         Social Weather Stations
TK          Defense of Nature (Tanggol Kalikasan)
VAWC        Violence against Women and Children
WLB         Women’s Legal and Human Rights Bureau, Inc.




                                                                           iv
 Community-Based Paralegalism in the Philippines: From
        Social Movements to Democratization


            Jennifer Franco, Hector Soliman, and Maria Roda Cisnero



Abstract
Community-based paralegalism has been active in the Philippines for the past 30 years, and yet its
contribution to access to justice and the advancement of the rights and entitlements of the poor has
been largely undocumented. This paper attempts to provide a framework study on the history,
nature, and scope of paralegal work in the Philippines, based on the experience of 12 organizations
that are active in the training and development of community-oriented paralegals. The study first
provides a working definition of a community-based paralegal, and then examines the work of
paralegals, their systems of accountability or lack thereof, and issues regarding recognition by the
state and civil society actors. It also explores facilitating and hindering factors that aid or impinge
upon the paralegals’ effectiveness. A major contributor to the work of paralegals was the
democratization process after the overthrow of the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos and the
continuing evolution of legal rights spurred by the relatively progressive constitution ratified in
1987. Three dimensions of paralegal’s work are identified and explored, namely, building rights
awareness, settling private disputes, and increasing state and corporate accountability. The study
ends with conclusions and recommendations with regard to sustainability, monitoring and
evaluation, funding, and the prospects for paralegal work over the long term.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the challenge of expanding access to justice for the poor has received increasing
attention from the international development community. Promoting justice in settings where state
legal and judicial institutions and the rule of law are weak or compromised is a difficult proposition.
Today, many societies, despite formal recognition of the legal rights of poorer citizens, fall short of
full and effective realization of those rights in practice. In many countries, civil society spaces and
organizations oriented toward legal empowerment of the poor may also be inadequate or
nonexistent, and thus still limited in their potential contribution to expanding access to justice for
the poor.

Deepening interest in the problem of access to justice has emerged within a broader emphasis on
judicial and rule of law reform as a necessary prerequisite to development more generally. Efforts to
address weak state legal and judicial institutions have often focused on interventions defined in
terms of creating and/or reforming the relevant rules and procedures, often based on idealized
understandings of what constitutes a well-functioning system of law and justice. At the same time,
more attention is being paid to increasing legal assistance to the poor in order to increase their
capacity to effectively use state law and institutions in the pursuit of justice. 1 Legal assistance has
involved diverse interpretations ranging from “legal aid” to “legal empowerment.” 2 Taken together,
such efforts reflect changing understandings of the processes and obstacles involved as citizens
attempt to get their justice concerns met. It is no longer enough to address formal legal institutions
(such as the judiciary and ministries of justice) alone; as important are: (i) how formal legal
institutions actually operate in real societies, (ii) whether and how different members of a given
society experience and use law in their pursuit of justice, and (iii) which strategies and practices
have what effects in terms of law reform and justice.

One strategy involves community-based paralegals. In the Philippines, community-based
paralegals3 have existed for decades, with a practice that spans a variety of local circumstances and
is largely assumed to contribute to poor people “getting justice.” The conditions under which
community-based paralegals emerge and operate in the Philippines and the impacts they may have
remain unclear, not least because although community paralegals are often cited as important, in
fact, “there has been little systematic study of the workings of paralegal programs” in that country.4
The question thus remains whether and to what extent community-based paralegalism is a socially
relevant and empowering innovation for Filipino society.

2. Methodology
To begin addressing this question, a broad scan was taken of the Philippines’ contemporary
paralegal movement. Because the country has a long and extensive experience in using state law to
defend and deepen people’s rights—an approach referred to as “developmental legal aid” or
“alternative law”5 by Filipino activists—this study involved casting the net widely and deeply to
gather insights from a diversity of actors working in the field. The analytical approach used can be
described as historical, institutional, and process oriented.

The approach is historical in order to capture changes that affect the practice or direction of
community-based paralegalism over time, including, among other factors: (i) the nature of the
overall political-legal framework that may either recognize community-based paralegalism or not;
(ii) the degree of the presence and reach of alternative lawyering networks that can facilitate the
growth of community-based paralegalism; or (iii) the degree of attention given by key actors
involved in cultivating paralegalism to assessing the social and political impacts of their work.

1
  Another type of response has involved revaluing and drawing on more localized, “nonstate”, types of indigenous and
customary practices in social regulation and in determining and dispensing justice as an additional means to expand
access to justice for the poor. However, this type of innovation is not the subject of the present study.
2
  Legal aid usually focuses on the state’s obligation to provide legal services for the poor, while legal empowerment
stresses the process by which the poor use the law to make a claim on their entitlements and hold governments more
accountable to their rights.
3
  Paralegals are understood here as community based in the broad sense of being based in or catering to a grassroots-
level organization, whether workplace, neighborhood, parish, school, or some other basic social-institutional setting.
This concept is elaborated in section 4.1 of the paper.
4
   Vivek Maru and Varun Gauri, BNPP Concept Note, World Bank Justice for the Poor Program, December 2009.
5
   The terms “developmental legal aid,” “alternative lawyering,” and “public interest lawyering” are all used
interchangeably. They all denote the use of the law by the poor with the assistance of legal service nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) or lawyers, so that the ends of justice may be fully served and the poor’s rights and entitlements
fully realized. See box 1 for a definition of “developmental legal aid.”

                                                                                                                     2
The approach is institutional in that it gives attention to how formal and informal institutions shape
the power and activity of paralegals over time, as well as other actors that may affect their activity
and practice. For example, the state judicial and quasi-judicial dispute tribunals (such as agrarian
adjudication boards or labor relations tribunals) can affect paralegal practice and activity and the
standing of individual practitioners by according formal recognition (or not).6 Entrenched political
patronage networks can also influence and constrain community paralegals both inside the
courtroom and in the differentiated and stratified communities where they work.

But institutions alone do not determine outcomes, and thus the approach used here is also process
oriented, emphasizing human actors and their actions and interactions in order to better detect the
role of perception, interpretation, and choice regarding particular laws or legal provisions in
relevant interactions over time and in specific situations.

The main analytical point is that no law, policy, program, or project is “self-implementing”; rather,
laws and policies are interpreted and implemented by real people (Franco 2008a). Oftentimes this
involves conflicting parties with different political and/or legal standing and the need to bring
different interpretative frames to bear in interactions. The implementation of laws and policies is
therefore to a certain extent open ended and contingent upon the actions and interactions of
numerous competing actors embedded in diverse power relations and structures. Many of the actors
involved in making law in a broader sociological sense—that is, beyond the mere formal legal
processes of making and implementing laws and policies to include the more fundamental processes
of making laws and policies actually authoritative in society—are themselves embedded in social
structures that are not necessarily coterminous with the state. This includes an array of actors from
municipal judges, public attorneys, and local police commanders who may be part of broader local
kinship or regional political networks, to private lawyers, corporations, landlords, public interest
attorneys, civil rights advocates and rights advocacy networks, and social and political change
activists—each with his or her own organizational interests and sources of authority.


2.1. Study Participants
The study included a variety of actors operationalizing diverse concepts and perspectives on the
issue of community-based paralegalism. The first set of informants came from nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) that train, mentor, and/or deploy paralegals. Twelve organizations were
selected that help to illustrate (albeit partially) the breadth of paralegal practice covering a range of
issue areas, including, for example: civil and political rights, environmental protection, agrarian
reform, and the rights of indigenous peoples, children, women, and migrants. Ten of the 12
organizations are members of the Alternative Law Groups (ALG), a civil society network founded
in the early 1990s and anchored by lawyers dedicated to the practice of law to aid social justice. The
selection of the 10 ALG members (out of the total 19 members) considered the range of paralegal
practice in diverse areas such as the environment, women, and agrarian reform. The selection also
took into account the representation of the various major island groups of the country, which means
the locations of Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao.


6
  In the Philippines, the term “courts” is utilized to refer to dispute tribunals located within the judicial branch, while the
term “quasi-judicial” agencies is usually used to refer to dispute-resolution offices located within the executive branch.

                                                                                                                             3
The remaining two NGOs are not ALG members, but the nature of their work qualifies them as
practitioners of alternative law. Taken together, the 12 organizations constitute a critical mass of
civil society groups and localized networks that engaged in paralegalism and for which paralegalism
is a more or less institutionalized part of their overall work.7 For this set of participants, we
conducted key interviews and focus group discussions with paralegal officers and/or trained
paralegals.

All of the organizations covered in this study are specialized in one or two distinct issue areas and
sets of associated law. Four of them work on agrarian issues (Balay Alternative Legal Advocates for
Development in Mindanaw, Inc. [BALAOD], Solidarity toward Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development [KAISAHAN], the Rural Poor Institute for Land and Human Rights Services
[RIGHTS], and the Alternative Legal Assistance Center [SALIGAN]). Two work on labor issues
(SALIGAN and the Center for Migrant Workers [KANLUNGAN]), with one of these specializing
in migrant labor issues (KANLUNGAN). Two work on different aspects of women’s rights
(KANLUNGAN and the Women’s Legal and Human Rights Bureau, Inc. [WLB]), and one works
on children’s rights issues (the Children’s Legal Bureau, Inc. [CLB]). Two others work mainly on
environmental issues (the Environmental Legal Assistance Center [ELAC] and Defense of Nature
[TK]), and one works on the rights of indigenous persons (the Legal Assistance Center for
Indigenous Filipinos [PANLIPI]). The Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG) continues to work on
civil and political rights violations, while the Ateneo Human Rights Center (AHRC), a law school-
based actor, works mainly on human rights education.

Several of the civil society groups invited to participate in the study saw its potential value as a
contribution to the historical record, but expressed various degrees of concern about participating in
a project initiated by the World Bank. Indeed, one ALG member refused outright to participate in
any World Bank-related activity, including this one. Some were particularly concerned about how
the World Bank would use the data, especially on issues where the World Bank’s advocacy and
activities in the country were seen as deeply at odds with their own, especially the promotion of
large-scale mining but also other far-reaching economic activities perceived as having intolerable
negative social and environmental impacts. In the end, some of the groups that initially expressed
reservations did eventually agree to participate, in the belief that it would be important to register
their experience in any study on community-based paralegals. In order to protect those informants
who currently work under extremely hostile conditions in local areas adversely affected by large-
scale economic activities (by trying to stop to those activities), it was determined that all informants
would remain anonymous.

In addition to participants from the nongovernmental sector, a second set of informants was selected
who included officials from several government branches and agencies at different levels (national,
regional, municipal). Those from the government sector came from the local judiciary as well as the
Supreme Court, the Department of Justice, and the Public Attorney’s Office. Finally, a smaller,
third set of informants was drawn from the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP), more
specifically the Director for Legal Aid, as well as the Asia Foundation, an important funder of
paralegal programs in the Philippines historically. The IBP could be viewed as a somewhat curious
institution, in that it is a professional organization of lawyers but has been created by mandate of the

7
    A list of these 12 organizations can be found in Annex B.


                                                                                                      4
supervisory powers of the Supreme Court. It receives no funding from the state, only from
membership contributions, giving it the character of a quasi-government institution.

All these informants were selected on the basis of the role that their institutions play in influencing
and defining paralegalism in theory and in practice. In the end, a total of 18 interviews and 19 focus
group discussions (composed of 3–5 individuals each) were conducted, with a 50:50 gender balance
overall. In addition, most of the informants were from areas outside of Metropolitan Manila, namely
the provinces of Zambales and Quezon on the island of Luzon, and the provinces of Cebu, Misamis
Oriental, and Palawan.


2.2. Study Goal
The main purpose of this study was to describe the state of community-based paralegal work in the
Philippines. By definition, the study was not designed to assess the impact of paralegal work in
various facets of social justice, for example, the improvement of the skills of the poor over time, or
the responsiveness of state institutions to paralegal engagement. The study does point out that
monitoring and evaluation work in the area of paralegal work remains a substantial challenge. Thus,
it is hoped that this paper will provide the framework needed to evaluate the impact of paralegal
work much more rigorously in the future.

3. Background
Contemporary paralegal work in the Philippines is not a new phenomenon. Rather, there is
precedent for paralegal work in the lawyering for the poor that dates back to the early 1930s, when
agrarian and labor unrest arose in response to deteriorating social and economic conditions, mainly
in Central and Southern Luzon (see Kerkvliet 1977; Crippen 1946). Demands over land tenure and
labor issues both shaped and were shaped by political-legal support received from individual local
lawyers who sympathized with these movements and their aspirations. The experience launched a
tradition of lawyering for the poor and other marginalized groups, which continued into the ensuing
decades, when new generations of worker and peasant organizations arose in response to still-
unfulfilled demands for better working terms and conditions and the recognition of land and tenure
rights.

When President Ferdinand Marcos imposed martial law in 1972, all opposition was suppressed, the
press was muzzled, and the national legislature was shut down. Activists were rounded up by the
hundreds, detained, and in many instances, tortured and summarily executed, prompting the
establishment of the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG) in 1974 by the late Senator Jose W.
Diokno (see box 1). Led by a small core of lawyers and non-lawyers, the organization pioneered a
strategy of training and deploying paralegals for “first aid legal aid.”8 FLAG’s efforts amid
repression and adversity served as a training ground for future generations of lawyers, inspiring

8
 “First aid legal aid” denotes legal assistance work in emergency situations, very similar to the medical concept of “first
aid.” This term gained currency during the martial law regime when people were subjected to arbitrary arrests or even
extrajudicial executions. First aid legal aid usually involves strategies like accompanying the would-be detainee to his
detention center to help him avoid torture or extrajudicial execution, identifying the captors and their military unit, and
ensuring that the detention does not go beyond the legal limits, depending on the severity of the alleged offense.

                                                                                                                         5
many to later set up their own institutions to expand upon its example. During this time, other
similar organizations such as the Protestant Lawyers League (PLL) and the Movement of Attorneys
for Brotherhood, Integrity and Nationalism, Inc. (MABINI) also followed the FLAG model of
addressing human rights abuses.

                                   Box 1. What is Developmental Legal Aid

      Jose Diokno encapsulates the concept of alternative lawyering or developmental legal aid as
      follows:

      “Traditional legal aid is in fact the lawyer’s way of giving alms to the poor. Like alms which provide
      temporary relief to the poor but do not touch the social structures that keep the poor poor, traditional
      legal aid redresses particular instances of injustice, but does not fundamentally change the
      structures that generate and sustain injustice...

      “So development requires a different type of legal aid, one that will not supplant traditional legal aid
      but supplement it, concentrating on public rather than on private issues, intent on changing instead
      of merely upholding existing law and social structures, particularly the distribution of power within
      society...

      “This new type of legal aid is needed because development is more than just feeding, clothing,
      curing, teaching and housing people. Many prisons do as much. Development is above all the
      people deciding what food, clothes, medical care, education, and housing they need, and how to
      provide them...

      “In ASEAN countries and, indeed, in all developing countries, then a n ew type of legal aid would
      rest on firm legal ground: the right of the people to development. Efforts to practice this new type of
      legal aid which for want of a better name I shall call developmental legal aid, have begun in
      ASEAN countries. Lawyers who had been imprisoned, or had practiced traditional legal aid became
      convinced that, under conditions in their country, something more was needed. If the rights of the
      poor and the oppressed were to be vindicated and just and human development achieved, the job
      of developmental legal aid had to be done.”

      Source: Diokno (1982).


The collapse of the Marcos dictatorship in 1986 and the promulgation of a new national constitution
in 1987 led to an unprecedented proliferation of “sectoral” organizations and “cause-oriented”
movements, often with competing political visions and strategies for change, but similarly intent on
influencing the pace and direction of national social, political, and economic reform after Marcos.
This included numerous nongovernmental legal services organizations, some of which (but not all)
would coalesce under the formal banner of the ALG. A new generation of activist lawyers likewise
sought to take advantage of the new political space that opened up after the dictatorship, and to use
the associated political-legal institutions to bring a more democratic law within the reach of
everyone. The post-dictatorship constitution enshrined a whole host of new rights and provisions,
positively addressing key social and political rights and justice concerns of the poor and other
marginalized groups, including in relation to environmental protection and the use of natural
resources. These provisions became crucial reference points for alternative law activism and
paralegal efforts, partly because in the Philippines, “good” law has never by itself guaranteed
“good” legal outcomes (Franco 2008a). The alternative law and paralegal activism approach thus
gained significant new social relevance in the post-Marcos era.

Political openings at the national level, however, did not guarantee a similar change below it, and
indeed since that time, subnational democratization has proceeded unevenly and in many places not

                                                                                                                 6
at all (Franco 2001). Political structures at the local level are still largely controlled by established
dynasties (whose power is rooted in control of land, labor, and other key factors of production),
many of which operate in conjunction with private armies and within a strong culture of impunity.
In many parts of the Philippines, journalists, activists, judges and lawyers, and others who attempt
to challenge an undemocratic and repressive status quo are routinely harassed and even killed, often
without any sign that justice will ever be meted out to the perpetrators. A gross example of this
phenomenon was the November 2009 Maguindanao Massacre, wherein 58 persons (34 of them
journalists) were killed by the hired assailants of a prominent local politician at the height of the
political campaign for local electoral posts.

4. Paralegals Today: Definition, Work, Tools, and Training
4.1. Definition
The word “paralegal” has been used in the legal-activism literature on development-oriented legal
assistance for the past 30 years. For example, Senator Diokno wrote about “paralegals or barefoot
lawyers,” as he called them, in 1982 (see box 2). In development work today, the term refers to a
variety of situations, some community based others not, but all sharing a broadly similar
community-oriented, grassroots perspective. In general, paralegals are not lawyers by definition,
although they do have some legal training and can include those who are the products of law
schools, namely, law students or law graduates who have not yet taken or passed the bar
examination. But in the Philippines, the term refers primarily to a layperson who claims some
knowledge of the law and the workings of government, has had some training in these fields, and
practices her/his paralegal skills in the name of some organization, whether state or nonstate. It is
important to note here the clear distinction between a paralegal and an abogadillo (or “little
lawyer”). The term abogadillo refers to any layperson who offers legal advice and services in
his/her own name in exchange for money—a practice considered illegitimate by alternative law
activists due to a perceived lack of accountability to any greater authority. This practice is also
clearly “unauthorized practice of law” and is considered illegal by the IBP and the Supreme Court.
Although interesting (to the extent that it reflects a demand for such services), the abogadillo
phenomenon is not the focus of the present study, nor is the type of paralegal found in mainstream
law offices (for example, those whose objective is more commercial and profit-making in nature).

                           Box 2. Jose W. Diokno on Community Paralegals

    “To overcome the manpower problem, developmental legal aid groups have:

    “Trained paralegals or ‘barefoot lawyers’ in the basic concepts of law, legal procedure, tactics and counter
    tactics, and in the skills needed to do routine, repetitive, or preliminary jobs and carry out simple investigations,
    such as interviewing witnesses, and taking down their statements, getting copies of public records, preserving
    physical evidence, filling out standard government forms, etc. Paralegals are chosen from among promising
    students of law and social sciences who agree to do field work with poor communities between school terms;
    representatives of depressed communities who are recommended by civic organizations working with them;
    and trade union members recommended by their unions. Paralegal training has produced several benefits.
    Lawyers have had more time to devote to the creative aspects of their job: counseling, negotiating, drafting,
    advocacy. Some law students were motivated by their experience as paralegals to join legal aid groups after
    the bar. And paralegals have equipped the communities they live with a knowledge of how law works and how
    they use law to assert or defend their rights.”
    Source: Diokno (1982).


                                                                                                                            7
4.2 Substance of Work and Underlying Legislation
Paralegals in the Philippines today engage in: (i) education on human rights, constitutional rights
and provisions, and legal rights and procedures; (ii) legal research/investigation/documentation or
casework proper; (iii) mediation in conflict-resolution or dispute-processing venues, especially the
village-level barangay justice system,9 (iv) representation in certain quasi-judicial dispute
resolution tribunals; (v) law enforcement as bantay gubat (forest guards) and bantay dagat
(municipal water guards); (vi) policy advocacy around local ordinances and national laws, policies,
and programs; and (vii) organization and mobilization of people to more effectively address their
justice concerns by making claims based on legal rights.

As noted, a large number and wide range of new (and still evolving) legal rights became available
after 1986, and in turn, have become key tools for people seeking justice. This includes new laws
and policies regarding, among others: (i) land rights: the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
(CARP 1980) and the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Extension with Reforms (CARPER 2009);
(ii) ancestral domain: the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA 1997); (iii) women’s rights:
Violence against Women and Children (VAWC 2004); (iv) children’s rights: Juvenile Justice and
Welfare Act (JJWA 2006); (v) rights of sustenance fisher folk: the Local Government Code (LGC
1992); (vi) coastal marine resource protection: (Fisheries Code 1998); (vii) environmental
protection: the National Integrated Protected Areas System (NIPAS Law 1991); (viii) the writ of
kalikasan10 2010; (ix) human rights (writ of amparo11 2007); (x) Habeas Data12 2008); and (xi) the
rights of migrants workers and overseas Filipinos (1995).


4.3 Affiliation and Accountability
Examining the question of paralegal accountability is useful in making some further distinctions.
Paralegals are understood in the Philippines as community based in the broad sense of being a part
of or catering to a grassroots-level organization, whether from the workplace, neighborhood, parish,


9
   Barangay justice is a state-mandated mechanism for the mediation of petty matters at the level of the barangay or
village. The mechanism is mandated under the Local Government Code and is often a prerequisite for the filing of a
more formal case in court.
10
   “The writ is a remedy available to any natural or juridical person, entity authorized by law, people’s organization,
NGO, or any public interest group accredited by or registered with any government agency, on behalf of persons whose
constitutional right to a balanced and healthful ecology is violated or threatened with violation by an unlawful act or
omission of a public official or employee, or private individual or entity, involving environmental damage of such
magnitude as to prejudice to life, health or property of inhabitants in two or more cities of provinces”. This remedy has
been provided in the recently promulgated Rules for Environmental Courts, and the full text can be found at:
 http://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/Rules%20of%20Procedure%20for%20Environmental%20Cases.pdf.
11
   “The writ is a remedy available to any person whose right to life, liberty and security is violated or threatened with
violation by an unlawful act or omission of a public official or employee, or of a private individual or entity. The writ
shall cover extralegal killings and enforced disappearances or threats thereof.” The full text of the procedure governing
the writ of amparo is found at: http://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/Annotation_amparo.pdf.
12
    “The writ is a remedy available to any person whose right to privacy in life, liberty or security is violated or
threatened by an unlawful act or omission of a public official or employee, or of a private individual or entity engaged
in the gathering, collecting or storing of data or information regarding the person, family, home and correspondence of
the aggrieved party.” Full text available at:
http://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/rulesofcourt/2008/jan/A.M.No.08-1-16-SC.pdf.

                                                                                                                       8
school, or some other basic social-institutional setting. In practice, however, this affiliation turns out
to have various meanings in terms of the paralegal’s relationship with the state.

For instance, for paralegals who are strictly “PO based”—that is, embedded in a “people’s
organization” (PO) as a member, their accountability is to that organization13. Other paralegals, by
contrast, are best understood as “LGU based,” in that their standing as a paralegal comes from being
connected to and recognized by a given local government unit (LGU), usually the barangay
(village), and their accountability is largely to the local government. Still other paralegals attempt to
establish a standing in both spheres, that is, as both PO member and as member of the local
development council (LDC) or barangay development council (BDC), for example. The study also
encountered paralegals who are not based in any grassroots community-level organization, but can
and do (cl)aim to serve a particular group or category of people whose justice concerns revolve
around their standing as members of a particular grassroots community. This latter mode of
paralegalism is more often based in an NGO (and is thus NGO based), although there are also those
who are based in a government institution, such as the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR),
which launched its own paralegal program in the 1990s in order to hasten agrarian reform
implementation. ‫‏‬

In all these cases, a defining feature is that the paralegal explicitly endeavors to serve a particular
group or category of people who are perceived as inadequately recognized as rights holders, and/or
whose human rights are deemed insufficiently defined, guaranteed, or fulfilled by the state in
practice. This should not be surprising, given that historically in the Philippines (see section 3
above), the main anchor of paralegalism has been the broad movement for social change, which
despite some important internal differences, reflects a basic consensus about the key problems
besetting Philippine society. These include: (i) the highly skewed and uneven distribution of wealth
and power, which produces chronic poverty and drives many Filipinos (including children) into
precarious and unfavorable work situations at home and abroad; (ii) the continued emphasis on a
development model that relies on large-scale, destructive extraction and use of natural resources
(land, water, minerals, forest), which in turn intensifies conflicts over natural resource and territorial
ownership and control and at the same time deepens the need for environmental protection; (iii) an
entrenched socio-political culture that supports gender and ethnic injustice and gives rise to violence
and human rights violations against women and indigenous peoples; and (iv) a deep-rooted political
culture that tolerates both repression and impunity and depends on maintaining a gap between rights
on paper and rights in reality, even as the number of rights available on paper continues to expand.


4.4 Recognition and Training
Within the state, post-Marcos political-institutional change has unfolded only partially and
unevenly, creating some openings for paralegalism in the process. Community-based paralegals are
now recognized and encouraged in some quasi-judicial tribunals—for example, in the DAR
Adjudication Board that handles agrarian reform-related disputes, and in the National Labor


13
  The term “people’s organization” refers to an association composed mainly of members of basic sectors, such as
peasants, fisher folk, indigenous peoples or slum dwellers, while a non-governmental organization usually refers to
professionals who are working for the benefit of the basic sectors.

                                                                                                                 9
Relations Commission that handles disputes between employers and employees—but not yet
formally recognized by the judiciary.14

Today’s community-based paralegalism has also been shaped by state-led reform measures and
associated peoples’ initiatives. For example, when the Constitution mandated the right of the people
to a clean and healthy environment, this spawned various legislative proposals on the fisheries code,
solid waste management, clean air, hazardous wastes disposal, the integrated protected areas
system, and the like. The abundance of new environmental legislation in turn prompted the
Supreme Court to designate new environmental courts with primary jurisdiction and to enhance the
rules of redress in environmental cases. All of these actions have created a pressing need for
specialized public information campaigns about the new legal opportunities available, both in terms
of legal content and procedures of redress. The more progressive legal provisions that are
promulgated, the more there is a need for paralegal training and education. Looking back, much of
the new legislation originated in the active engagement of environmental groups, rural development
groups, and so on, and thus can also be seen in part as an outcome of active lobbying efforts of
groups pushing for social change.

Even as alternative law organizations and paralegal programs tend to specialize and thus revolve
around distinct issue areas and laws, they share a broadly similar approach in training and
“forming” paralegals. This reflects the legacy they share as offspring of the earlier generation of
alternative law activists. Groups such as FLAG and the Protestant Lawyers’ League generated a
training methodology and practical paralegal tools with enduring relevance, establishing standards
adopted by later paralegal programs. The earlier wave of paralegalism created prototype modules on
human rights, human rights situation analysis, and paralegal skills building and practice. As a result,
standard paralegal training today includes: (i) analysis of the situation in which participants find
themselves in human rights and socio-political terms; (ii) introduction to the philosophy of
developmental legal advocacy (DLA) or legal empowerment defined as the use of the law to
creatively empower people, reform laws, assert rights, and hold the state or corporations
accountable; and (iii) instruction in the specific human rights norms and legal principles that have
application to participants’ situations, in basic paralegal skills such as gathering evidence and
making affidavits, and in advanced paralegal skills focusing on particular issue areas (for example,
collective bargaining, lobbying local government, and so on—see Annex A).




14
   Under the law student practice rule, senior law students are allowed to appear in court under the supervision of a
competent lawyer. And as already mentioned, in the DAR, a contractual position called paralegal has also been created,
but this is purely to help the adjudicators to decide on cases and finish the backlogs, and involves law graduates who
have not (yet) passed the bar exam. This is paralegal work in a more restricted conventional sense (an assistant to a
lawyer), but is also unique in the sense that this also indirectly contributes to the resolution of cases of farmers and
landowners.

                                                                                                                     10
5. Types of Paralegals
This study uncovered numerous types of paralegals, which have been “captured” in the typology
outlined in box 3.


                                 Box 3. Basic Paralegal Typology

         Basic Paralegal Typology

              Type A: Grassroots Organization Paralegal. Member of a grassroots organization,
               usually labor (factory based) or agrarian (landholding based), who is deployed by the
               organization as a paralegal. Grassroots organizations are associations of the poor
               themselves (e.g., workers, or peasants or fisher folk) and whose members and leaders
               come from this sector. Grassroots organization paralegals are typically supported by a
               rights advocacy group, an NGO composed of professionals rendering services for the
               poor. Rights advocacy groups include KAISAHAN, SALIGAN, BALAOD, RIGHTS, WLB,
               CLB. KAISAHAN, for example, has social science graduates and lawyers among their
               staff, and is dedicated to rural development, agrarian reform and local governance
               issues.

              Type B: Roving (Territorial) Leader-Organizer Paralegal. Member of a people’s
               organization or network with a regional scope, for instance, an indigenous community
               with ancestral domain claims spread across numerous villages and municipalities, or a
               human rights advocate’s network covering several provinces, or grassroots leaders
               deputized to enforce specific environmental laws, in a particular ecological zone spread
               across several municipalities (ELAC, PANLIPI, TK, FLAG);

              Type C: Law Student Paralegal. Volunteer students who perform community legal
               education, election monitoring, case build-up, and legal advice and assistance (AHRC);

              Type D: Office-based/Hired Paralegal. NGO staff members who document cases,
               provide legal information, and assist lawyers (KANLUNGAN, PANLIPI);

              Type E: Mainstreamed Community Paralegal. Community members who are trained by
               NGOs (or local officials themselves trained by NGOs) and based in a local government
               unit (LGU) while performing paralegal functions for the benefit of affected community
               members (KANLUNGAN, WLB, CLB).


              Type F: Law Enforcement Paralegal – Community members or members of grassroots
               organizations who have been entrusted by the local or the national government
               agencies with some form of law enforcement functions. The two most common types of
               these paralegals are the forest guards (Bantay Gubat) and municipal water guards
               (Bantay Dagat).


Among our respondents, the Type A paralegal was the most prevalent, which coincides with the
availability of a state-mandated forum for the practice of paralegalism (see box 4).




                                                                                                          11
                      Box 4. Incidence of Paralegals by Type by Organization
  SECTOR/   NGO                               TYPE OF PARALEGAL
ISSUE
                        Grassroots Roving    Law       Office    Mainstreaming Law
                        Leaders/   Paralegal Student Based       LGU           Enforcement
                        Paralegals           Paralegal Paralegal



Agrarian    Balaod
Reform/     Mindanaw
Peasants    KAISAHAN

            RIGHTSnet

Children    CLB

Environment ELAC

            TK

Gender      WLB

HRE         AHRC

HRV         FLAG

IP          PANLIPI

Labor       SALIGAN

Migrants    Kanlungan


6. Facilitating and Hindering Circumstances
A number of factors have helped to promote the paralegal system in the Philippines. There is a
relative scarcity of public interest lawyers, for example, which creates a substantial need for
paralegals to fill in the gap. At the same time, despite the relatively successful emergence and
development of the work of paralegals, there continue to be a number of factors that impede their
efforts (like continuity of funding). This section will examine both sets of factors, those that
facilitate paralegalism in the Philippines and those that often impede its effective advancement.



                                                                                              12
6.1. Facilitating Circumstances
Public interest lawyers
One factor identified as facilitating the emergence of paralegalism is the scarcity of public interest
lawyers. Relatively few lawyers choose to go into public interest law in the Philippines because of a
combination of low pay and potential danger. This trend resonates with the experience in the United
States, where only 6.7% of law graduates have taken on public interest jobs in 2010. 15

Entry level positions for public interest lawyers at NGOs typically pay US$500 to 900 per month.
This is quite low, as compared to the entry level salary of lawyers who work as public attorneys in
the government service, who would earn typically USD 1,400 per month, including their
allowances, such as transportation. The entry level of lawyers in the law firms would be similar to
that of public interest lawyers; however, many lawyers are attracted to the firms because of their
bonuses and profit sharing schemes, which augment the basic salary significantly.

New lawyers often have school loans to pay off or other pressing personal financial obligations,
which militates against taking such relatively low-paying jobs. Moreover, doing public interest law
in the Philippines can expose one to the same hostile forces and social-political environments that
confront the lawyers’ clients. Lawyers are not immune from harassment or death threats, and the
threat is often severe enough to keep many away. The scarcity of public interest lawyers means that
it is necessary to mobilize non-lawyers to help fill the gaps.

Yet, the scarcity also means that the networks of persons who do become public interest lawyers
become all the more important, as they are the ones who provide the training, legal “clinic-ing,” and
mentoring needed to support a paralegal movement. This then is the second factor seen as
facilitating paralegalism, which perhaps ironically directly contradicts the first: despite their
relatively little number, there exists nonetheless a strong network of public interest lawyers capable
of anchoring and guiding paralegal programs. The country’s long tradition of public interest
lawyering, reinvigorated during the dictatorship and carried on in later decades, is a contributing
factor here. Some of the study’s informants went further by saying that without lawyers to train and
guide paralegals, there can be no paralegal movement—a stronger formulation that reflects growing
concern that the traditional alternative law movement may be losing and not gaining momentum, in
part because fewer lawyers are joining its ranks and in part because of the dwindling funds for
existing paralegal programs and operations (a hindering factor discussed below).

Institutional support
This also points to a deeper issue: to what extent paralegal work, anchored and guided by public
interest lawyers, is institutionalized within both the government and the nongovernmental spheres.
(For more discussion, see section 6.3 below.) Institutionalization is clearly seen as facilitating and
sustaining paralegalism. The underlying assertion is that both public interest lawyers and paralegals
are expanding access to justice to previously excluded groups, and thus both need to be

15
     Kane, Sally. Public Interest Law: A Guide to Public Legal Service Careers in
http://legalcareers.about.com/od/practiceenvironments/a/Public-Interest-Law.htm



                                                                                                   13
incorporated into more formal institutional structures and in this way sustained in order for
paralegal formation programs to survive. Institutionalization is not automatic or fixed over time, but
must be continuously cultivated, particularly as there is concern among some informants that
traditional sources of funding for paralegal programs are drying up. In practical terms,
institutionalization refers to several things: (i) the existence of civil society organizations (CSOs)
that can absorb and deploy public interest lawyers as paralegal program anchors; (ii) the existence
of real opportunities and recognized venues for paralegals to operate and practice their skills; and
(iii) the existence of what one informant called “institutional sustaining mechanisms” that can
ensure the survival of paralegal programs, including (if not especially) institutional (versus
piecemeal project) funds for the CSOs that host and midwife paralegal programs and work.

The institutional, programmatic, and operational sustainability of paralegal work since the collapse
of the Marcos dictatorship is closely tied to long-term donor support for the ALG network. This
refers particularly to funding from numerous foreign agencies, especially the Ford Foundation and
the Asia Foundation, the Dutch funding agencies the Catholic Organization for Relief and
Development Aid (CORDAID) and the Netherlands Organization for International Assistance
(NOVIB), and also the German funding agency the German Catholic Bishops’ Organisation for
Development Cooperation (MISEREOR). The Paralegal Education Skills Advancement and
Networking Technology (PESANTEch) paralegal program (1994–2006), for example, an initiative
of ALG members engaged in agrarian reform work, was made possible through such long-term
funding. Meanwhile, the creation of a fund dedicated to legal defense work is another mechanism
that serves to sustain paralegal work, as in the ALG’s Environmental Defense Program or
“EnDefense,” which provides funds for legal defense in environmental cases. 16 The extent that
paralegal work threatens to upset an unjust status quo, increase claim-making, and facilitate social
justice activism often provokes legal offensives by entrenched elites (as a form of harassment),
making it necessary to divert scarce financial resources away from the social change work itself and
into legal defense. Having a dedicated legal defense fund can help to ease this problem to some
extent.

In sum, the institutionalization of paralegal programs in the governmental and non-government
spheres could be a sustaining mechanism; however, and especially for the non-government sector,
the process of institutionalization is dependent on whether these groups have adequate funding in
the future.

Community organizing
Also seen as a crucial factor facilitating paralegal programs and work is community organizing and
“people’s organization” (PO) building work. The essential notion that strong (well-organized and
active) grassroots or POs facilitate community-based paralegal efforts makes sense intuitively. The
very kind of paralegals this study is concerned with are those who explicitly endeavor to serve a
particular group or category of people who are perceived as inadequately recognized as rights
holders and/or whose human rights are deemed insufficiently defined, guaranteed, or fulfilled by the
state in practice. An important political resource for people in this situation is their capacity to
organize and mobilize social pressure. This is particularly critical in settings where “good law”

16
  More information about this program is available at:
http://www.alternativelawgroups.org/whatwedo.asp?sec=det&type=projects&id=239.

                                                                                                   14
exists, and the next challenge of making law and legal rights actually authoritative in society
requires a struggle against powerful, entrenched interests (see Franco 2008a). In the Philippines, the
mixed, uneven, and often hostile social-political setting has given rise to community-based
paralegal formation as part of a broader political strategy. The ALG network members refer to this
strategy as “legal-metalegal,”17 a concept that emphasizes the limitations of a purely legal strategy
and the need for organized, “metalegal” collective action as well. Other groups (such as RIGHTS)
have framed this kind of strategy as “rightful resistance” (see O’Brien 2006 for the concept, and
Borras and Franco 2005 for its application to the Philippines case).

Different groups have different understandings of what “strong” organization means in practice.
There is likely general agreement that the ideal situation involves: (i) well-trained and accountable
paralegals; (ii) well-organized and dynamic communities at the grassroots; and (iii) a mutually
reinforcing relationship between the two. Beyond this there appears to be a diversity of ideas on
how this ideal is to be achieved and sustained. One issue involves the question of who should do
what—for example, who should do the organizing or who should do the paralegal formation and
mentoring work. The theory within the ALG is that a legal NGO (that is, the member organizations
of the ALG) should partner with other organizations that specialize in and can take charge of the
community organizing work. The idea is to achieve a synergy and complementarity of work, for
example, with one NGO partner doing the community organizing work and the other doing the legal
work and paralegal formation. In practice, however, problems can arise for whatever reason, the
community organizing work is not sustained and the legal NGO ends up left alone to address the
legal work/paralegal formation and the community organizing/PO-building work. Several study
informants have found themselves in such a situation, which they described as a dilemma and a
source of debate within the legal NGO as well as within the ALG network more broadly (see also
the discussion of decreased funding in section 6.2 below).

Responsive local officials
A final set of facilitating factors involves state structures and government officials, especially at
more local levels. Respondents spoke of the importance to their work of open, friendly, and
approachable local government officials, especially at the barangay (village) level. Beyond personal
politics with government officials, they placed value in barangay-level structures and strategies,
where the paralegals trained through NGO formation programs could be embedded, such as the
barangay development councils and the barangay justice system structures. These are venues where
they are able to voice the objectives of their advocacy efforts, such as the need for a dedicated
committee on violence against women, as advocated by paralegals in Marikina City on the island of
Luzon. Part of the logic has to do with the fact that barangay units, led by the barangay captain (the
elected village head), have the authority to issue ordinances or orders to regulate everyday social
relations in a village on a whole range of matters. For example, among other directives, barangay
captains can issue a barangay protection order (BPO) in cases of violence against women or
children, ordering the offender to desist from committing or threatening harm to the victim (woman
or child). Having a good relationship with local officials enables one to have a potentially positive
influence on how local officials respond to injustice.
17
   Legal-metalegal strategies involve a combination of purely legal work with actions that are lawful but not
traditionally considered legal work. For example, when the lawyers are debating a heated proposal in Congress, their
supporters could hold a public rally or demonstration outside, or even silently drop a banner in the gallery to support a
certain advocacy.

                                                                                                                      15
If local officials are open and friendly, paralegals are: (i) better able to maximize localized
opportunities to deepen and extend their rights education work; (ii) better able to efficiently and
effectively respond to serious incidents requiring “first aid legal aid”; and (iii) potentially able to
gain access to sustaining resources for their work at least in the medium term (that is, under the
current government administration), such as a physical base for their practice or financial support to
cover operational expenses. Such “closeness” to a given barangay administration does not come
without its own risks, however; most obviously, if that official does not get reelected, there is a
possibility that such benefits will likely be lost (and transferred to someone else, for example).

Recognition by officials in relevant government agencies and units is likewise perceived as a
facilitating factor, despite potential pitfalls. An interesting distinction here can be made between
official and unofficial recognition. In one case, for instance, paralegals who must frequently interact
with local court employees and officials engage in what they call “alliance work” in order to
befriend them and win their respect, so that even without official recognition of their work as
paralegals, eventually they are given unofficial recognition as representatives of their organizations,
which in their experience serves them well. In other cases, more formal types of state recognition
are perceived as essential for their work, including: (i) official recognition relative to dispute
tribunals under the DAR and the DOLE, respectively; and (ii) official deputization by law
enforcement agencies such as the BFAR and the DENR for bantay gubat (community-based forest
guards) and bantay dagat (community-based coast guards). These forest or coast guards deputized
by the state agencies recognize the difficulty of law enforcement in very wide areas such as hard to
reach forests and expansive coastal areas in an archipelagic country such as the Philippines. The
informants expressed limited success in these areas, and more extensive cooperation between the
paralegals and government law enforcement agencies is required.

For other participants, more crucial (and more acceptable) than official state recognition is
unofficial but formal recognition in the form of identification cards issued by legal NGOs to those
they train as paralegals.


6.2 Hindering Circumstances
Low capacity and declining funding
Numerous factors were viewed as hindrances to the successful practice of paralegalism. One is the
low capacity of CSOs to absorb the public interest lawyers needed to anchor and guide paralegal
practice and programs, a problem linked to decreased funding for public interest law work in
general. In the Philippines, civil society organizations primarily provide the platform upon which
the public interest lawyers are able to do their work. Although there has been long-term donor
support in this area, many traditional sources of funding for both alternative law activism and
paralegal formation programs in the Philippines have been shifting away from such work.

This situation is further compounded by the lack of resources (time and money) devoted by legal
NGOs to paralegal monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems. M&E systems have been given a
low priority by legal NGO leaders and paralegal program funders alike, according to study
informants, who also cite limited resources as the reason for this (for example, given limited funds,

                                                                                                    16
priority should be given to training over M&E). There is a basic consensus as well that M&E is
unnecessary and a waste of time and resources. As one respondent said, “why devote time, effort,
and funds to monitoring and evaluation, when we already know that paralegal work contributes to
access to justice?” Since the paralegal work is not properly documented and evaluated, it becomes
harder for the NGOs to provide evidence to funders that such types of paralegal activities work and
are effective.

Corrupt or indifferent local officials
Another hindering factor is the phenomenon of erring local government officials, who, instead of
upholding and fulfilling state law, violate it. Seeing government officials violate the law has an
immediate “chilling” effect on paralegal work. This point was emphasized by an informant who
provides legal and paralegal support to impoverished and marginalized rural communities
struggling against local government-sanctioned large- and small-scale mining operations that have
been ravaging fragile ecosystems, livelihoods, and the health of local populations across a huge
area. Such scenes are replicated in remote communities across the Philippines and are thus not rare.

Paralegals commonly encounter local officials who are not aware of certain new provisions of the
law. For example, in the Fisheries Code, the local government is now in charge of declaring marine
protected areas for coastal management. Typically, the paralegals engage local governments and try
to convince them to enforce this new legislation for the common good. But when the local officials
themselves sanction illegal practices, such as unauthorized small scale mining, then the local
government officials become hindering factors.

Less dramatic but perhaps more common are local government officials who are “unsympathetic” to
a given cause in which paralegals have become active, even when the latter are “in the right” in
legal terms. One example is the case of farmers who were threatened by their former landowners
with dispossession despite possessing Certificate of Land Ownership Awards (CLOA) issued by the
national government under the agrarian reform program.

A related hindering factor is the lack of support in the communities for specific initiatives in
paralegalism. This point was raised especially by a group of women paralegals working at the
barangay level on issues of violence against women, who felt that their efforts were not supported
enough by the barangay officials. Despite the existence of a government policy mandating that 5
percent of the local government budget go toward financing gender and development work, such as
local anti-VAWC efforts, the barangay officials in these paralegals’ area of work had yet to release
any funds. Unwilling or unable to force local officials to release the money, the paralegals were able
to continue their work only by tapping into their own respective personal household finances.
Although this example points specifically to the gap between official policy on paper and realities
on the ground, it also may suggest a need to combine localized pressure politics with more “scaled-
up” advocacy, since it is likely a problem facing paralegals who are trying to “engender barangay
justice” elsewhere in the country.

Physical and legal threats
The phenomenon of “erring officials” reflects the partial and uneven way in which post-Marcos
democratization has proceeded below the national level. In many villages, it is still regional

                                                                                                   17
authoritarian elites, backed by private armies and commanding extensive patronage networks, who
determine which “law” rules in reality (see Franco 2008a, 2008b). This kind of setting is behind the
next factor seen as a major hindrance to paralegal work, namely, physical and legal harassment,
which arises especially in cases where paralegals are involved in struggles against a prevailing
status quo perceived as unjust, if not unlawful. Examples include: (i) cases where members of a
grassroots organization—including its paralegals—get slapped with criminal charges in the course
of trying to push forward the implementation of the government’s agrarian reform law; or (ii) cases
where bantay gubat face criminal charges after attempting to carry out their duties as government-
deputized forest guards by confiscating the profits of illegal logging activity. In cases such as these,
the filing of criminal charges by an entrenched power-holder who feels threatened is just one side of
the coin; the other side is the use of coercion and violence. 18 In some cases, the agents of such
violence are neither state actors nor corporate elites, but the anti-state New People’s Army (see
Borras and Franco 2005).

Skepticism of paralegals’ abilities
In a different vein, the paralegal movement has also been hindered by the persistence of a “lawyer-
centered” legal consciousness among ordinary citizens, including paralegals themselves, which
leads them to doubt their own capacity to study and practice law. Some paralegals interviewed for
the study framed the problem as: they are not lawyers but are dealing with the law, so they have to
be cautious, otherwise they might find themselves in an awkward position (“ma-alanganin”). A
lawyer-centered legal consciousness is prevalent among government officials as well. The strong
perception that it is only lawyers who can know and should practice law makes it difficult for
paralegals to gain effective recognition, whether formally or informally, even in venues where they
are officially recognized by law, such as the quasi-judicial labor tribunals. As one labor paralegal
said, “The [labor] arbiters look down on paralegals” (“Mababa ang pagtingin sa mga paralegal ng
mga arbiter”). Labor arbiters who “look down” on union and migrant labor paralegals sometimes
harass them by creating technical obstacles, such as asking for additional authorization from the
union or the union board. There is skepticism and suspicion of paralegals in the regular court system
also, as seen in the Supreme Court effort to limit the range of paralegal work and the prohibition
against the “unauthorized practice of law”—a decision issued in the context of an Access to Justice
Project funded by the European Union (see box 5 below).19

Weak grassroots organizations
Meanwhile, whereas strong (well-organized and active) grassroots or POs are seen as facilitating
community-based paralegal efforts, conversely, the absence of such grassroots efforts is seen as
creating social-political dynamics that can undermine paralegal work. This can be from a lack of
active involvement by the whole organization or community, to a lack of accountability and

18
   The long list of names of all those who have been killed—even just in the past five years—while trying to hold
powerful elites or companies accountable by mobilizing existing state law is proof of how real this threat is.
19
   The Access to Justice Project is a joint undertaking between the Government of the Philippines and the European
Union. The Financing Agreement was signed in August 2004. The implementing agency from the Philippine
Government was supposed to be the Supreme Court. However, in the decision cited below, the Supreme Court has ruled
that it was not the proper institution to handle the project, considering the separation of powers theory. In the course of
handing out the decision, they also made a comment on the role of paralegals in the information centers as contained in
the project design. The decision in full is available at:
http://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/rulesofcourt/2005/am_05_2_01_sc.htm

                                                                                                                       18
legitimacy on the part of the paralegal. When community organizing work and organizational
strengthening efforts are not sustained in conjunction with paralegal practice, problems can result.
For instance, in areas where labor unions are becoming weaker, there is increasing pressure on the
legal NGOs doing paralegal formation work to do some of the organizing work also, thereby
diverting attention and resources away from the paralegal formation work proper. On the agrarian
reform front, a similar problem is emerging, as it is increasingly difficult to find one partner who
can do the community organizing effort in conjunction with another partner doing the paralegal
formation work. Stalled progress on one front can impact negatively on the other, launching a
downward spiral that is difficult to stop or reverse.
                            Box 5. Supreme Court Position on Paralegals

           A.M. No. 05-2-01-SC dated Feb. 15, 2005
RE: SC PROJECT: ACCESS TO JUSTICE FOR THE POOR PROJECT
TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT OF PARALEGALS IN VARIOUS ASPECTS
OF THE PROJECT VIOLATES EXISTING JURISPRUDENCE

“It bears noting that the implementation of the Project relies heavily on
paralegals as an essential component of the Project. Necessarily, these
paralegals would engage in the practice of law which this Court in Cayetano
v. Monsod,[14] defined as "any activity, in or out of court, which requires
the   application    of   law,   legal  procedure,   knowledge,  training   and
experience."[15] But the use of paralegals may be improper since under
Philippine law, a person who has not been admitted as an attorney cannot
practice law for the proper administration of justice cannot be hindered by
the unwarranted intrusion of an unauthorized and unskilled person into the
practice of law.[16] As the OCAt (Office of the Court Attorney) astutely points
out:

The TAPS (Technical and Administrative Provisions) mentions the training of
paralegals that shall be fielded in the implementation of the Project.
Paralegals are not a common breed in this country. Although the Court has
supported approval by the Commission on Higher Education of the proposal of
the Manuel L. Quezon University to offer the course of Bachelor of Science in
Paralegals, such support is circumscribed by the requirement that the course
shall be a pre-law course. Authorizing the practice of paralegals in the
country is still being studied by the Committee on Legal Education and Bar
Matters because of the need to regulate their practice in much the same
way that the practice of the members of the Integrated Bar of the
Philippines   is   subject   to   the   Court's   rule-making   authority .[17]
Parenthetically, if the Project were to be properly implemented, the
participation of the IBP is necessary. (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)

Surprisingly, the PMO (Program Management Office) agrees with the assessment
of the OCAt, to wit:

This Office concurs with the position of the OCAT that the Committee on Legal
Education and Bar Matters (CLEBM) is still studying the prospect of
certifying   paralegals.   Taking   into   account   this   development,   the
utilization of the paralegals in the implementation of the Project
could be held in abeyance pending proper sanction from the CLEBM. We also
acknowledge that the participation of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines in
this Project is necessary. (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)”


                                                                                                 19
6.3 Selected Issues for Debate
In sorting through which factors facilitate and which hinder the emergence and growth of
paralegalism, two issues emerged as key points of difference, disagreement, and/or debate, and
therefore deserve special mention.

The first point has to do with the merits of linking paralegal work to local government unit
structures, particularly official barangay structures. Two groups participating in the study,
especially those addressing the rights and welfare of women or children (including migrant women
and their children), have adopted a strategy of forging such linkages, framed as “mainstreaming” by
one or “engendering” by another. This strategy was seen as logically flowing from the fact that
when the rights of women and children are violated, the first responders tend to be barangay
officials, who are traditionally and still oftentimes men and may not be sensitive or knowledgeable
in their handling of such cases. Paralegals armed with specialized training are therefore urgently
needed, both to intervene in cases arising on a day-to-day basis and also to help influence and
change the entrenched patriarchal culture that still largely determines local official response,
especially in cases of VAWC.

In some cases, paralegal formation is oriented to lead directly into official community-based law
enforcement structures (for example, bantay gubat, bantay dagat) that emerged as a result of new
environmental protection legislation. In the context of rampant violations of environmental
protection laws and the persistence of an array of illegal economic activities harmful to local
ecosystems, livelihoods, and community health, these new localized law enforcement structures
were viewed as opportunities that had to be seized by people in the affected communities.

Here, it might be noted that paralegal formation can also become bound up with “unofficial”
community-based law enforcement initiatives (such as “bantay CADT”20). Such initiatives can
emerge “from below” in a more spontaneous manner, often in response to those occasions when
violations of environmental law are ignored (or facilitated) by local state law enforcement agents.
The community-based initiatives thus operate in what might be called “the shadow of the law”
(following Galanter 1981), that is, they are socially acceptable forms of collective regulatory action
and may embody the spirit of the law, but they are not necessarily legitimate in a narrow formal-
legal sense.

Unsurprisingly, many respondents expressed concerns about linking (or linking too closely) with
local governments. This concern was expressed in several ways. Most common was the observation
that electoral politics can “make or break” one’s paralegal practice, depending on “whose side
you’re on” in an election. This is because in practice, local government structures themselves down
to the village level are closely tied to election-fueled patronage networks. Indeed, in the Philippines,
the capacity to engage with local government officials often has more to do with one’s political and
personal affiliations than the social relevance of the paralegal program; consequently, your strength
can also become your weakness if the network you are affiliated with loses in the next election.

20
  CADT stands for Certificate of Ancestral Domain Title, which is a tenurial instrument, a land title issued by the
government under the Indigenous People’s Right Act (IPRA) in order to secure the land rights of indigenous peoples.

                                                                                                                20
In sum, linking with local government units offer a lot of potential for paralegal work. The obvious
advantage is the cloak of authority that the local government can provide, especially when such
work (protecting women and children, environmental law enforcement) is within the remit of such
local authority. But together with this advantage also comes the limitations of working with such a
structure, such as the change in the local officialdom every three years, and the instability that this
can generate in the continuity of the work.

A second point of debate has to do with whether and how the state should intervene and be
involved in the certification and regulation of all paralegals. This is an especially thorny issue that
touches upon core elements of community-based paralegalism. Arguments in favor of state
intervention through certification and regulation include: (i) the legitimizing effects that state
certification can have on the activities and efforts of paralegals, especially when facing resistance
from local elites; and (ii) the salutary effects that state regulation can have on paralegal practice
through the setting of performance standards. Here, state intervention is seen as a potential
safeguard against poor quality or corrupt practices. Arguments against state intervention include: (i)
that it can also be used to filter out perceived “undesirables” based on social or political biases; and
(ii) that it can end up filtering out the very kinds of people (for example, from the poor and
marginalized groups) that community-based paralegalism tries to tap and mobilize. As an
alternative, some respondents suggest either relying on CSO-led certification and regulation, or
coursing state intervention through the governmental Commission on Human Rights.

7. The Work of Paralegals: Three Dimensions
The conventional notion of a paralegal in the context of Western legal practice is as an assistant to a
lawyer. Even the initial discourse of Diokno on the role of the paralegal carries that sense of saving
time for human rights lawyers to do more of the “creative aspects of their job” (see box 2 above).
But since then, in the context of developmental legal practice in contemporary times, the work that
community paralegals have undertaken and continue to undertake have encompassed and moved
beyond these traditional notions. The work of a paralegal today can be categorized along three
dimensions: a) building rights awareness; b) settling private disputes; and c) increasing state and
corporate accountability.


7.1 Building Rights Awareness
The most elemental task of paralegals is building awareness of the rights of the poor and other
marginalized groups. The term “rights” is understood in a multi-faceted fashion. Prior to 1986,
internationally accepted human rights standards were invoked in the Philippines to counteract the
restrictive and oppressive rules laid down by the martial law regime (for example, the issue of arrest
search and seizure orders [ASSO] used against those identified as “enemies of the state”). After
1986, in the context of struggles for democratization and democratic deepening, rights awareness
work could now cite the new Constitution and various new laws (or their progressive provisions and
elements) that ongoing social pressure helped to shape. Campaigns to make “ordinary people” more
aware of their human and legal rights now increasingly include a new dimension as well: struggles
to use state law to claim and enforce rights. Paralegal training today makes a clear distinction
between legal literacy (know your rights) and skills training (taking action to enforce and
                                                                                                     21
implement your rights). A typical training for paralegals would include: (i) a “situationer” on the
specific sector (or population) of concern (for example, the national and local situation on the state
of indigenous peoples); (ii) the human rights and legal rights pertinent to that sector; (iii) and the
skills that may be needed in order to enforce those rights (see Annex A).

The martial law era modules on paralegal training typically contained skills building on how to
preserve evidence, how to make an affidavit based on what one has personally witnessed (very
useful when someone has been arrested by the military, for example), and which government
agencies to approach in cases of human rights violations. Today, with the various arenas that new
legislation has opened to public interest lawyers and paralegals, this aspect of training is more
elaborate. Below is a sampling of the various “how to” elements (such as skills) taught in paralegal
training programs today:
      How to secure a protection order from the village chieftain based on a complaint of a
       woman who has been abused by the husband;
      How to make a citizen’s arrest of fishermen who have been caught involved in dynamite or
       cyanide fishing;
      How to lobby the LGUs (specifically the municipal government) to declare a certain body of
       water as a protected area;
      How to follow through with the government for the issuance of agrarian reform land titles,
       from the identification of the beneficiaries and the valuation of the property to the final
       issuance of title;
      How to represent farmers or workers in the agrarian or labor tribunals, respectively, and
       argue their case to its successful conclusion; and
      How to lobby and advocate for a change in the laws and regulations at the national and local
       government levels.

The increased awareness of community groups and their ability to act on such awareness was noted
in an evaluative study done by the Filipino NGO Social Weather Stations:

       Knowledge of the Law. In the battery of knowledge questions, generally, more
       survey respondents in the ALG target areas got the correct answers to the questions
       ranging from general concept of rights, to specific provisions on sectoral issues, such
       as the women’s rights, environment, labor and people living with HIV/AIDS….

       Ability to Translate Knowledge to Action. There is a marked difference between
       the ability of the ALG partners and non-ALG partners to assess and act on a legal
       problem. The ALG partners say they are fairly knowledgeable, and find it not too
       difficult to act. This is likely a result of education campaigns and paralegal trainings;
       paralegals and trainees score even higher... (SWS 2008)

Yet although important, this first dimension of work can achieve only so much on its own, since
even if paralegals are well armed with rights awareness and legal skills knowledge, access to justice
often remains problematic. Experience suggests that gaining knowledge does not automatically lead

                                                                                                   22
to success; as one informant put it, “paralegal knowledge is very useful, but implementation is the
problem.” Among the informants there was a perception too that increased rights awareness and
paralegal skills can lead to frustration and inaction in the absence of successful outcomes, especially
the more one’s understanding grows of how conflicts actually get processed. As one of our
respondents said: “paralegal training is great in terms of legal literacy, but doesn’t help much in
achieving real results in actuality because it all gets derailed in the process; government agencies
that ought to implement don’t, and citizens feel that they are the ones who have to implement.” As
this shows, many political factors are perceived as beyond the control of paralegals, no matter how
well trained. The skills training part of paralegal instruction and formation today does emphasize
the need for collective action on the part of citizens in the enforcement of rights and the
implementation of programs, but in the end, what matters to the affected people are the results of
any legal-metalegal action. Any attempt to look more closely at whether, when, and how
paralegalism is actually effective in expanding access to justice would thus have to delve into the
relationship between legal and metalegal action.

Meanwhile, paralegal formation efforts, including the rights awareness-building aspect, can lead to
important but unexpectedly finite results. For example, with regard to paralegal work on the
agrarian reform front, one of our respondents pointed out that in her experience, once the land title
is issued by the DAR, there is a tendency for the community-based paralegal, who, as a member of
a farmers organization is likewise a beneficiary of the agrarian reform program, to become inactive
since the most immediate outcome of the farmers’ campaign has been achieved. In the Philippines,
land reform campaigns take more effort and time than is usually anticipated, exhausting the
members of the farmers organizations and their resources in the process, thus giving rise to a kind
of “battle fatigue.” When the struggle for the land has been finally “won,” there may be a tendency
for the farmers organizations and their paralegals to demobilize to focus on more immediate
household level concerns, even if the next immediate challenge (such as to make the land
productive) or subsequent other challenges (such as to put a stop to illegal fishing, if the agrarian
reform community is also partly a fishing village, for instance) remain. Some advocates argue that
this kind of situation requires creative interaction between the paralegal, the community organizers,
and the legal NGO workers supporting the paralegals to devise sustaining strategies for the
continued involvement of paralegals in the area. Others would say that it is up to the organizations’
leaders and members to determine the next moves and whether or how paralegal work might fit in.


7.2 Settling Private Disputes
A second area of work is the settling of private disputes. In the Philippine context, the settlement of
private disputes is not a high priority for the kind of paralegals studied here. Because paralegalism
in the Philippines historically has been tied to social change-oriented, social movement actors, it
tends to address issues affecting traditionally marginalized segments of the population (such as
farmers, fisher folk, women, indigenous communities, political detainees, and so forth), or broad
public interest issues that can affect the entire population or an entire community (including
environmental issues such as clean air and water and other pollution concerns, illegal logging and
dynamite fishing, and so on). This is not to say that Filipino paralegals are not involved in settling
private disputes at all, as they are in fact. For instance, one participant explained that due to his
reputation as a paralegal and labor leader, he is often asked by people in his neighborhood, which is
also home to many other members of his labor union, to mediate family disputes.

                                                                                                    23
One factor that competes with paralegal intervention in private dispute settlement is the presence of
formal and informal structures of mediation at the community level, which rely on customary
methods of conciliation. Notable here is the barangay justice system (BJS) (katarungang
pambarangay), which was introduced during the Marcos dictatorship in 1978 as a compulsory
venue for certain kinds of disputes, and was later reiterated in the Local Government Code of
1991.21 The BJS has reported an uptake of over 6 million cases from 1980 to 2008, of which 79
percent were settled, 6 percent went to the courts, and the rest had varied outcomes. 22

Many observers agree that the BJS has some advantages over the regular courts as a venue for
dispute processing and that it is gaining acceptance as a dispute-resolution forum. But there are also
concerns about the “double-edged” nature of the “traditions” upon which BJS is based—especially
clientelist politics and gender bias (see Golub 2003). In many remote rural villages and indigenous
communities, village leaders often serve as conduits for mediation and conciliation even in criminal
matters such as murder and rape (Franco 2008b). One problem here may be competing ideas of
what constitutes a just outcome in such cases; another underlying problem is power. As Nader
(2001, 22) has put it: “If there is any single generalization that has ensued from the anthropological
research on disputing processes…it is that mediation and negotiation require conditions of relatively
equal power.” In the Philippines, as elsewhere, such conditions may hold sometimes, but certainly
not always.

Another factor that can dampen demand for paralegal services is the parallel phenomenon, cited
earlier, of the “privatization of paralegal services” through an abogadillo. A Spanish term that
literally means a “small lawyer,” it is also used pejoratively to refer to persons who claim to be
knowledgeable in the law and charge money for their services (often unreasonable amounts), but
who produce outcomes that may or may not be legitimate. Sometimes, paralegal trainees who are
the products of NGO-led paralegal formation programs end up breaking away from their base
organizations to go into “practice” on their own. To illustrate, one of the paralegals from Quezon
province cited an incident where an abogadillo was charging 5,000 pesos (roughly US$120) to
secure an order from the DAR that is in fact a public document and available free of charge. This
phenomenon has caused concern within the alternative law movement because of the perceived lack
of accountability and quality control, although there are few actual reports of this type of problem to
date.

Meanwhile, what constitutes a “private dispute” may itself be a shifting, socially constructed
category determined in part by the historical-institutional context and in part by the perceptions and
interpretations of any number of parties. For example, some respondents identified the following as
qualifying as private dispute settlement: (i) mediating farmer-to-farmer disputes over allocation of
land within a certain estate or landholding; (ii) mediating land disputes using indigenous customary
law systems in tribal communities; or (iii) settling family disputes between spouses and children in
urban poor communities. However, at different moments and under different political conditions,
each of these issues could also be conceived not as strictly private disputes, but rather as disputes

21
   An excellent brief on the barangay justice system can be found on the website of Restorative Justice Online at
http://www.restorativejustice.org/editions/2004/June/traditional.
22
   See http://baseswiki.org/en/Barangay_Justice_System_%28BJS%29,_Philippines.


                                                                                                              24
that can and perhaps should be addressed as a matter of public interest as well, especially in light of
the relatively new laws governing land property rights and relations and violence against women
and children, for example.

Finally, some respondents from the judicial sector highlighted a need to attend to the more
commonplace legal concerns of the relatively unorganized poor, especially in far-flung
communities. Because public interest law NGOs focus on relatively organized groups and the
Public Attorney’s Offices (an adjunct of the Department of Justice [DOJ]) focus on indigent
litigants, this leaves a gap in addressing the legal needs of the unorganized poor.23 One trial court
judge in a poor municipality in Mindanao said that she often found herself having to advise poor
litigants on their legal rights and responsibilities. The unorganized poor usually have little or no
access to legal services in cases such as death benefits claims, discrepancies in the records of birth,
marriage, or death, and issues of registration during election time, among other matters. One top
official of the DOJ recalls participating in joint legal and medical missions in rural poor villages
where the queues for those seeking legal assistance were longer than for those seeking medical
assistance, indicating to him, rather unexpectedly, a real unmet need for basic legal services.


7.3 Increasing State and Corporate Accountability
State accountability
Increasing awareness of human and legal rights is intertwined with a third dimension of paralegal
work hinging on a human rights law framework. In this framework, the state is the primary “duty
bearer” in relation to citizens as “rights-holders,” especially those who are poor, disadvantaged, and
marginalized. Since states have the moral and legal responsibility to protect, defend, and fulfill the
human rights of their citizens, much paralegal practice in the Philippines today revolves around
working to increase state accountability, especially to poor and marginalized citizens in this sense.

Some of this state accountability work is international in character and involves mobilizing to push
the Philippine government to carry out its obligations under international human rights law to
protect, defend, and fulfill the human rights of its citizens. A good example is the rape case of
Karen Vertido, which was brought to the attention of the Committee for the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) of the United Nations in 2007 and decided in July
2010.24 In this case, CEDAW found that the trial court in the Philippines fell short of adhering to
human rights principles when it dismissed the case in 1996, and recommended that the Philippine
government provide “appropriate compensation commensurate with the gravity of the violations of
her rights.”25 The decision also recommended that the government adopt structural changes in order
to prevent rape and to improve the handling of rape cases.

23
   Indigent litigants can be characterized as poor people who are able to approach the legal aid system and provide
information regarding their status in order to pass the “means test” usually adopted by legal aid agencies of the
government. The unorganized poor are the ultra poor who do not even have the means to access legal aid offices due to
extreme poverty or ignorance.
24
   Under the Optional Protocol to CEDAW, a decision of a local court could be reviewed by CEDAW if the decision
fails to conform to internationally accepted principles protecting the rights of women. The case was originally brought
to the attention of CEDAW by the Women’s Legal Bureau, a member organization of the ALG.
25
   The full story of this case is available at:
 http://www.gmanews.tv/story/201848/un-womens-committee-faults-rp-for-junking-rape-case.

                                                                                                                    25
By contrast, some of the state accountability work that Filipino paralegals are involved in is more
national in character, revolving around the passage and meaningful implementation of national laws
and associated policies and programs (for example, the various national laws on agrarian reform and
the rights of workers, women, children, migrants, indigenous peoples, and so on). In some cases,
this can mean calling attention to situations in which state actors and agents of state law are
involved as rights violators, such as when local officials are engaged in illegal economic activities,
or the police or military units are involved in illegal detention and “salvaging,”26 to name a few
examples. Some of the legal tools that paralegals work with include the writ of amparo, the writ of
kalikasan, and barangay protection orders,27 which are intended to protect a specific woman against
domestic violence.

A good example here is the now 20-year struggle to implement the government’s agrarian reform
law and program. The first landmark legislation, the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law
(CARL), was passed in 1988. Comprehensive land reform was mandated to take place within 10
years, and soon after the law was passed, public interest lawyers and paralegals joined other rural
reform activists as well as a broad coalition of peasant movements to work for its implementation.
Intense social pressure from below was combined with pro-reform efforts from within the DAR to
distribute a significant amount of land and provide support services to many farmers (see Borras
1999). Further mobilizations of social pressure served to ensure that the law was extended in 1998
for another 10 years, and in 2008, another intensive campaign succeeded in securing a further
extension of the program, this time from 2009 to 2014, or a period of five years. The work of
paralegals was instrumental in providing the much-needed evidence of the weaknesses and
shortcomings of the law as crafted. For example, landowners in the coconut-producing areas used
criminal statutes in order to circumvent the intent of the law, and this practice was corrected in
subsequent legislation. This long-standing national-level struggle for the launch and continuation of
a state-led agrarian reform program and legislation can be seen as an example of paralegal
involvement in larger efforts to hold the state accountable for promises made in the constitution.

Finally, some state measures can be implemented only at the local level. For example, the
declaration of marine protected areas for the regeneration of coral reefs and fish stock can be done
only at the level of the municipality. Environmental NGOs and their paralegals must lobby at the
local level for this safeguard, and the same is true with law enforcement in the form of bantay gubat
and bantay dagat, a community-based type of paralegal mentioned earlier. Paralegals play a role in
efforts to hold local officials accountable through various means, such as monitoring the utilization
of the local budgets, attending the meetings of local special bodies, (local development councils,
peace and order councils, and so on), and if needed, filing cases with national government heads, or
the ombudsman in cases of graft and corruption or malversation. Some of our respondents report
that in instances where local DENR officials are known to be involved in illegal logging, cases have
to be filed with the courts in order to hold them accountable for their misdeeds. As this suggests,
working to increase state accountability at the local level is a double-edged sword for many
paralegals. Sympathetic local government officials can be allies in the fight against poverty and

26
  “Salvaging” is a colloquial term in the Philippines which means extrajudicial killing or execution.
27
  The writ of amparo and the writ of kalikasan are explained in section 4.2. A barangay protection order is a preventive
order issued by the village chieftain in order to protect a woman from acts of violence, usually by the husband. This
order is authorized under the VAWC law.

                                                                                                                     26
lawlessness, but they can also be the worst of enemies if they themselves are involved in corrupt
practices in their locality. Many paralegals end up adopting a strategy of “critical collaboration”; as
one informant put it, “when we need to fight, we fight; when we can be friends, we are friends, but
in the majority of our areas, the local governments still need to be oriented.” Concretely, this means
that the local officials have to be won over to the side of the paralegals, provided with the legal
basis for their action, and a program for collaborative implementation has to be established with the
consent of such officials.

Corporate accountability
Finally, paralegals are also involved in efforts to increase corporate accountability. Here the work
ranges from documenting violations and gathering evidence, to persuading victims to pursue and
sustain cases, to trying to activate relevant and appropriate state bodies and agencies to mobilize
and decide in favor of the groups and communities harmed by corporate activities. A good example
of a major campaign in which ALG-supported paralegals have been involved is the ongoing effort
to ban aerial spraying of pesticides in commercial banana plantations around Davao City. Not only
has the effort received broad public support, but also the support of the Davao City local
government. Another example is the problem of pollution through mine tailings, where some of the
study’s paralegal respondents have been active in gathering evidence (water samples) for
examination for the presence of pollutants, in preparation for filing complaints with the DENR and
its pollution adjudication board.

There are in fact numerous examples of paralegal involvement in efforts to hold large corporate
entities (both foreign and domestic) accountable for either civil and political rights violations and/or
social and environmental harms caused by their activities, especially mining, logging, fishing, and
commercial farming, but also including illegal recruitment of migrant workers, unfair labor
practices, and human trafficking. Many of the informants for this study have once been or currently
are still involved in such struggles. Perhaps in part because of the difficult and sensitive nature of
participating in challenges to the power of economic elites, who are often supported by powerful
political elites, most participants referred to the cases in general terms and without mentioning
details. Experience suggests, however, that securing accountability from corporate entities is
especially difficult in the context of big power imbalances both inside and outside relevant state
dispute-processing structures.

Some of the key problems and challenges for paralegal engagement on this dimension include:
“window-dressing”-type official local decision-making and oversight bodies, and weak state
regulatory and law enforcement functions. Even in the example of the campaign against aerial
spraying (mentioned above), and despite solid support from local government, the legal case has
been stymied in the courts, and as of this writing, there has been no final and enforceable ruling on
the issue. More frequently, paralegals have to contend with uncooperative local government
officials, corrupt regulatory offices, and armed resistance directed against those who try to expose
and oppose their activities. As one of the paralegal informants said: “The problem is
implementation at the ground level. The paralegals work hard to gather evidence, follow the law,
policies, procedures etc. But the problem is in the difference between what is said at higher levels
and what actually happens when you get to where we live.”



                                                                                                     27
8. Conclusion
The paralegal movement in the Philippines is dynamic and deeply embedded in an evolving
socioeconomic and political-legal landscape. Paralegal practice was born out of the need for social
mobilization of the poor and marginalized to creatively engage the state in favor of the defense and
protection of their human and legal rights. Its diversity in application is partly attributable to the
country’s fragmented legal system, with its various segmented channels of legal entitlement,
fragmented approach to dispensing justice, and multiple levels of dispute resolution. Some organs
of the state have expressly recognized paralegals, including community-based paralegals, while
others maintain that paralegals have to be constrained and regulated to ensure that they do not
encroach upon the “real” practice of law. Despite this official skepticism and suspicion toward
community-oriented paralegals, they remain a key part of the Philippines’ social movement terrain,
embedded in or tied to various types of grassroots organizations and supported by alternative law-
oriented civil society groups, as well as in local government structures and some line agencies of the
government.

The very notion of community-based paralegals is based on the hypothesis that they are an
important positive factor in struggles for social justice. Therefore, whether or to what extent they
actually fulfill this expectation in a given society is an important but complex empirical question.
As explained at the outset of this paper, the present study aimed more modestly to explore and
examine the actually existing landscape of paralegalism in the Philippines, rather than to assess the
actual impact of paralegal practice on access to justice. In leaving the systematic tracing of the
outcomes and impacts of community paralegals for future study, some key issues are laid out here
for consideration.


8.1. Issues for Consideration
Accountability and sustainability: locating paralegals in CSOs and LGUs
In theory, paralegals embedded especially within grassroots membership organizations are subject
to internal mechanisms (formal and informal) that may allow organizational members to hold them
accountable. Within legal NGOs, the system of accountability, mentoring, follow-up, and quality
control may be quite robust. But civil society groups, and grassroots membership organizations
especially, are often poorly financed, and it is an ongoing challenge to sustain them over time.
Meanwhile, paralegal operations that are mainstreamed within LGUs—as in the case of VAWC
committees within the barangay, or bantay dagat or bantay gubat members coming from the POs
who are deputized by the local government—may gain an advantage in terms of sustainability, at
least in the medium term. For example, the VAWC committees may receive some logistical support
as well as office space within the barangay hall. However, the paralegal risks becoming primarily
accountable to the local government official who supervises his or her work, such as the barangay
captain in the case of the VAWC committees, rather than to the disadvantaged population they aim
to serve. In this way, they remain vulnerable to the vagaries of patronage politics and three-year
electoral cycles, and to the rent-seeking activities of some local officials. If the local government is
supportive of paralegals’ social justice efforts, this augurs well for a continuation of their work; if
the political situation changes, their work could be severely compromised.


                                                                                                     28
Recognition and certification of paralegals by the state
Another sensitive issue is the relationship of the paralegal to the state. One extreme position is that
of the Supreme Court, which states that paralegals by definition are engaged in the practice of law,
and therefore it is improper for them to participate in the Access to Justice Project, since the
practice of law is limited to court-accredited attorneys. A middle ground of sorts is the practice of
some quasi-judicial agencies to allow paralegals to appear on behalf of their fellow farmers or
workers. This practice has provided a state-sanctioned venue where the paralegals can practice their
craft, and a built-in structure for developing their knowledge and skills in this area. On the other
extreme are paralegals who are beyond the shadow of the law, so to speak, who operate below the
“legal radar” within the confines of their respective organizations but who also provide essential
services to their constituents, in spite of any formal recognition from the state. In the 2006 National
Paralegal Conference hosted by the ALG, the 100 or so paralegal participants passed a resolution
that they brought to the attention of the Court:

       Formal recognition on the role of paralegals by the courts and quasi-judicial
       agencies. Given the quantity of cases that we face and the lack of alternative
       lawyers that are willing to assist us, it is due time that the Supreme Court
       recognize our knowledge, skills, and capacity to represent ourselves and
       our organizations and communities. ALG 2006

The sentiment expressed by the participants echoes the continuing problem of the shortage of public
interest lawyers who defend the poor and marginalized in various tribunals, and hence the need for
paralegals to act on their own, learn the law, and represent themselves. How this recognition will
take place, however, is still a subject of discussion among public interest lawyers. If the state is the
accrediting mechanism, which organ of the state should play this role? Should it be the Supreme
Court or the specialized agencies of government like the DAR or the National Labor Relations
Commission (NLRC). There is a genuine concern that even as some may pass, the accreditation
process could be used to weed out the “dissenters” and the “troublemakers,” making such a process
discriminatory. The proponents of accreditation who participated in the study (mostly from the
government sector) also talked about the need for certain standards, such as educational
qualifications. But the fear is that disadvantaged groups may be further marginalized and that an
elite group of paralegals may be created who will not have any organic connection to their
constituencies over the long run. Should there be just one type of recognition, a “one-size-fits-all”
approach? Some participants in the validation workshop argued that paralegals engaged in the
enforcement of environmental laws, for example, should undergo a more stringent type of
“accreditation” or “deputization,” as opposed to those whose work is more about building
awareness on human and legal rights.

Monitoring and evaluation of the impact of paralegals
Despite the long history of paralegalism in the country, there has been little done to measure the
impact of such efforts on access to justice. The possible exception to this general statement is the
evaluative study done by the Social Weather Stations (SWS 2008). The NGOs interviewed do not
routinely track the outcome of the cases that have been handled by the paralegals to determine
whether they have succeeded or to analyze what kinds of impacts they have made on the
communities they serve. There has also been little done to track systematically the status of the

                                                                                                     29
many paralegals who have been trained over the years—that is, where are they now, are they still
active, how have they maintained their interest, and why did some of them become inactive. These
are some of the issues that would be useful to know in order to improve the implementation of the
paralegal programs. Monitoring and evaluation systems for paralegals do not seem a priority in light
of the seemingly more urgent concerns of training paralegals and immediately making them work
on issues facing the community. The issue of scarce resources definitely comes into play, as limited
funds are used more for training and actual dispute resolution rather than for trying to monitor the
outcomes of these efforts. This issue merits serious consideration. The paralegal movement cannot
simply rely over the long haul on a presumption that paralegalism contributes to increased access to
justice. Although this may seem obvious, more rigorous and systematic inquiry is needed to
determine empirically the actual impact(s) of community-based paralegals on the lives of the poor.

Funding as a sustaining mechanism
A few respondents emphasized that there are many law students who have demonstrated their
ability and commitment to take up a public interest law career, but that there are too few “takers” of
fresh law graduates among the public interest law NGOs. The anemic “uptake” of recent law
graduates by CSOs, due mainly to inadequate funds for sustaining public interest lawyers, has an
impact on the quality of the training, maintenance, and monitoring of community-based paralegals.
Many informants have highlighted the problem of inadequate funding for alternative lawyering as a
problem for sustained paralegal formation and operation.

Looking at paralegals in the long term
Aside from the institutional problem of financial sustainability, community-based paralegals face
enormous obstacles in trying to work out legal assistance schemes at the grassroots, in the context
of increased legislation and rights, as well as increased rights consciousness but weak
implementation. This can be a problem especially in areas far from the reach of the central
government and the national and independent media. In such settings, an inability or delay in
making progress in paralegal work in specific cases can be seen as a failure to achieve success and a
failure of the paralegal strategy in general. The cumulative effects can be demoralization,
demobilization, or a turn toward violence. Meanwhile, poverty and impunity can make
communities, grassroots organizations, and their paralegals vulnerable to adverse incorporation into
the very kinds of illegal or destructive economic activities that they hope to stop. For example, they
can become vulnerable to the initial enticements of mining or logging companies (in the form of
local support and assistance) or to the immediate relief offered through clientelist relationships with
elites, where they give up their civil and political rights and freedoms in exchange for access to
social and economic benefits. In the Philippines, such responses to a very difficult situation can
undermine paralegal formation, practice, and strategy.

Special issues for women and children
As more and more paralegals become engaged in work with women and children, this sector
requires a deeper understanding of the dynamics involved in order to make the work of the
paralegal more effective. Experience shows that women who suffer domestic violence, for example,
including rape, are unlikely to challenge their attacker without strong support from the community,
and as a result, paralegals may need to engage in organizing such support as well. This could take
the form of community forums on violence against women, the rights and remedies available to

                                                                                                    30
women, and so on. Another area that warrants close scrutiny is whether and to what extent
patriarchy can interpret cases of violence against women as “petty” disputes, and push such cases
into the village justice system for mediation by village leaders. While the BJS is not mandated to
handle criminal cases in the first place, once there, appropriate and just outcomes for women cannot
be guaranteed, and women may be forced to settle for unjust and disadvantageous results. Hence,
public law work may need to give extra focus to “engendering” LGUs, most especially the people
who are implementing the barangay justice procedures.


8.2 Recommendations
In spite of the challenges and obstacles, the paralegal movement in the Philippines will continue to
be buoyed by factors and circumstances that heighten the urgent need of ordinary people at the
grassroots to know the law and their rights and how these can be protected and promoted. Given the
unlikelihood that the number of public interest lawyers will increase substantially in the future, the
need for paralegals to reach out to the poorest of the poor will continue to exist. The legal
opportunities created by new legislation will also continue to make paralegal services relevant in
communities suffering from various kinds and degrees of social injustice. This paper concludes with
a number of recommendations for CSOs (including legal service NGOs) and state actors concerned
about and involved in struggles for social justice and justice reform.

   1) Locating the accountability of paralegals remains a key issue for the future. The
      ramifications of mainstreaming paralegals in LGUs must be carefully examined, especially
      its effects on both accountability and sustainability. For paralegals embedded in CSOs,
      accountability mechanisms must also be reviewed and strengthened to safeguard against the
      phenomenon of abogadillos.

   2) The recognition of paralegals by the state is also an important area for further study and
      critical review. Where such recognition is deemed necessary, care should be taken that the
      standards imposed do not serve as a filtering or excluding mechanism, which would
      undermine the vibrancy and dynamism of the paralegal and alternative law movement. State
      recognition need not adopt a “one-size-fits-all” approach; instead, various paralegal roles
      (for example, deputization of fishermen engaged in law enforcement) may merit more
      stringent accreditation measures than others.

   3) CSOs should take a closer look at monitoring and evaluation schemes for paralegals in the
      future. These systems could be highly instructive for internal strengthening purposes, and
      also serve as a benchmark for future funding.

   4) The justice concerns and legal needs of remote communities should be looked into more
      closely by the state and in any justice reform programming. Among other responses, a state-
      led paralegal program should be considered, in conjunction with the public attorney’s
      program and the BJS. However, a state-led paralegal program should not be taken as the
      only solution to the justice concerns and legal needs of the poor and marginalized. Any
      state-led justice reform initiatives must address their justice concerns and legal needs, and
      paralegals can play a key role in deepening understanding toward more relevant solutions.


                                                                                                   31
   5) The government as well as the donor community should put more emphasis on the funding
      of paralegal programs as good value for money in the crusade to improve access to justice
      by the poor. Partnerships between committed public interest lawyers and community-based
      or oriented paralegals may be one (but not the only) key to improving access to justice, and
      at the same time, maintaining an optimal use of scarce resources.


8.3 Concluding Remarks
This study has taken a historical perspective on the work of paralegals in the Philippines. It has also
examined the institutional constraints and opportunities that hinder or allow paralegals to do their
work productively. The paper concludes by going back to the paralegals themselves, who were
asked what it takes to be a paralegal. Numerous interesting responses from various key informants
have been collated. It is hoped that this collection of responses usefully illustrates the motivations
and goals of those who opt to become paralegals in the Philippines today (see box 6).



                                     Box 6. Who Can Be a Paralegal?


              ANYBODY CAN BE A PARALEGAL IF...

                     One will take time to know and study the law (student paralegal)

                     One has inner strength and believes in one’s ability (farmer leader and
                      paralegal)

                     One has a deep understanding and knowledge of the culture and lifeways of
                      the indigenous peoples (indigenous peoples’ leader and paralegal)

                     One has a strong love and reverence for the sea and the environment
                      (community-based coast guard volunteers)

                     One has a strong sense of service and not expecting anything in return (labor
                      leader and paralegal)

                     One has the courage to defend the rights of the people (environmental
                      paralegal)

                     One has a balanced perspective on the problems and legal rights (labor
                      leader and paralegal)

                     One could open their eyes, their ears and their minds (student paralegal)

              [These quotes have been selected from the responses of informants in the focus group
              discussions in various places.]




                                                                                                      32
Annex A. Anatomy of a Typical Paralegal Training
PART 1
 Module 1
            Overview of the Human Rights Situation (sector/issue) in the Country
            (region/area/community)

 Module 2   Basic Human Rights

            Universal Declaration of Human Rights

            If applicable with special attention/focus to:
            Convention of the Rights of a Child (UNCRC)
            Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women
            (CEDAW)
            United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP)

 Module 3   Developmental Legal Framework
 Module 4   The Philippine Legal System
PART 2
 Module 5   Issue or Sector Specific Relevant Laws

            Agrarian Reform:
            RA 9700 CARP Extension with Reforms
            MC 15 s2004 Affirming Role of Farmer Paralegal

            Children:
            RA 9344 Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006
            RA 7610 Special Protection of Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and
            Discrimination Act

            Environment:
            PD 705 Forestry Code
            RA 8550 Fisheries Code
            RA 7586 National Integrated Protected Areas System
            RA 9003 Ecological Solid Waste Management Act
            RA 8749 Clean Air Act


            Human Rights Violations:
            Revised Penal Code
            Writ of Amparo
            Writ of Habeas Data
            RA9745 Anti-Torture Law


                                                                                         33
            Indigenous Peoples:
            RA 8371 Indigenous Peoples Rights Act

            Labor:
            PD 442 As Amended LABOR CODE
            RULE1BOOKV Labor Relations
            ART. 279 Security of tenure

            Women:
            RA8353 The Anti Rape Law of 1997
            RA9262 Violence Against Women & Their Children Act
            RA9710 Magna Carta of Women

PART 3
 Module 5   Basic Legal Forms
 Module 6   Evidence Gathering and/or
            Arrest, Search, Seizure, and Detention
 Module 7
            Introduction to Philippine Court System/Procedural Laws

 Module 8
            Metalegal Remedies




                                                                      34
Annex B. List of Organizations Participating in the Study

Ateneo Human Rights Center
Ateneo Professional Schools Building, 20 Rockwell Drive,
Rockwell Center, 1200, Makati City

Balay Alternative Legal Advocates for Development in Mindanaw
(BALAOD-Mindanaw)
2nd Floor, Belsar Bldg, Brgy. 19, Capistrano-Del Pilar Sts.,
9000 Cagayan de Oro City

Children’s Legal Bureau
No. 10 Queen’s Road, Caputhaw, 6000, Cebu City

Environmental Legal AssistanceCenter, Inc.
Carlos Sayang Compound, Mitra Road, Sta. Monica Puerto Princesa, Palawan

Free Legal Assistance Group
Alumni Center, University of the Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City

KAISAHAN Tungo sa Kaunlaran ng Kanayunan at Repormang Pansakahan
No.3 Mahabagin St., Teacher’s Village West, Diliman, Quezon City

Kanlungan Center Foundation, Inc.
KANLUNGAN
No. 77-K 10th St., Kamias, 1102 Quezon City

Tanggapang Panligal ng Katutubong Pilipino PANLIPI
Unit 303 JGS Bldg., #30 Scout Tuazon cor. Dr. Lascano
Brgy. Laging Handa, Quezon City

RIGHTSNET
79C Bignay St. , Brgy. Quirino 2A, Project 2, Quezon City

Sentrong Alternatibong Lingap Panligal SALIGAN
G/F Cardinal Hoffner Building, Social Development Complex,
Ateneo de Manila University, Loyola Heights Quezon City

Tanggkol Kalikasan
Room M-01, CRM Building III, 106 Kamias Road,
1102 Quezon City




                                                                           35
Womens’ Legal Bureau
Room 305, CSWCD Building, Magsaysay Avenue,
U.P. Diliman, Quezon City

Program Management Office
Supreme Court of the Philippines
7th Floor, Centennial Building, Padre Faura St., Manila

Department of Justice
Padre Faura St., Manila

Public Attorney’s Office
4th Floor DOJ Agencies Building, NIA Road cor. EDSA, Quezon City

Integrated Bar of the Philippines
IBP Building, Julia Vargas St., Ortigas Center,
Pasig City

The Asia Foundation
36 Lapu Lapu St. Magallanes Village, Makati, Metro Manila




                                                                   36
References
ALG National Paralegal Conference 2006. Statement to the Supreme Court. Quezon City, page 2

Borras Jr, Saturnino M. 1999. “The Bibingka Strategy in Land Reform Implementation.” Quezon
       City, Institute for Popular Democracy.

Borras Jr, Saturnino M., and Jennifer C. Franco. 2005. “Struggles for Land and Livelihood:
       Redistributive Reform in Agribusiness Plantations in the Philippines.” Critical Asian Studies
       37 (3): 331–61.

Crippen, Harlan R. 1946. “Philippine Agrarian Unrest: Historical Backgrounds.” Science & Society
       10 (4): 337–60.

Diokno, Jose W. 1982. “Developmental Legal Aid in Rural ASEAN: Problems and Prospects.” In
      “Rural Development and Human Rights in South East Asia,” 178–81. International
      Commission of Jurists and Consumers Association of Penang, Penang, Malaysia.

Franco, Jennifer C. 2001. Elections and Democratization in the Philippines. London: Routledge.

———. 2008a. “Making Land Rights Accessible: Social Movements and Political-Legal
   Innovation in the Rural Philippines.” The Journal of Development Studies 44 (7): 991–1022.

———. 2008b. “Peripheral Justice? Rethinking Justice Sector Reform in the Philippines.” World
   Development 36 (10): 1858–73.

Galanter, Marc. 1981. "Justice in Many Rooms: Courts, Private Ordering and Indigenous Law".
       Journal of Pluralism and Unofficial Law 19: 1-47

Golub, Stephen. 2003. “Non-State Justice Systems in Bangladesh and the Philippines.” Department
       for International Development, London.

Kerkvliet, Benedict. 1977. The Huk Rebellion: A Study of Peasant Revolt in the Philippines.
       Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Nader, Laura. 2001. “The Underside of Conflict Management—in Africa and Elsewhere.” IDS
       Bulletin 32 (1): 19–27.

O’Brien, Kevin J., and Lianjiang Li. 2006. Rightful Resistance in Rural China. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.

SWS (Social Weather Stations). 2008. “Research on the Poor Accessing Justice and the ALG as a
      Justice Reform Advocate.” Inroads ALG Study Series 4, Alternative Law Group, Quezon
      City, Philippines, available at http://www.alternativelawgroups.org/upimages/ALG-
      SWS%20INROADS%20No.%204%202008%20%28May%2014%29.pdf.

                                                                                                 37
Selected Papers Published in the Justice and Development Working Papers Series
2014
WPS 26/2014: Examining the Effectiveness of Legal Empowerment as a Pathway out of Poverty: A Case
Study of BRAC by Akhila Kolisetty

2013
WPS 25/2013: Public-Private Partnerships in Prison Construction and Management by Rob Allen & Paul
English

WPS 24/2013: Developing Specialized Court Services: International Experiences and Lessons Learned by
Dr. Heike P. Gramckow and Barry Walsh

WPS 23/2013: Caseflow Management: Key Principles and the Systems to Support Them by Dr. Heike P.
Gramckow and Valerie Nussenblatt

WPS 22/2013: Hybrid Justice in Vanuatu: The Island Courts by Michael Goddard and Leisande Otto

WPS 21/2013: “To Whom Do The People Take Their Issues?” The Contribution of Community-Based
Paralegals to Access to Justice in South Africa by Jackie Dugard and Katherine Drage

WPS 20/2013: The Drug Treatment Court Concept: The Jamaican Drug Courts by Stephane Jackson
Haisley

2012
WPS 19/2012: Estimating Staffing Needs in the Justice Sector by Dr. Heike Gramckow

WPS 18/2012: Court Auctions: Effective Processes and Enforcement Agents by Dr. Heike Gramckow

2011
WPS 17/2011: Can OHADA Increase Legal Certainty in Africa? by Renaud Beauchard and Mahutodji
Jimmy Vital Kodo

WPS 16/2011: Justice Sector Reform in Mongolia: Looking Back, Looking Forward by Dr. Heike
Gramckow and Frances Allen

WPS 15/2011: Preventing Corruption in Prosecution Offices: Understanding and Managing for Integrity by
Heike Gramckow

WPS 14/2011: Justice Development Programming in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Areas: Perspectives of
Two Leaders in Justice Administration by Abdul Salam Azimi and Christiana Tah

WPS 13/2011: The Hybrid Courts of Melanesia – A Comparative Analysis of Village Courts of Papua New
Guinea, Island Courts of Vanuatu and Local Courts of Solomon Islands by Daniel Evans, Dr. Michael
Goddard with Professor Don Paterson

WPS 12/2011: Alternative Dispute Resolution and the Rule of Law in International Development
Cooperation by James Michel

2010
WPS 11/2010: Surveying Justice: A Practical Guide to Household Surveys by Kristen Himelein, Nicholas
Menzies and Michael Woolcock

WPS 10/2010: Culture-Based Justice Architecture :Building Community Wellbeing Through Deeper
Cultural Engagement by Philip James Kirke
J&D
justice&development
working paper series
