    Report No: ACS14223
.




    Republic of India
    Manufacturing Plan Implementation
    Supply Chain Delays and Uncertainty in India: The hidden constraint
    on manufacturing growth

.
    March 2014


.
    GTCDR
    SOUTH ASIA
.




.
.
    Standard Disclaimer:

.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
    findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
    Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
    data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
    not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
    acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:

.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
    may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
    encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
    World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ 3
1. CONTEXT: FREIGHT AND LOGISTICS OVERVIEW ..................................................... 4
   Definitions, scope and stylized facts ....................................................................................... 4
   Infrastructure is only part of the story..................................................................................... 7
   Regulatory specifics: taxes, checkpoints, and customs ........................................................ 10
2. THE IMPACT ON MANUFACTURING FIRMS ............................................................... 12
   Hidden freight costs add substantially to total freight costs ................................................. 12
   Logistics can matter more than the ‘usual suspects’ (i.e. electricity and labor) ................... 14
   Comparison to services ......................................................................................................... 16
3. VARIATIONS AND AGGREGATE EFFECTS ................................................................. 18
   Domestic delays and uncertainty afflict all firms without prejudice .................................... 18
   Young and small companies have the most difficulty in customs ........................................ 18
   Freight difficulties are rearranging the locations and structure of industries ....................... 20
   International comparisons ..................................................................................................... 22
4. REFORM PRIORITIES........................................................................................................ 24
   Carrying through a few major reforms could make as much difference as massive
   investment ............................................................................................................................. 24
   Implementing GST................................................................................................................ 25
   State-level actions ................................................................................................................. 28
   The gains would be enormous, especially for inclusion and low-income states .................. 29
   Other measures, such as subsidy schemes, are unlikely to have much impact ..................... 30
   The urgency and potential for reform is enormous ............................................................... 30



Acknowledgements:
This paper was authored by Luke Jordan and Bertine Kamphuis. They are Private Sector Development Specialists
with the South Asia Financial and Private Sector Development Unit and Competitive Industries Practice of the
World Bank Group, based in New Delhi. RedSeer Consulting, based in Bangalore, India, provided crucial research
support. Lita Das provided crucial modeling support and research guidance. The authors wish to thank our
principal reviewers: Jean Francis Arvis, Senior Transport Economist, Gael Raballand, Senior Public Sector
Specialist, Ben Eijbergen, Lead Transport Specialist (all at the World Bank), and Arbind Modi, Regional Tax and
Trade Advisor (IFC). The authors would like to pay thanks to Deepak Bhattasali, Denis Medvedev, Vincent
Palmade, Urmila Chatterjee, Yannick Saleman, and Niraj Verma (all at the World Bank) for their comments and
discussions as this paper was being written.
This paper has been prepared under the Manufacturing Plan Implementation non-lending technical assistance
(P132991), led by Luke Simon Jordan (former TTL) and Bertine Kamphuis (GTCDR, TTL). Overall guidance was
provided by Onno Ruhl (Country Director, SACIN), and Ivan Rossignol and Henry K Bagazonzya (Sector/Practice
Managers, SASFP/GTCDR).

This material has been funded by United Kingdom aid from the UK Government, however the views expressed do
not necessarily reflect the UK Government’s official policies.




                                                                      2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The performance of India’s freight industry, through the delays and uncertainty it creates in
supply chains, is a constraint on the growth of its manufacturing sector, possibly a binding one,
and regulations make as much difference as do the thousands of Crores being invested in
highways.1 In fact, the large investments being made in transport infrastructure are unlikely to
yield more than a fraction of their full potential in economic returns unless and until those
regulatory barriers are addressed.

This matters enormously, because logistics are a higher share of costs for manufacturing firms in
India than either electricity or labour. Its effects are less obvious, because more indirect, and
therefore it does not attract as much attention as it should, except under the broad rubric of
‘infrastructure’, which is in itself misleading.

These are the findings of a review of existing literature and data on the freight and logistics
industry in India, combined with a new survey of almost 70 manufacturing firms across four
industries. It considers both domestic road freight and international trade, focusing on regulatory
barriers that may cause delays and uncertainty in domestic road freight and imports and exports
and the consequent impact on manufacturing competitiveness.

The primary survey results are presented in Annex A; the results of statistical analysis and
modeling on them in Annex B; and this report provides a narrative of the conclusions drawn
from both, as well as a review of prior studies. Key results are:

 Less than half of the average domestic freight journey is spent ‘on the road’, the remainder
  being split between rests and regulatory stoppages.

 Unpredictability in freight requires manufacturers to hedge against possible delays by carrying
  higher levels of inventory than they would otherwise need, or face the even costlier risk of lost
  sales, interrupted manufacturing production runs, or a proliferation of pricey, avoidable
  emergency shipments.2

 Including indirect effects on inventories and sales, logistics is 10-14 percent of the operating
  costs of manufacturing firms, by far the largest cost difference between them and services
  firms.




1
  According to the Government’s 12th Fifth Year Plan, an estimated one trillion dollars investment will be needed in
the infrastructure sector. For the road sector, “against an outlay of Rs. 192428 crore in the Eleventh Plan for the road
sector, the anticipated expenditure was Rs.158077 crore (at current prices).” (p. 215) “The Twelfth Plan budgetary
support for Central Sector Roads is Rs.144769 crore. In addition, the sector is expected to generate IEBR amounting
to Rs.64834 crore and private-sector investment of Rs.214186 crore during this period. The Twelfth Plan budgetary
support for Rural Roads (PMGSY) is Rs.126491 crore.” (p. 226).
2
  As documented in detail for Vietnam in: Luis C. Blancas et al., Efficient Logistics: A Key to Vietnam’s
Competitiveness (Washington, DC: The World Bank, 2014).


                                                           3
 Domestic freight performance is explained almost entirely by distance and state border-
  crossings, and adding two border crossings can add a week of uncertainty in shipments.

 Average times and delays in customs show some variance with firm characteristics, with
  young and small companies having the greatest difficulty (especially versus large firms).

 These effects are likely to have inhibited convergence in incomes between low- and high-
  income states, and are spatially rearranging even successful industries such as autos.
These findings not only prioritize even more the long-delayed introduction of a national Goods
and Services Tax (GST), they motivate a sustained period of follow-up action to dismantle check
points and fully implement systems for risk-based compliance monitoring for customs and
domestic inspections. This, along with the more thorough implementation of already-announced
initiatives and sustained human capital and capability building in the trucking industry, could do
as much or more than vast highway and port investments to unlock growth in the medium-term.

Undertaking this in practice will require sustained engagement among States, not only in passing
the GST but in follow-up actions to reduce barriers in practice. At the more tactical level,
sustained mechanisms for feedback on the real status of reforms are needed, to raise the flag
when a notified policy is not having ground-level impact.

In the absence of this strengthening of the policy and implementation process, and without
needed reforms implemented through and alongside them, the manufacturing sector is unlikely to
reach the targets set by the Government of India, remaining fragmented and stunted instead of
connected and expanding. The largest gains in economy-wide total factor productivity (TFP) in
economic history have come through the modernization of freight, more so than electrification,
and it is these gains that current regulations constrain.

This report is structured as follows: Section 1 provides the context of the freight and logistics
industry in India; Section 2 describes the headline impacts of its performance on manufacturing
firms; Section 3 then explores variations in this impact and causes thereof; and Section 4
concludes with a more detailed look at the reform agenda this motivates.

1.    CONTEXT: FREIGHT AND LOGISTICS OVERVIEW

Definitions, scope and stylized facts

For the purposes of this study, freight refers to the movement of goods from a buyer to a seller,3
whether by one or more intermediaries, or by the buyer or seller themselves. ‘Domestic’ freight
refers to instances where both buyer and seller are located in India; ‘international’ where at least




3
 Here ‘buyer’ and ‘seller’ do not refer to distinct firms, but to distinct plants or service locations, i.e., it covers
shipments from one unit of a larger firm to another (within-firm shipments as well as between-firm).


                                                              4
one is located abroad. The ‘freight industry’ is used to refer to the firms that take part in one or
more aspects of this movement, though primarily the physical movement, as well as the internal
departments of firms that undertake freight themselves.

These definitions are broad in theory, but are narrowed somewhat in practice. Only one out of
eight surveyed firms own the equipment for moving goods. Moreover, although goods can be
moved by road, rail, or air, road so predominates in India that it will be the primary focus. Road
traffic accounted for about 60 percent of freight traffic.4 While there are strong arguments for
increasing rail’s share, not only will doing so require decades of investment and difficult policy
decisions, the Government is already moving ahead with dedicated freight corridors.5 Studies
focused on going further than this tend to be both overly grand and overly simple.6

Hence, for domestic freight, this study concentrates on the business environment for road
transport. The estimated needed investment in road infrastructure in general as well as in
specific connecting infrastructure for dedicated national investment and manufacturing zones
(NIMZs) are thus not covered.7 Similarly, for imports and exports, estimates of the enormous
sums required for investment in ports and airports were considered out of scope. Instead, the
study considers the regulatory barriers that may cause delays and uncertainty in domestic road
freight and imports and exports, no matter the size or quality of theoretical expansions.

According to a 2011 study of the trucking industry, the third-party industry is dominated by
small truckers: in a sample of over 1,200 goods transport units, about two-thirds were individual
proprietorships, and the same proportion had 15 or fewer employees. Of the units classified as
vehicle owners, about 83 percent had five or fewer trucks.8 At the high end some modern freight
forwarders are present, both multinational corporations (MNCs) and domestic firms such as TVS




4
  Government of India, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, “Annual report 2011 -2012,” p. 6.
5
  India’s Twelfth Five Year Plan emphasizes the need for a better modal mix, especially the opportunities of rail to
serve a larger share of the overall freight traffic through prioritized investments in dedicated freight corridors.
6
  McKinsey&Company, “Building India,” report, August 2009, is perhaps typical of the genre.
7
  At the time of the 2014-2015 Union Interim Budget speech, February 17, 2014, “The investment in eight National
Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZ) has been announced along the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor
(DMIC) and nine projects have been approved by the DMIC Trust. Five NIMZs outside DMIC have also been given
in-principle approval. Three more corridors connecting Chennai and Bengaluru, Bengaluru and Mumbai, and
Amritsar and Kolkata are under different stages of preparatory work.” NIMZs were introduced as part of the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India, “National Manufacturing Policy,” November 4, 2011. As
noted in a just in time note on Manufacturing Policy Implementation and the Concept of a ‘Backbone Organization’
(June 2012, Annex 3 – Learning from SEZs) and documented elsewhere, “the new approach embodied by NIMZs
and the NMP [National Manufacturing Policy] is promising in many regards, and seems to incorporate important
lessons from both India’s and other countries’ experiences with SEZs [Special Economic Zones].” However, as
mentioned in the same note, challenges remain and include embracing non-contiguity and getting the necessary
infrastructure in place both within and outside the zones, notably necessary roads to ports and airports.
8
  JPS Associates, “Study on Economics of Trucking Industry,” Final report submitted to the Ministry of Shipping,
Road Transport and Highways, October 2011, pp. E-V, 47.


                                                         5
Freight Forwarding, but most of the companies in our sample used small firms on a fluctuating
day-to-day rate.

A range of estimates have the average distance traveled by a truck in India as 250-300 kilometers
(km) per day, compared to 450km in Brazil and 800km in the US (Figure 2). The average speed
per hour on a highway is reported to be 20-40km per hour, but with some lack of clarity on
whether this is averaged over stoppage times and over what quality of highway. Both can make
substantial differences to such estimates, in particular the former.

This study is based on the findings of a review of existing literature and data on the freight and
logistics industry in India, combined with a new survey of almost 70 manufacturing firms across
four industries, auto-components, textiles, electronics, and heavy-engineering (Figure 1).

In our sample, firms reported an average of 2.7 days for inbound freight, and 3.7 days for
outbound freight, and corresponding large standard deviations of respectively 2.2 days and 2.6
days. For international freight, firms reported that the average import shipment (from shipment
by supplier to delivery at the firm’s doorstep) required 4.5 weeks to arrive, and exports on
average 4.1 weeks. The average time to clear customs was just over 4 days, though with a
median of 3.5 days this was skewed towards higher times. There was also substantial reported
variance among ports: some clearing in under a day, others requiring a week or more. We will
return to these various causes of variance below. First, we turn to breakdowns of journey time.




                                                6
                                                  Figure 19




Infrastructure is only part of the story

Although there is a widespread preoccupation with road infrastructure (Figure 3), perhaps the
most significant fact about freight in India is that only a minority of a journey’s time is spent on
the road. This accords with general trends observed in other developing countries. Studies of
logistics performance (in terms of cost, time and reliability) across the developing world find that
infrastructure is only one of three factors influencing logistics performance. In fact, in most
countries high logistics costs mainly depend upon the market structure and organization of the
trucking sector and regulatory and policy implementation challenges that increase uncertainty. 10

In India, as noted above, the trucking industry tends to be relatively small and informal. To the
authors’ knowledge there is little evidence that the trucking industry is very different from others
in India in this respect. From size thresholds for schemes to the ability to evade monitoring, the
factors that tend to promote small and informal firms are therefore likely to hold in common with
other industries. Since these are treated elsewhere, they will not be considered here.11




9
  Annex A, p. 4.
10
   Jean-François Arvis, Gaël Raballand, and Jean-François Marteau, The Cost of Being Landlocked: Logistics Costs
and Supply Chain Reliability (Washington, DC: The World Bank, 2010).
11
   See Deepak Bhatassali, Neeti Katoch and Luke Simon Jordan, “Regulations Restricting the Growth of Non -Farm
Enterprises,” draft 2013; Luke Simon Jordan, Bertine Kamphuis, and S.P. Setia, “A New Agenda: Improving the


                                                       7
                                                  Figure 212




The regulatory impediments, though, are substantial. A range of studies in the last few years has
analyzed the time composition of truck journeys, with most finding that only around 40 percent
of journey time is spent driving. This implies that even if road infrastructure improved to such
an extent that average speeds while driving doubled, journey times would only decrease by 20
percent.13 Approximately 15-20 percent of the total journey time is made up of rest and meals;
another around 15 percent at toll plazas; and the balance, roughly a quarter of the journey time, is
spent at check posts, state borders, city entrances, and other regulatory stoppages.14




Competitiveness of the Textiles and Apparel Value Chain in India,” March 2014; and Dieter Ernst, “Fast Tracking
India’s Electronics Manufacturing Industry: Business Environment and Industrial Policy,” March 2014.
12
   Prepared by RedSeer, based on, for the Unites States, American Trucking Associations, 2010; for Australia,
Centre for Environmental Management, “Calculating, Reporting and Reducing Greenhouse Emissions in the
Australian Trucking Industry,” September 2010; for Brazil, World Bank, “Brazil Green Freight Transport Report,”
2010; for World, National Transport Development Policy Committee, “Integrated Logistics Strategy,” 2011; for
India, JPS Associates, “Study on Economic Cost of Inter-State Barriers in Goods Traffic,” October 2011.
13
   “The percentage of actual moving time to the total trip time was about 69%, 54% and 38% for Mumbai -Delhi,
Delhi-Kolkata and Kolkata-Chennai routes respectively,” according to the survey by Rajiv Ghandhi Institute for
Contemporary Studies, cited in: Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India, “Report of the
Sub-group on Policy Issues,” September 2011, p. 33. Another study suggested that out of total trip time, act ual
moving times accounted for only 33% for trips of less than 500km, 36% for 500-999km trips, and 43% for longer
distances. JPS Associates, “Study on Economics of Trucking Industry,” p. E-VIII.
14
   Ibid., p. 82; JPS Associates, “Study on Economic Cost of Inter-State Barriers in Goods Traffic.”


                                                        8
Moreover, these regulatory stoppages account at least as much for variation. Indeed, besides
from road quality, the next most cited causes for shipment delays are inefficient custom
departments and state border check-post clearances. Except for the largest trucking companies,
with established (mostly informal) links to regulatory authorities across their routes, most of the
trucking companies and firms that use them have little way to predict how long their trucks will
be stopped. This has a cascading effect on transport time, for instance, when the unpredictability
of arrival times at city entrances hinders effective planning and adds further delays there, when
trucks have to wait at city entrances.

                                                      Figure 315




In fact, a large proportion of uncertainty and variance in the supply chain is explained solely by
distance and by the number of state borders which freight must cross. Specifically, state borders
explain two thirds of the variance in transit time, such that adding two state borders between
origin and destination can add as much as a week to the uncertainty in delivery schedules (Annex
B). Likewise, distance explains a similar proportion – two thirds – of variance.16 Revealingly,
the explanatory power of distance drops to only 35 percent when restricting the analysis to



15
  Annex A, p. 8.
16
  This explanation enters logarithmically, i.e. log distance explains two thirds of the variance of the log transit time.
See Annex B.


                                                            9
companies that source their primary raw material within the same state, while distance does not
provide any significant explanation of variance for companies sourcing from more than two
states away.

Similarly, for domestic sales transit time between the manufacturing firm and the customers’
warehouse increased with both distance (as expected) and state borders crossed. For every order
of magnitude increase in the average distance between the origin and the destination, the average
total transit time goes up by one day. However, their effect on uncertainty and variance is less
strong, except in the auto sector. Overall, the regulatory difficulties in crossing state borders are
having as much of an impact on freight performance as the quality of long-distance roads.

Regulatory specifics: taxes, checkpoints, and customs

These effects are not surprising once one considers the number and range of checkpoints and
other stoppages which can affect freight journeys. One that has been much discussed of late is
toll booths, whose manual processes can lead to delays of hours. The Planning Commission’s
working group on logistics suggested that such delays have largely negated the time saved from
better condition National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) highways. Since some studies
estimate waiting tolling at 12.5 percent of journey time, or a third of the time driving on the
highways, this may be plausible.17 The Government is actively addressing the issue, with a high-
level committee formed in 2010 to recommend the most suitable technology for the
implementation of national electronic toll collection. The committee presented its
recommendations to the Ministry of Road and transport and Highways the same year. India
Highways Management Company Limited (HMCL) was established in 2012 to implement the
electronic tolling system on National Highways using passive RFID (radio frequency
identification device) technology, allowing automatic vehicle identification at a fraction of the
costs for the vehicle owner compared to alternatives. The technology has been rolled out on a
pilot basis. However, full implementation in 2014, as originally announced, is unlikely in the
context of a slowdown in financial closure and execution in the road sector and attacks against
toll gates.18




17
   Government of India’s Planning Commission, “Report of the Working Group on Logistics,” 2007, p. 64; and
Transparency International India, “Corruption in Trucking Operations,” p. 21.
18
   Transport Company India (TCI) and the Indian Institute of Management (Calcutta), “ Operational Efficiency of
Freight Transportation by Road in India,” Second edition, 2012. Recommendations of Committee chaired by
Nandan Nilekani to examine all technologies available for Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) and recommend the
most suitable one for implementation throughout India, June 28, 2010, http://ihmcl.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/ETC-report_Nandan-Nilekani.pdf. A subsequent Apex Committee for ETC
Implementation was tasked in 2011 with suggesting the operational methodology for implementation and operation
of ETC, “Electronic Toll Collection, Report by Apex Committee for ETC Implementation,” Government of India,
September 2011. Manu Balachandran, “NHAI to partner banks for e -payment of toll: Roll out of e-tolling will
happen soon,” Business Standard, February 15, 2014.


                                                      10
Turning to regulations, the best known are the various sales and entry taxes which can create
check-points and barriers at State crossings. However, these are not the only sources of
checkpoints. Another is the regional transport offices (RTOs), which register vehicles and
provide driving licenses. They are also the primary body for obtaining permits and for collecting
motor vehicle taxes for using state roads. Others include checkpoints for commercial taxes and
VAT, excise taxes, and forestry clearances. There are about 330 RTO checkpoints across India,
and these are only half the total number, with (in order of frequency) commercial and VAT
checkpoints, excise tax checkpoints, and forestry checkpoints making up the remainder.19

The delays related to commercial, excise and VAT results in particular from reconciling the sales
taxes in one state with those in the other, such as the imposition of the additional 2 percent in
Central Sales Tax (CST). 20 This affects not only domestic freight but can also effect
international freight: a garment exporter in Tamil Nadu reported diverting his shipment by
several hundred kilometers, not using the high-quality and nearby Cochin port, simply to avoid
the Tamil Nadu-Kerala border crossing.

The other checkpoints are principally to check permits are in order, as well as to impose taxes on
or prohibit the movement of specific types of goods, such as alcoholic products (for state excise
taxes), mineral products (for royalties) and forestry products. Many are located only in the
relevant areas, such as mining districts. All can lead to delays if on a main trade route and
inspecting most vehicles ‘in case’ they are carrying the relevant products.

As will be described below, there is substantial variation between States in the number of
checkpoints and the time spent at each. Haryana, for example, has managed to eliminate
domestic checkpoints, replacing them with widespread mobile squads; in contrast, Uttar Pradesh
(UP) is reported to have over 100 commercial/VAT checkpoints. Karnataka and other states
have implemented e-permits that have dramatically cut the time spent at checkpoints; Gujarat has
moved to a fully electronic inter-state check-post system.21

Most intriguingly, some States seem to have almost seamless borders: Andhra Pradesh (AP), for
example, has attracted a substantial amount of investment near to Tamil Nadu, as firms report




19
   JPS Associates, “Economic Cost of Inter-State Barriers in Goods Traffic,” p. 37.
20
   It is the commercial, excise and VAT checkpoints that tend to absorb the most time in delays according to a 2003
study by Arindam Das-Gupta, “Internal Trade Barriers in India: Fiscal Check-posts,” paper, August 2003. A more
recent study suggests that “VAT/Commercial check-posts are the most common on-road check-posts and involve
the most cumbersome and costly procedures than other check-posts barriers,” JPS 2011, “Inter-State Barriers,” p.
10. However, this same study shows that RTO check posts are more prevalent, and that check post halting time is
primarily accounted for by RTO posts. At the same time, the incidence of defaults is much higher for commercial
tax and VAT, resulting in substantial additional hours of delay.
21
   JPS Associates, “Economic Cost of Inter-State Barriers in Goods Traffic,” pp. 10, 37 -38; and Annex A, p. 35.


                                                        11
they can use Chennai port with no delays crossing the border while availing the lower cost land
in AP. The contrast between this border and that between Tamil Nadu and Kerala is stark.

Overall, it is important to keep in mind that the checkpoints serve a clear fiscal purpose. Careful
studies have shown that attempting to simply eliminate checkpoints, or move too rapidly to
overly sophisticated information-based solutions could result in substantial fiscal damage to the
States.22 This will be discussed further in Section 4 below.

Finally, on international freight, the key regulatory constraints are related to disputes and dispute
resolution over the classification of goods. As documented in studies on both the textiles/apparel
and electronics sector, the Government of India has in principle notified a ‘risk management
system’ (RMS) for imports several years ago, and earlier this year notified its extension to
exports. However, its implementation has lagged, and varies substantially between customs
offices in different ports.23

2.   THE IMPACT ON MANUFACTURING FIRMS

Hidden freight costs add substantially to total freight costs

The impact of logistics performance on manufacturing firms goes well beyond direct freight
charges. To them must be added the cost of capital of inventories, which expand with the time
taken to receive supplies and reach customers, as well as the cost of packaging for transport and
of lost sales due to customers for whom the firm is uncompetitive due to logistics, rather than
cost or quality.

This applies in particular for uncertainty and variation in delivery times. Over and above direct
transportation and other logistical costs, uncertainty increases what are called ‘delayed hedging
costs’, which includes the capital cost of additional inventory on the roads, uncertainty induced
inventory and warehousing costs, and – when time is almost priceless – the costs of shifting to a
faster, more expensive, mode of transportation.24

Concretely, in India uncertainty pushes up total logistics costs substantially:




22
   Das-Gupta, “Internal Trade Barriers in India.”
23
   Jordan, Kamphuis & Setia, “A New Agenda,” and Ernst, “Fast Tracking India’s Electronics Manufacturing.”
24
   Arvis et al., The Cost of Being Landlocked, p. 33. A detailed study in Vietnam reveals that “the root cause for
costly logistics is the incidence of unpredictability that permeates supply chains. This unpredictability requires
manufacturers to self-insure against uncertain freight itineraries by carrying higher levels of inventory than they
would otherwise need to manage their daily operations, or face the even costlier risk of lost sales, interrupted
manufacturing production runs, or a proliferation of pricey, avoidable emergency shipments.” World Bank, “Taming
Unpredictability as Source of Growth: What More Competitive Freight Logistics Can Do in Vietnam,” summary
note, 2014, p. 2; and Luis C. Blancas et al., Efficient Logistics: A Key to Vietnam’s Competitiveness (Washington,
DC: The World Bank, 2014).


                                                        12
          It hinders efficient asset utilization planning, increasing costs and prices. Companies, for
           instance, might need to switch to premium freight providers to meet order deadlines or to
           meet the needs of high priority customers. For freight providers themselves, a truck
           which is unexpectedly late on one delivery may miss the next scheduled collection,
           leading to low asset utilization. More commonly, freight providers may simply refuse to
           offer specific collection or delivery times, in turn preventing such detailed planning by
           their customers, the manufacturing firms themselves.

          It creates lost sales, as firms miss customers’ delivery requirements, and so are cut out of
           repeat orders or have to provide substantial discounts. While this effect may be limited
           domestically, given widespread expectations of uncertain delivery times, it leads to a
           substantial loss of competitiveness in global value chains, which are increasingly
           structured around rapid, ‘just-in-time’ production, even in such industries as textiles.25

          It increases the size of buffer stocks that firms must hold, sometimes almost doubling
           inventory holding periods. Out of about 70 firms surveyed in India, on average, 43 days
           of inventory was found to be maintained across the four industries represented (auto
           components, textiles, electronics, and heavy engineering), of which approximately 27
           percent (11.6 days) of this inventory is buffer stock.
While it is difficult to estimate the impact of the first factor, the deep-dives with three companies
indicate that the second and third together can account for at least 14 percent, and as much as 23
percent, of the total logistics costs.26

These are though liable to be substantially under-estimated, since they exclude systemic effects.
For example, when asked how much their sales would increase with more efficient freight, most
firms responded that since such logistics would be a public good, all their competitors would
benefit equally. As a result, the estimates of lost sales do not include the lost aggregate demand
that results from high logistics costs and the fragmentation it generates.

Similarly, the estimates of buffer stocks reported by firms are liable to be under-estimated, since
the use of lean techniques has simply been infeasible and thus many firms are unlikely to have
systematically tried to reduce inventories. For example, in the one industry where such
techniques are widespread – automotive components – inventories are half those of textiles.
Utilizing a higher estimate of buffer stocks increases the ‘regulatory share’ of logistics costs to at
least a quarter.

Finally, we have not quantified the reductions in direct freight costs that could result from a
reduction in uncertainty, and resulting increase in small truckers’ ability to plan and utilize assets
(doing so would require a fresh survey into the economics of those informal firms). However,




25
     Jordan, Kamphuis & Setia, “A New Agenda,” and Ernst, “Fast Tracking India’s Electronics Manufacturing.”
26
     Annex A, p. 34.


                                                        13
such efficiencies might be very large: as will be discussed below, improved efficiencies in asset
utilization in logistics caused some of the largest historical increases in total factor productivity.

Logistics can matter more than the ‘usual suspects’ (i.e. electricity and labor)

Indian firms, particularly intermediary firms, which purchase from and sell to other firms, thus
not only incur high inbound freight charges for supplies and outbound freight charges for
deliveries, but also face additional carrying costs for inventory, lost sales from missed deliveries
or orders not taken, and additional packaging costs to avoid loss and damage during transit.

Adding these together, we estimate that total logistics costs can range from 10.4 percent of net
sales for automotive to 14.1 percent for electronics (Figure 4). Even for companies that have
structured their supply chain to source nearby (within one day’s transit), total logistics costs
remain at least 4.5 percent of net sales.27

These total logistics costs make as much difference to the cost structure of manufacturing firms
as do much-discussed electricity or labour costs, and in some cases is more important. For
comparison, the total wage bill in these industries ranges from 6.2 percent of net sales to 11.8
percent. With many companies having to rely upon alternative and more expensive power
sources as electricity is in short and erratic supply. Power, fuel and water costs range from a
mere 1.1 percent to 6.8 percent of costs, and as these are reported financial numbers they include
the cost of self-generation. Only electricity costs in textiles, and personnel costs in electronics,
come close to matching the cost impact of logistics (Figure 5).

It should be cautioned of course that these cost estimates depend on several assumptions, whose
values were derived from phone interviews with a sample of firms, and thus are vulnerable to a
range of errors. As such, they should be considered order-of-magnitude estimates, but the
differences above are substantial enough to give confidence in the results.




27
  Based on a survey of almost 70 companies in the auto-components, textiles, electronics and engineering sectors;
in-depth, repeated examination of the logistics patterns of three SMEs; and analysis of the Prowess Dataset for
FY2011-12, which contains financial data on twenty-seven thousand companies.


                                                        14
                                                    Figure 428




                                                    Figure 529




28
     Annex A, p. 20, citing RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013; Prowess Data for FY2011-12.
29
     Annex A, p. 21, citing Prowess and Estimations (all figures in %) FY2011-12.


                                                        15
Moreover, they were tested through repeated, in-depth interviews and primary evidence at three
SMEs, manufacturing in Himachal Pradesh, Bangalore and Uttarakhand.30 All three
manufacture high-value, low-volume products (alcohol products, high-end batteries, and
transformers). One, whose suppliers are almost all based within its State – many in the same
sector – does have very low total costs, at 4.4 percent of sales, and another, which sources only
one major input from outside the State, has costs of 6 percent of sales. The third, though, with a
somewhat more typical profile – multiple suppliers outside the State – has logistics costs of 9.2
percent of sales, with a particularly high amount of lost sales (Figure 6). The low cost of firms
sourcing in-state may be taken as an indication of the substantial effects on competitiveness from
cross-state sourcing.

                                                       Figure 631




Comparison to services

Moreover, total logistics costs might explain the unfulfilled promise of India’s manufacturing,
contributing only 16 percent of India’s GDP, in contrast to comparator countries. Using the
logic of Hausmann, Rodrik and Velasco (2005) in conducting a ‘growth diagnostics’, it is




30
     As a condition of access, these firms were guaranteed confidentiality.
31
     Annex A, p. 28, citing RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013.


                                                            16
revealing that an avoidance of logistics costs is the principal difference between manufacturing
and the faster-growing service sector.

Total logistics costs do not exceed 1 percent of net sales for information technology (IT), hotels
and tourism and communications. By contrast, power, water and fuel account for approximately
7 percent and 9 percent of net sales for the latter two industries; the IT industry has little to no
dependence on logistics or power, with 45 percent of its cost in the wage bill (Figure 7). Overall,
the most substantial difference between the operating cost structure of manufacturing and
services in India is not reliance on labor or power, but on logistics.32

Last, the manufacturing industry that has posted the strongest performance in recent decades –
automotive – is the industry that has been most aggressive in decreasing its dependence on
logistics. As will be discussed below, there is evidence that the industry is changing its spatial
structure in response to logistics costs, with potentially significant damage to its long-run
competitiveness.

                                                     Figure 733




32
   A similar analysis has not been done for capital costs, but there it might be expected that the principal difference
would be the larger land footprint of manufacturing.
33
   Annex A, p. 22, citing Prowess and Estimations (all figures in %) FY2011-12.


                                                           17
3.   VARIATIONS AND AGGREGATE EFFECTS

It might be posited that logistics, like some other aspects of cost, is amenable to improvements
by firms themselves. In that case, high logistics costs would motivate improving supply chain
management capabilities, as much or more than regulatory changes.34 At the same time, it might
be argued that the effect of logistics on average firms might cancel itself out.

Domestic delays and uncertainty afflict all firms without prejudice

When it comes to the ability of manufacturing firms to influence domestic freight performance,
we find that few to no characteristics help firms manage delays and delivery times. Statistical
analysis finds that a firm’s sector, its size in terms of revenue and profitability, and the
composition of its principal raw material are not significant in explaining variance in delivery
times for domestic shipments.

This implies that domestic freight performance is an almost purely environmental constraint on
firm performance. If management capabilities were important, one would expect profitability (as
an imperfect proxy for capabilities) to have a significant impact on variance. From a similar
logic, specific regulations on certain kinds of material are not a root cause. Finally, we also note
that the number of freight providers a company uses is also not significant in explaining transit
time, i.e., whether a company uses many small companies or few large ones has an insignificant
effect on transit times versus distance and state borders.

At a descriptive level, there appear to be some differences between sectors, with auto-
components facing the smallest delays and electronics the largest (Figure 8). However, sector
differences are not statistically significant when controlling for other factors. This may be
accounted for by the ongoing spatial re-arrangement of the auto sector (discussed in more detail
below).

Young and small companies have the most difficulty in customs

Turning to international freight, the survey did find greater influence of firm characteristics on
delays.35 However, this influence seems to stem from size, rather than capabilities.

The larger the company, the lower number of its orders is delayed at customs, though the
magnitude of this difference is not large. Statistically, an increase in company revenue by
approximately 100 crore (everything else being equal) implies a reduction of 0.03 percent in the




34
   Or viewing those regulatory impediments in the light of their effect on capabilities, as is appropriate for the
textiles value chain. Jordan, Kamphuis & Setia, “A New Agenda.”
35
   Annex B. This analysis is based on the 40 companies in the sample that import products, and the 43 that export.


                                                         18
number of orders delayed.36 This aligns with anecdotal reporting from firms interviewed in more
depth, who report that ‘green channels’ at customs, intended to allow faster clearance for firms
that have a clean track-record, in fact just privilege larger companies.

                                                  Figure 837




One counter-intuitive finding is that uncertainty in import processes tends to be higher for more
profitable companies, in terms of margins. A difference of 1 percent in profit margins is
associated with an increase of 0.4-percentage points in delays in imports. When combined with
the findings above, this indicates that smaller, highly profitable companies will be particularly
disadvantaged by delays in customs in clearing imports. There is one exception, however, and
that is the auto-components sector, where more profitable and higher revenue companies were
found to have significantly lower transit time.

There could be a range of explanations for this phenomenon, for example that high-end export
products with higher prices and margins create more room for disputes in the implementation of




36
   The magnitude of impact here could be underestimated, given that few very large companies were interviewed,
and anecdotal evidence suggests that these face the smoothest customs processes.
37
   Annex A, p. 11, citing RedSeer Freight Survey.


                                                       19
regulations, causing delays – as has been the experience of some smaller, high-end garments
exporters interviewed. Another is that more profitable companies may be importing from lower-
cost destinations which face increased scrutiny. These and other competing explanations may be
an avenue for future research.

In – only partial – support of one of those, we do find systematic variation by the country of
origin. Importing from China, Taiwan and Japan increases the number of days spent in transit.
In particular, importing from China adds a full day in customs, all else being equal. However, it
is not clear from the data whether there are other, unobserved causes of this variation.

Finally, there are some non-linear effects in dealing with customs processes. Firms that are near
to ports tend to face far fewer delays at the port than those far away, likely indicating a premium
to personal interaction with customs officials. Strangely, firms that export a moderate amount
tend to face greater obstacles than those that either export very little – having just once-off
shipments – or those that rely on exports for a substantial portion of their sales. This may
indicate that firms which export only a little may entrust orders to aggregators, while those that
do so a lot are practiced at complying with requirements. The intermediate firms, which are
starting to export in large volumes, then face the greatest difficulties.

Overall, as is discussed at length in both of the companion studies, on textiles and electronics,
the principal issue in customs is not the letter of regulations, but their implementation. A process
of concerted implementation of reforms will be necessary before manufacturing firms in India
can sustainably link into global value chains, which in turn is necessary if they are to compete in
ever more globalized industries. This is discussed further in the final section.

Freight difficulties are rearranging the locations and structure of industries

In theory, the cost burden imposed on individual firms by logistics might not have a large
aggregate effect, if firms individually adopted coping strategies (e.g. using premium freight
providers) that led to widespread mitigation of the effects. On the other hand, such coping
strategies might do the opposite, and lead to effects that were even more constraining than at the
firm level.

Further research would be required to answer this question conclusively. Our survey results do
show that firms have developed a range of coping strategies to deal with unpredictable freight,
but that these raise costs rather than mitigate them. More than half of the firms surveyed stated
that they used premium freight providers for high priority orders, with the highest proportion (82
percent) among electronics firms.

Roughly 45 percent of firms also indicated a willingness to pay a premium for on-time delivery.
Even in low margin businesses, such as textiles and apparel, firms anecdotally reported that for
the most time sensitive deliveries, such as samples, they would resort to air cargo, or to sending
staff on long-distance train rides carrying the goods personally.


                                                20
The most extreme coping strategy has been witnessed in the automotive industry. There, the
physical distribution of activities and the reaping of scale and other economies has been almost
entirely subordinated to overcoming logistical difficulties.

Here, the case of Maruti Suzuki is illustrative. In 2001, its total logistics costs were substantially
higher than its wage bill (perhaps up to four times as high),38 but in 2013 those costs had been
slashed, by requiring almost all suppliers to build, warehouse or locate within a few hours radius
of the plant.39 Specifically, in the early 2000s Maruti Suzuki relied on some 400 major suppliers,
located across India, with some being almost 2,500km distant from their main plant in Haryana.
At the time, this meant it had to carry large buffer stocks and deal with substantial freight costs.

Today, the situation has been transformed. Over the last decade the company has required its
suppliers to locate close to it. Approximately 80 percent of its suppliers are now located within a
100km radius of the plant.40 The company reports that its buffer stocks are now down to zero,
and it is running lean production processes. It has been able to force this change because of the
enormous scale of its operations, which make its business alone valuable enough to its suppliers
to motivate them relocating.

More generally, the auto-industry, with its enormous economies of scale in plants producing
hundreds of thousands if not millions of cars per year,41 may be uniquely able to impose such a
structure, so that auto-component firms have the lowest outbound distances of any industry by a
factor of a third (Figure 9). Even so, component producers have complained of their own
decreasing economies of scale and loss of localization economies. Given the land price
dynamics at work in India today, this risks diverting substantial amounts of investment from
plant upgrading and building human capital into the acquisition of land.42

As such this is unlikely to be an optimal or replicable strategy for manufacturing growth. It runs
the risk of creating an auto-component industry that foregoes the advantages of having individual




38
   Sumila Gulyani, “Effects of Poor Transportation on Lean Production and Industrial Clustering: Evidence from the
Indian Auto Industry,” World Development 29, no. 7 (2001), pp. 1157-1177.
39
   Alternative explanations for this change over time have not been explored, and external factors thus might have
played a role as well.
40
   Interview with Maruti Suzuki representatives, September 20, 2013.
41
   “The Indian automobile industry produced a total 1.69 million vehicles including passenger vehicles, commercial
vehicles, three wheelers and two wheelers in August 2013 as against 1.56 million in August 2012, registering a
growth of 8.18 percent over the same month last year,” http://www.ibef.org/industry/automobile-industry-in-india-
snapshot.
42
   An auto component producer setting up in the NCR today is likely to pay a large multiple for its land as it would
if it set up in the southern United States, let alone Michigan. Building on Sanjoy Chakravorty, “A New Price
Regime: Land Markets in Urban and Rural India,” Economic and Political Weekly XLVIII, no. 17 (2013), pp. 45-54.


                                                        21
parts of the supply chain co-locating, with consequent knowledge spill-overs among suppliers of
the same part, and economies of scale in component production.43

In sum, the performance of domestic freight in India may be imposing an unpalatable choice on
the auto and auto-components industries: either have a final assembly industry that can deliver
effectively to the domestic market, organized in clusters of dissimilar producers around large
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs); or have a world-class auto-components industry,
organized in clusters of similar parts producers, distributing goods to OEMs around the country,
forced to maintain high buffer stocks and forego just-in-time production. Industry bodies have
therefore begun to clamor for public land acquisition and subsidies for parts producers, in order
to mitigate this difficulty, but this would only solve part of the dilemma, if at all.

Though these effects are most noticeable in automotive, they is by no means restricted to it. For
example, apparel and textiles producers in many parts of the country complain that they simply
do not have a domestic supply chain – despite many of the products they need being available in
the country. So they do not bid for large or rapid orders and both they and firms elsewhere
forego sales, depressing capacity utilization and hence investment.44

International comparisons

Finally, it might be argued that logistics is not as serious a constraint to global competitiveness
as it seems, if India’s performance is no different to its competitors. Unfortunately, it is difficult
to find the like-to-like comparisons of performance, as analyzed in this study, that would be
needed to answer this conclusively.45

Overall, though, the picture is that India’s relative performance on domestic logistics is worse
than its relative performance on international logistics. This accords with the anecdote widely




43
   This concern was voiced explicitly at the conference on regulatory barriers to firm growth organized in June 2013
at the initiative of then Chief Economic Adviser Raghuram Rajan, where the Automotive Component Manufacturers
Association of India (ACMA) highlighted the requirements from OEMs for suppliers to move next to their factories
as a major problem facing the component industry.
44
   See “A New Agenda” for a more detailed analysis of the other factors that cause this.
45
   The World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index (LPI), the most used basis of international comparisons, places
India in the middle of the pack internationally – it ranks 46th in the 2012 Logistics Performance Index. However, this
ranking is based upon a survey of global freight forwarders and express carriers, providing feedback on the logistics
‘friendliness’ of the countries in which they operate and those with which they trade. Data collected in the domestic
part of the same survey on the logistical constraints within countries perceived by logistical experts working in those
countries does not inform this ranking. A comparison with other lower middle income countries on the domestic
LPI gives a more mixed picture of India’s performance. Being based on surveys of agents inside countries, this
ranking is vulnerable to perception bias, i.e., what is ‘low’ performance to respondents in one country may be ‘high’
in another. Moreover, this ranking is also oriented towards exports, primarily considering distances and lead times
to reach ports.


                                                          22
quoted in these reports, that shipments from China take as much time and cost to reach major
ports in India as domestic shipments from elsewhere in the country.

                                                     Figure 946




Moreover, domestic logistics performance will matter more for India than for almost any other
lower middle-income country. One of India’s largest potential strengths, as one of the only
continental economies, is its size and diversity. These potential strengths are particularly of
benefit to manufacturing, with its large economies of scale. As such, domestic logistics that is
substantially worse – in relative terms – than international logistics will nullify exactly what
should be India’s core strengths. On this front, India substantially lags behind the few other
continental economies (e.g., its trucks travel half the distance per day as those in Brazil).

In this light, there is perhaps a more pertinent comparison, drawing on the economic history of
another continental economy. Perhaps one indication of the foregone economic gains imposed
by these freight deficiencies comes from the economic history of another continental economy.
The single largest gains in TFP growth in US economic history occurred in the 1930s, during the




46
     Annex A, p. 13, citing RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013.


                                                            23
Great Depression.47 In that period, when US income was still just around $5,000 per capita, TFP
grew more than in any other peak-to-peak cycle since the 1880s, and including the electrification
of manufacturing in the 1920s and the IT boom of the 1990s and 2000s. The source of that TFP
growth was the reconfiguration of the US logistics industry to take advantage of the potential of
rail and road freight. At present, therefore, the regulatory burdens on its freight system imply
India is missing out on the single largest boost to living standards in economic history, one
greater than either electrification or the ‘IT revolution’.

4.   REFORM PRIORITIES

Carrying through a few major reforms could make as much difference as massive investment

The good news is that major steps forward in unlocking the freight industry are possible even
without the massive investments routinely called for in consulting reports. As a priority, the
almost 60 percent of journey time spent without driving could be significantly reduced through a
reform agenda such as:

     1. Implement the national GST;
     2. Follow it up with a national campaign to make the roads close to check-post free;
     3. As an initial step, enable and encourage states that have not yet adopted an ‘e-permit’
        system to do so, and ensure coherence between them;
     4. Fully implement a true ‘risk management system’ (RMS) for customs, to create a ‘green
        channel’ that makes customs hassle-free for young, small firms with clean records;
     5. Implement Government’s desired intent to introduce e-tolling on national highways, and
        promote its extension to all state highways, to eliminate waiting at tolls.48
One other non-regulatory action, but one that might also be highly cost effective, would be to
devise and implement programs to improve the human capital of the trucking industry. In other
words, this would involve a concerted effort to improve the health and education levels of
truckers themselves.49 Doing so would substantially reduce time lost to illness, disputes from
misunderstood forms, and so forth.




47
   AJ Field, A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and US Economic Growth (Yale University Press, 2011).
48
   The key challenges to meeting effective implementation of e-tolling on national highways was not reviewed
further as part of this study.
49
   Maruti Suzuki is in fact doing this already on its own initiative. It reduced the number of accidental damages per
lakh dispatches from 59 in financial year 2007-2008 to 28 in 2012-13, thanks to a joint initiative of Maruti Suzuki
and its logistics partners on training of drivers combined with health camps and better monitoring of the fleet
condition. The introduction of GPS systems alone resulted in a reduction of 3% in delays in the last two years.
Interview with Maruti Suzuki representatives, September 20, 2013.


                                                         24
This is not to say that investments in transport infrastructure and reforms of the freight sector are
not needed. Further improvements in unlocking transport and logistics will be needed, and have
been identified elsewhere.50 The principal focus of this concluding section, however, will be the
list of actions described above. The common theme in this list is that all of the needed measures
have already been identified by Government. Unfortunately, many have been implemented
partially, or not at all, so that their impact has languished. The more deep-seated problem is then
the lack of feedback mechanisms: policymakers may believe the problem has been solved when
the notification has been issued, while the systems do not take root.

More generally, these are reforms that will impose short-term costs – economic and political – on
some sets of stakeholders, in exchange for large long-term gains. The distribution of those costs
and benefits is therefore a difficult issue, one that is resistant to purely technical issues, and
hence requiring a careful, long-term process of consensus building.

The principal argument of this section – and this study – is that there can be few higher priorities
demanding the attention of policymakers and stakeholders than that process, given what is at
stake. This is nowhere more true than with the national GST.

Implementing GST

The GST has been long-delayed, with recent estimates suggesting a date sometime in 2015.51
Some firms described waiting for it as akin to ‘Waiting for Godot’. The changes it will cause are
summarized in Figure 10: although the entities involved, and flow of funds seem similar, the
variety of different – and cascading – taxes, locally administered, will be replaced by a unified
administration, avoiding the need for reconciliation when crossing every state border.




50
   See, for instance, the strategy proposed in the 12th Five Year Plan to improve the transport sector in a
comprehensive manner. Specifically on ports, see: World Bank, “Reforming the Indian Port Sector,” June 2013; and
on the trucking industry, see, for instance: JPS Associates, “Study on Economics of Trucking Industry.”
51
   The Government of India had introduced the Constitution 115 th Amendment Bill (GST) in 2011 in the Lok Sabha
to provide for the introduction of a GST. The Bill envisages a harmonization of the indirect tax regime by
subsuming a variety of taxes levied by the Centre and the States (such as service tax, state VAT, etcetera),
contributing to the creation of a single market. On 7 August 2013, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Finance, to which the Bill had been referred, submitted its report with observations and recommendations. Several
of the recommendations relate to the need to have broad consensus among States with respect to the implementation
of the GST, and address the concern of states regarding loss of revenue. At the time of the presentation of the Union
Interim Budget 2014-2015, it was announced that the Bill would be deferred till after the general elections in April-
May 2014. Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance, “73rd Report on The Constitution (115th Amendment)
Bill, 2011,” presented to Lok Sabha; laid in Rajya Sabna on 7 August, 2013; Institute for Policy Research Studies,
“Standing Committee Report Summary: The Constitution 115 th Amendment Bill, 2011 (GST),” PRS Legislative
Research, August 26, 2013; and “Union Interim Budget 2014-2015 Speech of P. Chidambaram, Minister of
Finance,” February 17, 2014.


                                                         25
Given the importance of this reform to the freight system, hence to manufacturing
competitiveness, and so to the target of 100 million jobs, it must continue to be a high priority.52
The process of implementation requires not only the resolution of a number of issues on fiscal
transfers and compensation, between Center and State, but putting in place large and
sophisticated systems to efficiently handle transactions once it is done.

As well as a continued search for imaginative solutions to the fiscal issues, and sustained
pressure from all stakeholders, this would motivate investing in advance in the necessary
systems. As an example, though on a much smaller scale, in Malaysia a national GST reform
has taken many years to pass through the political process. As part of the ‘One Malaysia’ plan, it
was decided to build – in advance – the systems and capabilities needed in the Ministry of
Finance and the provinces. The result was that when, the Prime Minister announced a decision
to implement the reform, the time taken to implement it in practice had been brought down, by
some estimates, from three years to one.53

Moreover, even after GST comes into force, a careful program of graduated efficiency
improvement and subsequent removal of checkpoints will need to be undertaken to ensure its full
benefits are reaped. A side-effect of the intense dialogue around the reform is that institutional
channels have been created among participants, particularly among the States and between them
and the Centre. It would be a waste for those institutional capabilities to dissipate once the initial
disputes are settled. As such, there should be a strong case for retaining the working groups,
committees and forums created even after GST comes into effect, and orienting them to the goal
of ‘seamless State crossings’ by a certain date. This could also be supported by a system of
monitoring and feedback in ways that could also strengthen long-term capabilities for revising
and implementing policies for domestic market integration.54




52
   “Implementation of a comprehensive GST across goods and services is expected, ceteris paribus, to provide gains
to India’s GDP somewhere within a range of 0.9 to 1.7 per cent ,” according to NCAER, “Moving to Goods and
Services Tax in India: Impact on India’s Growth and International Trade,” Final report prepared for the Thirteenth
Finance Commission, Government of India, December, 2009.
53
   The Government of Malaysia, though, still decided to delay the final coming-into-effect until 2015, to provide
time for expectations to adjust.
54
   For examples of how feedback mechanisms could be included in policy processes and implementation, see the
just in time note on Manufacturing Policy Implementation and the Concept of a “Backbone Organization” ; and as
the India Backbone Implementation Network (IbIn) aims to catalyze in practice.


                                                        26
                                                                      Figure 10
Comparison of the present and proposed tax structure under GST – (1/2)




Source: Accenture Goods & Services Tax (Transforming Supply Chain Performance in India)




Comparison of the present and proposed tax structure under GST – (2/2)




Source: Accenture Goods & Services Tax (Transforming Supply Chain Performance in India)




                                                                             27
State-level actions

Change does not need to wait for GST, and GST will not solve all problems. Many can be
tackled already by States, and some will have to be tackled by them.

As described in Section 1, many check posts exist within State borders as well and will not be
removed simply by GST. Many of these impose delays as documents are checked and informal
arrangements made, even where regulatory changes have introduced All-India Permits or other
such measures. Many of these can be addressed even in advance of GST, and should be the
object of continuing reform even once it is in place. One example often mentioned is that
Haryana has entirely shifted to a mobile squad based system of monitoring and enforcement. On
the other hand, such squads are expensive: even Maharahstra only had 38 squads, for the entire
state, in 2003. Moreover, such squads require careful organizational set up and iterative design,
to avoid monitoring and other issues. Needless to say, these issues will be particularly acute in
low-income states.

Some States have also taken a lead already in reducing time barriers at their borders. For
example, many firms have located in Andhra Pradesh that use the Chennai port, or that tap into
the skills pool of Bangalore, since its borders are considered seamless.

Another promising reform that has already been undertaken is the introduction of ‘e-road
permits’. These allow firms to print out permits in advance for their shipments, which allow for
the rapid clearing of state border and other check-posts. Awareness of this system was fairly
widespread among the companies interviewed, all of whom reported positive results from it.
Those who did use it most had among the lowest total logistics costs. However, implementation
has been sporadic, both between and within States, and it requires continuing impetus.

This extends beyond the headline reforms, to matters as operational as opening hours. Several
customs offices at ports are said not to operate on weekends. This issue recently seems to have
been addressed.55 This not only causes days of delay for shipments arriving at the end of the
week, it means the following week starts with a backlog. The costs thereby incurred are then
said to be charged to the firms. The Government has stated the desire to move to 365 day
operation, but, again, implementation has lagged intent.

The principal obstacles to carrying through these reforms seem to be distrust between
stakeholders. At a micro-level, firms report the feeling of institutional distrust by the customs
office, in which every exporter or importer is treated as suspect, except, of course, for those that
are breaking the law through informal arrangements. A large number of informal arrangements



55
  Focus group discussion with garments exporters, August 13, 2013. Recently, a 24X7 customs clearance (launched
as a pilot in 2012) was extended to include other ports as well. Ministry of Finance, “CBEC Extends 24X7 Customs
Facility for Export Cargo from 1st July, 2013,” Press release, June 25, 2013.


                                                      28
would also be threatened by such reforms, informal gains that would not be compensated by
system-wide gains in growth, creating stiff opposition among some powerful stakeholders.

At a macro-level, promises to States that they will gain in the long-term despite short-term costs
from freer domestic trade can run up against short time-horizons among political leaders. The
costs will come this electoral cycle, the gains the next. There is, as well, an (often deserved)
distrust of external analyses, particularly when it is conducted or presented by stakeholders who
would gain from the reform.

However, in terms of the various challenges facing reform in India, these would seem to be those
facing the least insurmountable barriers. Certainly the costs of these reforms, and the political
questions involved, would seem much smaller than, for example, labor laws, the distribution of
costs among electricity consumers or the allocation of national resources.

The gains would be enormous, especially for inclusion and low-income states

Not only does the contention here seem more surmountable, but the potential gains are among
the highest on offer in any policy area.

Simply halving the delays due to road blocks, tolls and other stoppages could cut freight times by
some 20-30 percent, and logistics costs by even more, as much as 30-40 percent.56 This would
be tantamount to a gain in competitiveness of some 3-4 percent of net sales for key
manufacturing sectors. This is a large multiple of the amounts these firms spend on research and
development, and approaches the entire wage bill in some sectors.

At little direct cost, it could have an impact on freight times that would be equivalent to doubling
the quality of the national road network. If it spurred the kind of rationalization of production
locations and reaping of scale economies seen in other continental economies. So the rationale
would seem compelling for a high-priority national campaign, to finally create an integrated
national market in goods, through a concentrated effort to fully implement the reforms needed to
dismantle regulatory barriers to movement.

Not only the direct effects, but the side benefits of such an initiative would be substantial. Most
notably, the Government of India has made it a goal to reduce the enormous disparities in
income between some of the States. Drawing again on economic history, in the US in the late
19th and early 20th centuries differentials between the states reached similar levels to those in
India today. The single most effective means of convergence was again the true integration of
the national market in goods: this meant that firms nationally moved to lower priced locations,




56
     See earlier calculation.


                                                29
from which they were easily able to supply the markets of high-income areas.57 This naturally
created a convergence in incomes as investment flowed from the richer to the poorer states. This
leveraged huge flows of private investment to address the inclusion challenge.

Without an integrated market in India, therefore, it is unlikely that private investment will flow
to take advantage of lower costs in the low-income states. Instead, it is likely to continue to
locate in second-tier cities and peri-urban areas in the more advanced states,58 within close
distance of the markets of the first tier cities and wealthy states.

On the other hand, it should be noted as a caveat that such a campaign, and the reforms and
processes composing it, will be necessary though not sufficient to overcome the fragmentation of
manufacturing in India. As noted in the studies on textiles and electronics, to achieve full
connection will require a suite of complex, complementary policies – and, more than that, a
strengthened learning, coordination and policy process.59

Other measures, such as subsidy schemes, are unlikely to have much impact

Various alternative measures have at times been proposed to overcome these difficulties. These
have often revolved around subsidies, such as the requests from the auto-component industry
mentioned above. Another has been various Freight Subsidy Schemes to subsidize freight in
backward or remote areas.

The analyses conducted for these studies indicate that such measures are unlikely to have much
effect, and may instead be counter-productive. This is because direct freight costs are only a
portion, as little as half, of total logistics costs. Beyond those, any location specific freight
subsidies are likely to just distort locations, breaking down the cluster effects and economies of
scale that true reform would unleash. As such, they are liable to work against precisely the
benefits which are sought. Similar arguments hold against ‘logistics zones’, and the recent
proliferation of ‘logistics’ or ‘industrial’ corridors. Instead, thorough reform to the regulations
inhibiting a healthy freight system will allow a natural evolution of the distribution of economic
activities, at more limited fiscal costs, with greater long-term TFP growth and inclusion.

The urgency and potential for reform is enormous

In conclusion, there is no substitute for the thorough implementation of an integrated reform
agenda for the freight industry. This is a necessary step if India is to reach the ambitious goals of
the National Manufacturing Plan. It is as urgent, likely more so, than addressing the oft-cited
trinity of power, land and labour regulations. It is politically less contentious, and most of the



57
   Robert J. Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Economic growth and convergence across the United States,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 1990, No. w3419.
58
   Klaus Desmet et al. “The Spatial Development of India,” Policy Research Working Paper 6060, May 2012.
59
   As IbIn aims to catalyze nationally.


                                                       30
needed reforms have been agreed in principle. As such, a firm and consistent push towards
implementation could reap gains for decades to come. However, with every passing year the
structure of activity remains sub-scale, sub-optimal location decisions are entrenched, and Indian
firms are locked out of both global and domestic supply chains. There is thus no time to waste.




                                                31
  Flexible in Approach, Firm on Results




                                             Freight Inefficiencies in India
                                    Key Findings: Quantitative Survey and Repeater Interviews
                                                           World Bank
                                                         September 2013

© 2011 RedSeer Consulting Confidential `and Proprietary Information   www.redseerconsulting.com   Query@redseerconsulting.com
Contents




  Survey Findings


  Logistics Cost Estimations


  Deep Dive: Select Companies




                                |   1
Executive summary – 1/2


    1.   This survey was done telephonically reaching out to 69 companies in understanding their supply
         chain to assess the impact of inefficient freight to the industry. While industry specific data is not
         statistically significant, but it does provide a directional indicator towards the direct / indirect costs
         borne by different industries

    2.   Companies on average spend about 3.7% of their sales into both inbound and outbound freight.
         65% of the companies bear the inbound freight themselves while 48% bear the cost for outbound

    3.   Outsourcing the transportation requirement is the major model for freight. Only 12% of the
         interviewed companies owned any transport infrastructure. More than 60% of the companies have
         contracts with less than 5 carriers, however a significant chunk of companies negotiate freight
         rates on a daily basis

    4.   Major reasons for delays and / or uncertainty mentioned by companies are: Road Infrastructure
         (Rank 1), Custom Clearance Delays (Rank 2), State border check post clearances (Rank 3)

    5.   Average number of domestic suppliers per company range from 50 to 70, while the average
         inbound distance is around 450 km

    6.   Average inbound transit time for inbound freight is around 2.7 days while that for outbound is
         around 3.7 days;

    7.   On an average, 16% of incoming orders are delayed due to unexpected delays while 7% orders
         are delayed due to uncertain delays. Average delay due to expected reasons is around 1.5 days
         while that due to unpredictable reasons is 1.1 days

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                     |   2
Executive summary – 2/2


    8.   Auto-component industry is the leanest of the four industries analyzed with an average inventory
         of 28 days, while Textile and Electronics have the highest average inventory of about 2 months
         (56 days). On average, 43 days of inventory was found to be maintained across industries,
         approximately 27% of the above inventory is buffer stock (i.e. 11.6 days)

    9.   Even though 55% of the companies interviewed use a premium freight provider for high priority
         orders, majority companies are not willing to pay more that 2% of raw material cost as a premium
         to faster suppliers

    10. Average outbound distance is ~700 km, auto-component (487 km) has the least while heavy
        engineering (926 km) has the highest; average number of state borders crossed on the way to
        customers is ~3.7

    11. While all interviewed companies realize the importance of delivery time for their customers,
        majority say that the revenue growth would be limited to 10% if both the delays and uncertainty in
        domestic freight improve by 25%

    12. For international purchases, the total transit time is 4.5 weeks; on average 4 days are spent in
        customs clearance with 44% companies reporting non-zero damages during customs clearance

    13. Exports delivery takes on average 4 weeks in transit with major geographies spread across the
        world; Electronics take the least transit time while auto-components the highest




Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                            |   3
The survey covered 69 companies across auto-components, textile,
electronics and heavy engineering sector
# of Companies


By Size (Annual Turnover in INR Crores)             By Industry
                  N = 69
                                                                  TOTAL # of      COS.        COS.
   >1000 Cr        12%                                 INDUSTRY   SURVEYED     EXPORTING   IMPORTING
                                                                  COMPANIES        FG          RM
                                                    Auto
                                                                      18         44%         67%
 B/w 50 and
                                                    components
    1000 Cr        41%
                                                    Textile           18         61%         17%

                                                    Electronics       17         71%         88%

                                                    Heavy
                                                                      16         81%         63%
                                                    Engineering
       <50                                          TOTAL             69         64%         58%
     Crores        48%




Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                  |   4
Median inbound and outbound freight are approximately 3.0% of sales.
Lesser variation in the inbound freight charges compared with outbound
Freight Cost as % of Sales                                                                               Freight Cost Borne By


                                                                                                                             10%
                                       Inbound                                  Outbound
                                                                                                                 23%
      INDUSTRY              Avg.          Med            SD           Avg.          Med            SD
                                                                                                                 12%         42%
  Auto
                             3.1           2.5           2.5           3.8           3.0           3.1
  components

  Textile                    3.9           3.7           2.4           3.4           3.0           2.7

  Electronics                4.0           3.0           3.3           3.1           3.0           1.4           65%
  Heavy                                                                                                                      48%
                             3.5           1.6           4.3           4.1           3.0           3.8
  Engineering

  TOTAL                      3.7           3.0           3.1           3.6           3.0           2.8
                                                                                                                Inbound    Outbound
                                                                                                                 n = 69     n = 67


                                                                                                               Company        Suppliers

                                                                                                                              Both, it
                                                                                                               Customers
                                                                                                                              depends

    Question: What would be the % of revenues that you or your supplier/customer spend on logistics?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                         |   5
Freight costs for inbound raw materials is mainly borne by the consuming
manufacturer
Who Bears the Freight Cost

                                                                                                                                          Both, it
                                                                           Company                   Suppliers            Customers
                                                                                                                                          depends


     Auto Components                                        Textile                                 Electronics                 Heavy Engineering
                         6%
                                                   17%                                                           18%             19%        20%
                                                                                               24%
     33%                                            6%                33%
                        29%
                                                                                                6%                               13%

                                                                                                                 35%
     22%

                                                                                                                                            73%
                                                   78%
                                                                      67%                      71%                               69%
                        65%

     44%                                                                                                         47%


                                                                                                                                             7%
   Inbound          Outbound                     Inbound          Outbound                   Inbound        Outbound           Inbound    Outbound
    n = 18             n = 17                      n = 18             n = 18                   n = 17            n = 17          n = 16     n = 15


    Question: Who bears the freight charges for your suppliers (inbound) / deliveries (outbound)?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                               |    6
Only 12% of the surveyed companies own relevant transport infrastructure

Infrastructure Owned by Companies


                                                                            By Size                                               Number of Transporters
Overall                                                                     Annual Turnover
                                                       n=69                                                                          64% of companies use
                                                                                                                                      less than 5 transporters
                                                                                                          22%                         for outbound
                     12%
                                                                                                                                     62% respondents use
                                                                                                                                      less than 5 transporters
                                                                                                                                      for buying raw material

                                                                                                                                     However, many
                                                                                100%                                                  respondents were found
                                                                                                                                      to be negotiating the
                                                                                                          78%                         freight charges on daily
                                                                                                                                      basis rather than having
                                              88%
                                                                                                                                      annual contracts with
                                                                                                                                      transporters



            We outsource
                                             We own
            most of our
                                             some logistics
            logistics                                                     <INR 50 Cr                 >INR 50 Cr
                                             infrastructure
            requirement                                                           n=33                    n=36
    Question: Do you own logistics infrastructure for material handling and transportation? (for example: trucks, cranes etc.)?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                          |   7
65% of respondents mention that the major reason for freight delay in
India is due to the inadequacy of India’s road infrastructure
Reasons for delay – % of Respondents
                                                                                                                                                                 n=69
          India’s Road Infrastructure not
                                                                                                  65%
                               adequate

       Customs department not efficient
                           for imports                                               46%


                   State border check-post                                   36%
                                clearances


         Non-freight related (Supplier or                          22%
                      Planning Related)
                                                                  20%
       Transporters / Logistics Provider
             not efficient / professional
                Rain / Climatic Conditions                        20%

      Supplier’s lack of control over the
    logistics infrastructure (doesn’t own                     14%
                                  trucks)

   Use of older vehicle by transporters                      13%

    Other Reasons: Low use of technology (10%), Form filling is a tedious process (5%), Errant drivers etc.
    Question: What according to you are the major sources of delay (and / or) uncertainty in the transportation time in your raw material purchases / customer shipments?
    Choose top three reasons.

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                |   8
Dom. Pur    Dom. Sale        Intl. Pur     Intl. Sale

Number of average active domestic suppliers range from 50 to 70, while
the average inbound distance is ~450 kms
 Average # of suppliers                                                                    Distance of Inbound Supplies (in KMs)



Median          35                 15               35                 40
                                                                                                                              Inbound Distance (kms)

                                                        70                                           INDUSTRY                 Avg.     Med       SD
                62                                                                               Auto
                                                                  Average = 60
                                                                                                                              393      225      427
                                   54                                                            components
                                                                       51
                                                                                                 Textile                      661      300      603

                                                                                                 Electronics                  369      200      380

                                                                                                 Heavy
                                                                                                                              391      225      425
                                                                                                 Engineering

                                                                                                 TOTAL                        456      250      474




              Auto-                                                Heavy
                                 Textile       Electronics
           components                                            Engineering

                        Average # of Active Suppliers
    Question: What is the total # of active suppliers (from which you have procured during the last 1 year): Domestic only?
    Question: What is average distance of inbound supplies: Domestic only (KMs)? (including co-located suppliers)

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                      |   9
Dom. Pur     Dom. Sale      Intl. Pur     Intl. Sale

Average inbound transit time is around 2.7 days while outbound is around
3.7 days
Average transit time by industry (in days)



                                               Inbound                                    Outbound

             INDUSTRY              Avg.           Med             SD           Avg.           Med            SD

           Auto
                                    2.5            2.0            2.5           2.9            3.5           2.2
           components

           Textile                  3.3            3.0            2.4           4.2            4.0           2.9

           Electronics              2.1            1.0            1.5           2.7            2.0           1.8

           Heavy
                                    2.3            1.3            2.2           5.2            5.3           2.9
           Engineering

           TOTAL                    2.6            2.0            2.2           3.7            3.0           2.6




    Question Inbound: What is the average time to deliver from supplier warehouse (largest suppliers of top-3 raw materials)? The data is averaged out over all three top
    raw materials. The standard deviation and median is calculated on these average transit times.
    Question Outbound: What is the average time to deliver to your major customers (in days) after leaving your factory / warehouse?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                |   10
Dom. Pur      Dom. Sale      Intl. Pur     Intl. Sale

Auto-component industry has the least percentage of orders with
expected delays while electronics has the highest
 % of Orders with uncertain delay                                                           Average # of Days of Inventory
Days of                                                                                % of
expected        1.4             2.0                 1.7                1.0             inventory
delays                                                                                           36%                   26%               25%                24%
                                                                                       as Buffer
                                                                                       Stock
Days of
uncertain       0.4             1.7                 1.1                0.7
delays
                                                                                                                         56                56
            Expected               Uncertain
            Delays                 Delays

                                                 22%
                                                                                                                                                              34
                              17%                                  17%
                                                                                                      28


              9%                                          9%
                                                                             8%
                                         7%
                      4%


               Auto-                                               Heavy
                                 Textile       Electronics                                          Auto-                             Heavy
            components                                           Engineering                                  Textile  Electronics
                                                                                                 components                        Engineering
                          % of Orders that are Delayed                                               Average Number of Days of Inventory
    Question: What percent of your purchase orders are delivered after the promised / planned date? What is the average delay in these orders (# of days)?
    Question: What are your average inventory levels at any given point of time (# of days / value of material)? What percentage of this inventory is buffer stock?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                     |   11
Dom. Pur    Dom. Sale       Intl. Pur    Intl. Sale

55% of the companies use premium freight providers for high priority
orders
Companies willingness to pay extra to deliver on time

% of Companies
choosing
                         41%                          44%                      82%                 56%        Important Aspects
premium freight
providers
                                                                                                                 52% of respondents
                                                            B/w 2.01                More than
                                 <=2%                                                                             cited speed of delivery
                                                            and 5%                  5.01%
                                                                                                                  as a key aspect for their
                                                                                                                  business
                                                      12%                      8%
                         12%                                                                      14%
                                                                                                                 45% cited reliability of
                                                                                                                  suppliers on promised
                                                                              38%                 21%             delivery time as key
                         33%
                                                      44%
                                                                                                                 25% were concerned
                                                                                                                  about damages to the
                                                                                                                  goods in transit
                                                                                                  64%
                         53%                                                  54%
                                                      44%



                       Auto-                                                                      Heavy
                                                 Textile           Electronics
                    components                                                                  Engineering
                                                Willingness to Pay Extra
    Question: Do you use a higher price freight company for a high priority order?
    Question: How much % extra are you willing to pay for suppliers who deliver on time?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                        |   12
Dom. Pur    Dom. Sale       Intl. Pur     Intl. Sale

Heavy engineering has the largest outbound distance while auto-
components has the least
 Average distance outbound (KMs)                                                          Importance of Delivery Times for Customers

                                                                                                                                 Moderately
Avg # of                                                                                                Very Imp.                                           Not so Imp.
                                                                                                                                 Imp.
state
               2.9               4.4               3.3                4.1
borders
crosssed                                                                                                                                                  6%
                                                                                                   11%
                                                                     926
                                                                                                                     35%

       Average = 705             718               703



               487                                                                                                                    100%
                                                                                                   89%                                                   94%

                                                                                                                     65%




              Auto-                                               Heavy                           Auto-                                               Heavy
                                Textile       Electronics                                                            Textile      Electronics
           components                                           Engineering                    components                                           Engineering
                     Average Outbound Distance (KMs)                                                          Importance of Delivery Times

    Question: What is the average distance of your products from your factory to where they are consumed? (in KMs)
    Question: How important are delivery times for your domestic customers? What value of orders (as %age of annual revenues) is lost due to inefficient delivery times?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                |   13
Dom. Pur    Dom. Sale       Intl. Pur     Intl. Sale

87% companies predict less than 10% increase in their revenues if both
delay and uncertainty is reduced by 25%
% increase in revenues with improvement in freight efficiency

           <10%                     B/w 11 and                 B/w 21 and                   More than
           increase                 20% incr.                  30% incr.                    31% increase
                                                                                                                    Important Aspects
                                                                                               6%
                        11%                                                                                             Overall, 87% companies said
                                                                                                                         that the revenue increase is
                                                                       35%                                               likely to be less than 10% given
                                                                                                                         an increase in domestic freight
                                                                                                                         efficiency

                                                                                                                        When asked to quantify the
                                                                                                                         potential of specific increase,
                                              100%                                                                       many were not able to quantify
                                                                                              94%
                        89%                                                                                              showing the lack of information
                                                                                                                         planning in managing freight
                                                                       65%
                                                                                                                        Also, respondents were quick to
                                                                                                                         point out that any particular
                                                                                                                         improvement would also impact
                                                                                                                         their competitors in the same
                                                                                                                         way and thus would not yield
                                                                                                                         significant additional revenue
                     Auto-                                                                Heavy
                                              Textile             Electronics
                  components                                                            Engineering

    Question: What %age of annual revenues would increase if there is an increase in efficiency of domestic shipments? Or in other words if both delay and
    uncertainty in your domestic shipments is reduced by 25%, what would be the impact on your revenue?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                            |   14
Dom. Pur     Dom. Sale       Intl. Pur     Intl. Sale

Imports take on average of 4.5 weeks to arrive while 4 days are spent in
customs clearance
Average Lead time for Imports and Customs



                                         Total Imports Transit Time (Weeks)                      Customs Clearance Time (Days)                           % Cos
                                                                                                                                                        reporting
                                                                                                                                                       damages at
                INDUSTRY                    Avg.               Med                SD               Avg.              Med                SD
                                                                                                                                                        customs
           Auto components
                                             5.4                5.0               1.6               4.3               4.0               2.5                 27%
           (n = 12)

           Textile (n = 4)                   3.9                4.0               0.6               3.1               3.5               1.2                 25%

           Electronics (n=15)                3.8                3.0               3.1               4.3               3.5               2.3                 40%

           Heavy Engineering
                                             4.9                5.0               2.7               4.4               3.5               2.7                 77%
           (n=9)

           TOTAL                             4.5                4.1               2.5               4.2               3.5               2.3                 44%




                   44% companies reported non-zero damages of the imported goods at customs, while the average
                                        damages was ~1% of the value of goods imported


    Question: What is the average time taken from shipment by supplier to delivery at your doorstep (in weeks)? What is Average # of days in which material gets
    cleared by customs (from time of arrival to time of customs clearance in Days or hours)? Approximately, what % value of the total purchase value of imports is lost
    or damaged in customs?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                   |     15
Dom. Pur     Dom. Sale      Intl. Pur    Intl. Sale

Exports on average take a transit time of 4.1 weeks

Average transit time for exports                                                                 Top Export Destinations (# of mentions)

                                                                                                                           Germany (15%)
                                                                                                      Auto
                                           Exports Transit Time (Weeks)                            Components              France (12%)
                                                                                                                           USA (9%)
                                                                                                        N=34
                 INDUSTRY                   Avg.            Med               SD                                           Japan & Middle East (6%)
           Auto components
                                             7.2             6.0              1.6
           (n= 7)                                                                                                          Bangladesh (12%)
           Textile (n=12)                    3.6             3.0              1.0                     Textile              China & Turkey (10%)

                                                                                                       N=52                USA (8%)
           Electronics (n=12)                1.9             1.4              1.2
                                                                                                                           UK & Vietnam (6%)
           Heavy Engineering
                                             5.5             4.0              3.2
           (n=12)                                                                                                          USA (21%)
                                                                                                   Electronics             Brazil (5%)
           TOTAL                             4.1             3.0              2.6
                                                                                                        N=39               Germany (5%)
                                                                                                                           Europe (5%)

          Electronics goods (being lighter in weight) are sometimes
        exported by air freight thus making the transit time significantly                           Heavy                 China, USA (10%)
                                     lower.                                                        Engineering             Germany / Europe (7%)
                                                                                                        N=42               Australia, Thailand & Saudi
                                                                                                                            Arabia (5%)
    Question: What is the average time taken for shipment to reach export customers (in weeks)? Which countries are you export to?

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                    |    16
Some insights from research

  Use of Tech Savvy Methods: “Efficiency of         Check Post Hindrance: “Check post         Congestion at ports: “Delay at
  Freight forwarders and understanding the          delays are especially a major issue       ICD/Sea Port are causing too much
  various competences that exist/missing            when our materials are shipped to         congestion for the inland freight. Sea
  which are important has to be elaborated.         Karnataka and Kochi. Then there is the    ports should be well equipped to
  For example most Couriers have ‘online            problem of paying 2% CST against C-       handle high traffic“– Mr. Mayur
  tracking’ of parcels – but trucking               form else we have to pay 5%. Also,        Gupta, Joint Managing Director
  companies and shippers do not. Similarly          there is an Octroi issue with
  other tech savvy methods need to be               Maharashtra Government . If GST is
  surveyed in detail.“Mrs. Shobhana Prakash,        introduced this will reduce the waiting
  MD                                                period at the check post/ interstate      Route Plan: “Route plans for the
                                                    borders enabling us to give faster        suppliers should be very well
                                                    delivery. “– Mr. Sanjay Mehta, MD         planned as it will smoothen the
  Green Channel: “For regular or recognized                                                   movement of the goods“– Mr. Amit
  importer there should be a green channel                                                    Bhargava, MD
  where the material can be cleared directly        Unfunctional Software: “Custom
  and later on the formalities regarding the        Delays due to software of CBEC not
  paper can be done.” – Mr. Subhash Goyal,          working for uploading duty (paying
  MD                                                online). Also excise regulation           Dedicated Freight Corridor:
                                                    regarding consignment stock is a major    “Introduction of dedicated freight
  Online Custom Clearance “Government               problem as we are not allowed to keep     corridor will make the transportation
  should provide the facility of Self online        consignment stock. “– Mr. Nirmal          hassle free– Mr. Vipin Kumar,
  custom clearance.– Mr. Vivek Kaushal, GM-         Sharma, Senior Manager- Logistics         Director
  Marketing

  Bring GST: With GST the entire structure of       Road Infrastructure: Poor road            Logistics Train: “Introduction of
  taxation will be simplified.”– Mr. Vinod Ahuja,   infrastructure needs an immediate         special logistic trains should be there
  Chairman                                          action.”– Mr. Aditya, CFO                 for carrying goods – Mr. Amin Almel,
                                                                                              Director



                                                                                                                                 |    17
Contents




  Survey Findings


  Logistics Cost Estimations


  Deep Dive: Select Companies




                                |   18
The logistics costs for a manufacturer are estimated using the following
assumptions
Components of Logistics Cost
Assumptions and Sources


                                                                   Exports Transit Time (Weeks)

              Component                Sub Component            Unit of Measure                  Source/ Methodology

                                     Inward                  As % of Net Sales          From Survey
        Direct Freight
                                     Outward                 As % of Net Sales          From Survey

                                     Only capital cost not
        Inventory Cost of                                    As % of Net Sales          From Prowess: Average capital value of
                                     rent / warehousing
        Capital                                              Sales                      inventory for FY11-12
                                     costs

        Cost of Capital              15% Assumed, multiplied with inventory cost of capital to obtain carrying cost of inventory

                                                                                        From Prowess: FY2011-12 reported
        Packaging Costs                                      As % of Net Sales
                                                                                        packaging costs by industry
                                                             As % of Gross              From Survey: Average value taken by
        Lost Sales
                                                             Revenues                   industry <10 (5%), 11-20 (15%).
        EBITDA contribution                                                             From Prowess: FY2011-12 industry level
        from Lost Sales                                                                 PBDITA margin as % of net sales

        Damages in transit           Assumed 0.5% (more than the insurance premium that needs to be paid for freight)



Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                              |   19
The estimated total logistics costs1 vary between 10.4% of net sales to
14.1% of net sales

                                                                      Source: Prowess and Quantitative Surveys (all figures in %)1

                                                                     Auto-                                                                          Heavy
                           INDUSTRY                                                             Textiles                Electronics
                                                                  components                                                                     Engineering4

       Inward Freight                                                    3.1                        3.9                       4.0                        3.5

       Outward Freight                                                   3.8                        3.4                       3.1                        4.1

       Average Inventory as % of sales3                                  13                         26                        30                         19

       Cost of carrying inventory (at 15%
                                                                        1.95                        3.9                       4.5                       2.85
       cost of capital) as % of sales3

       Packaging Cost as % of sales                                      0.2                        0.9                       0.7                        0.4

       Lost sales as % of current
                                                                         6.1                        5.0                       8.5                        5.6
       revenues2

       PBDITA Margin2                                                   12.8                       13.6                      15.7                       16.0

       Damages in transit                                                0.5                        0.5                       0.5                        0.5

       TOTAL LOGISTICS COST                                             10.4                       13.3                      14.1                       12.2

    Note: 1) Formula used for calculating the total logistics costs = Inward Freight + Outward Freight + Cost of Carrying Inventory (Total) + Packaging Cost + Damages +
    EBITDA due to lost sales
    2) EBITDA due to lost sales is calculated by multiplying the lost sales as % of current revenues (from Survey) with PBDITA margin. (from Prowess).
    3) Inventory carrying cost is calculated based on total inventory. Since the value of transit inventory and buffer inventories are not available separately, the total value of
    inventory (from Prowess) is used. The total value of inventory is going to slightly overestimate the inventory carrying cost for the in-transit and buffer inventory
    4) Heavy Engineering data corresponds to machinery sector (manufacturing of all electrical and non-electrical machines including electronic equipments)

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013, Prowess Data for FY2011-12                                                                                             |   20
The total logistics cost as % of net sales is higher than the industry’s
employee costs as well as the power and fuel costs


                                                                 Source: Prowess and Estimations (all figures in %) FY2011-12

                                                                 Auto-                                                                      Heavy
            Manufacturing – Cost Heads                                                     Textiles              Electronics
                                                              components                                                                 Engineering1
       Employee Cost as % of Net Sales
       (FY11-12)                                                     7.1                      6.2                     11.8                      8.6

       Power, Fuel and Water Cost as %
       of Net Sales (FY11-12)                                        3.7                      6.8                      1.8                      1.1

       Research and Development Costs
       (capital & current account) as % of                           0.5                      2.4                      0.1                      1.1
       Net Sales (FY11-12)
       Logistics Costs as % of Net Sales
                                                                    10.4                     13.3                     14.1                     12.2
       (as estimated)




    Note: 1) Heavy Engineering data corresponds to machinery sector (manufacturing of all electrical and non-electrical machines including electronic equipments)

Source: Prowess and Estimations (all figures in %) FY2011-12                                                                                                        |   21
Related data from services sector1 shows that logistics costs are much
higher for manufacturing sector



                                                                           Source: Prowess and Estimations (all figures in %) FY2011-12

                                                                                Information
                  Services – Key Cost Heads1                                                                Hotels & Tourism                 Communication
                                                                                Technology
      Employee Cost as % of Net Sales (FY11-12)                                       45.4                            24.6                            14.3

      Power, Fuel and Water Cost as % of Net
      Sales (FY11-12)                                                                  0.9                             6.9                             8.8

      Distribution Expenses as % of Net Sales
                                                                                       0.1                             0.1                             0.0
      (FY11-12)
      Average Capital value of inventory as % of
                                                                                       1.2                             5.1                             3.0
      Net Sales (FY11-12)
      Inventory carrying cost as % of Net Sales
                                                                                       0.2                             0.8                             0.4
      (FY11-12)
      Total Logistics cost as % of Net Sales
                                                                                       0.3                             0.9                             0.4
      (FY11-12)1




    Note: 1) Logistics cost data for services is indicative and only includes the inventory carrying costs and the distribution expenses as percent of net sales
          2) Distribution expenses as % of net sales might by understated as some companies do not report distribution separate from sales expenses

Source: Prowess and Estimations (all figures in %) FY2011-12                                                                                                       |   22
On an average, a strike or shutdown causes a loss of 14 days over the
course of a year
                     1                                                                                         1
Labor Unrest                                                                             Labor Unrest
# of Disputes (including strikes and lockouts)                                           Yearly # of Days Lost, Average over 2006 to 2011


                                                                                                 Avg # of disputes per
                                                                                                 year                                        367


                                                                                                 Avg # of workers
                                                                                                 involved per dispute                       3202

            430                      421                     431
                         389                     392                                              Avg Total # of mandays
                                                                                                  lost (in million)                         16.7

                                                                                                 Avg # of days lost per
                                                                                                 worker involved                            14.2


                                                                         140                      Considering an average industrial calendar of
                                                                                                  300 working days, about 4.7% (=14.2/300) of
                                                                                                  potential production is lost due to labor unrest.
                                                                                                     However, only a few companies face the
                                                                                                  situation of strike or lockouts during one year.
                                                                                                   Therefore the actual average cost would be
            2006         2007      2008P       2009P       2010P 2011P2                                            lower than 3.9%

                    Average Outbound Distance (KMs)

    Note: 1) Data only pertains to the stoppages which are on account of industrial disputes and which involves 10 or more workers, whether directly and /or indirectly
          2) Data for 2008 to 2011 is provisional. Data for 2011 is only upto Nov 2011
Source: FICCI http://www.ficci.com/spdocument/20188/Industrial-unrest.pdf;
        Labour Bureau http://labourbureau.gov.in/idtab.htm                                                                                                          |   23
Due to the use of captive power plants (i.e. generators, backups etc.),
companies also incur an additional cost of electricity
Power Outages                                                           Shortfall in Production
# of Hours per week of Power Outage                                     % of Production Lost (if no power backup available)

                  More than 30
                  hours                                                    Production Lost            % of Companies with the loss in
                                                           Less than          Notional                       production of ..
                         21%                               1 hour
                                                                                 Sector              <2%         2-5%   6-10%    >10%

                                                 37%                      Textile
                                                                                                      56          11     15       18

                                                                          Automobile and
     B/w 11       11%                                                                                 23          10      0       67
     and 30
                                                                          Components
     hours                                                                Electronics and
                                                                                                       9          9       9       73
                                                                          Equipment

                          16%                                             Total (across all
                                                                                                      12          13     12       61
                                            15%                           verticals)

               B/w 6 and 10
               hours                         B/w 1 and 5 hours


             Even though most companies use their captive power plants and generators to tackle power outages, the
            cost per unit of captive power plants is around INR. 12-16 per KWH of electricity, while that for government
             supplied power is INR 5.2 to INR 8.5 per KWH. This additional cost is already included in the power, fuel
                  and water charges mentioned. However the cost of generator and maintenance is not included.



Source: FICCI- Lack of Affordable and Quality Power http://www.ficci.com/Sedocument/20218/Power-Report2013.pdf                    |   24
Median price of a generator is about INR 5 lakhs with an additional
maintenance cost of INR 75000
Price of Captive Generator
% of Respondents, INR Lakhs                                                                   Additional Cost of Captive Power
                                                                                              Plants
                      More than 50 Lakhs
                                 1%                                                              Backup: Some companies own
                                                                                                  multiple generators to ensure
                                                           Less than                              that the backup has a backup
                                                           1 Lakhs
                                                                                                 Maintenance: Median
     B/w 25.1
     and 50         33%                                                                           maintenance cost of generators
                                                 37%                                              is ~ INR 75000
     lakhs
                                                                                                 Running Expenses: Generator
                                                                                                  fuel expenses are already
                                                                                                  included in the power, fuel and
                                                                                                  water expenses

                                                                                                 Inventory Expenses: An
                           16%                                                                    average firm holds a fuel
                                             15%                                                  inventory of INR 10-25k
                B/w 5.1 and 25
                                                                                                 Stabilizers Expenses: For
                Lakhs                        B/w 1 and 5 Lakhs
                                                                                                  stabilizing the voltage
                                                                                                  fluctuations.




Source: FICCI- Lack of Affordable and Quality Power http://www.ficci.com/Sedocument/20218/Power-Report2013.pdf                      |   25
Contents




  Survey Findings


  Logistics Cost Estimations


  Deep Dive: Select Companies




                                |   26
XYZ Company is a major battery manufacturer

    Company background                                         Overview

     ▪ Company Name                    : XYZ Company
                                                                XYZ company is one of the fastest
     ▪ Year of establishment           : 1987                   growing Lead acid battery
                                                                manufacturing companies in the
     ▪ Promoter                        : Not disclosed
                                                                country. The company makes batteries
     ▪ Location (HQ)                   : Not disclosed          from 2.5Ah to 200Ah for a varied range
                                                                from two-wheelers, automotive, inverter,
     ▪ Manufacturing                   : In Himachal Pradesh    generator, UPS & solar etc.
     ▪ Net Sales (Latest)              : INR 300 Crores


    Supply Chain                                               Key Financial Indicators

     ▪ Manufacturing in HP                                     ▪ Latest Turnover: INR 300 Crores
     ▪ Central Warehouse (finished goods) in Ambala            ▪ EBTIDA Margin: 12%
     ▪ Regional depots in 27 locations across India            ▪ COGS: 75%
     ▪ Contract with 6-10 carriers for outbound from           ▪ Exports: <5% (Mainly Nepal)
       Ambala to various depots
                                                               ▪ Imports: 0% (only tooling etc.)
     ▪ Separate supply chain department with 8 people
     ▪ Planning to implement SAP


Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                          |   27
XYZ Company’s total logistics costs is approximately 9.2% of sales
including 1.2% of EBITDA contribution on lost sales due to freight
inefficiencies
Build up of logistics cost of XYZ Company



                                                                                                                                          1.2%
                                                                                                                        0.5%
                                                                                   0.1%               1.1%
                                                                 0.2%


                                               1.8%
                                                                                                                                                            9.2%
                                                                                                                                          8.0%
                                                                                                                        7.5%
                                                                 6.1%              6.3%              6.4%
                            2.9%
                                               4.3%


            1.4%

                                                             In-Transit:          Buffer
      Inbound:          Outbound:                                                                 Packaging          Damages      EBITDA                   Total
                                  Warehouse:                  Inventory         Inventory
        Direct           Direct                                                                     Costs             in transit contribution             Logistics
                                   Outbound                    Carrying          Carrying
       Freight           Freight                                                                     FG             / insurance of lost sales              Costs
                                                                Costs              Costs

    Note:    1) For the calculations of the inventory carrying costs, only transit and buffer inventory are considered, not the overall inventory value. The overall inventory
             value will be significantly higher due to seasonality of demand and / or additional inventory to take care of the variability of product lines

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                        |   28
Amrut distilleries is a alcoholic beverage maker and distributor

    Company background                                         Overview

     ▪ Company Name                    : Amrut Distilleries
                                                                Amrut Distilleries is into the business of
     ▪ Year of establishment           : 1987                   distilling, bottling and distributing
                                                                alcoholic beverages in India and
     ▪ Promoter                        : NR Jagdale
                                                                abroad. The major products include
     ▪ Location (HQ)                   : Bangalore              Whisky, Brandy, Rum, Vodka and Gin.
                                                                Amrut’s single malt whisky is exported
     ▪ Manufacturing                   : Bangalore / Kerala     to the UK.
     ▪ Turnover (Gross)                : INR 500 Crores


    Supply Chain                                               Key Financial Indicators
                                                               ▪ Net sales: INR 200 Crores
     ▪ Two bottling plants (one each in Kerala and
       Karnataka). Bangalore plant is the largest              ▪ EBTIDA Margin: 9.6%
     ▪ Domestic sales only in respective states                ▪ COGS: 67%
     ▪ Yearly contract with transporter to supply to various   ▪ Exports: 5% (UK)
       state depots in Karnataka
                                                               ▪ Imports: 2-3% (UK packing material for
     ▪ Separate transport department with 4 people               Malt Whisky)
     ▪ Home grown inventory management system


Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                            |   29
Amrut Distilleries’ total logistics costs is approximately 6.0% of sales



Build up of logistics cost of Amrut Distilleries




                                                                                                                                 0.5%
                                                                                                          0.7%
                                                                                  0.1%

                                                           0.8%



                                                                                                                                                         6.0%
                                   2.4%                                                                                          5.5%
                                                                                  4.7%                    4.8%
                                                           3.9%


            1.5%


                                                        In-Transit:              Buffer
      Inbound:                 Outbound:                                                                 Damages                 EBITDA                   Total
                                                         Inventory             Inventory
        Direct                  Direct                                                                    in transit            contribution             Logistics
                                                          Carrying              Carrying
       Freight                  Freight                                                                 / insurance             of lost sales             Costs
                                                           Costs                  Costs

    Note:   1) For the calculations of the inventory carrying costs, only transit and buffer inventory are considered, not the overall inventory value. The overall inventory
            value will be significantly higher due to seasonality of demand and / or additional inventory to take care of the variability of product lines

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                       |   30
Universal power transformer is a make-to-order transformer manufacturer

    Company background                                          Overview

     • Company Name                    : Universal Power
                                         transformers            UPT is into the business of
                                                                 manufacturing and selling make-to-
     ▪ Year of establishment           : 1978                    order power transformers for
                                                                 residential, commercial and real estate
     ▪ Promoter                        : Dhruva Talwalkar        use. Other products include distribution
     ▪ Location (HQ)                   : Bangalore               transformers, compact substations and
                                                                 dry type transformers
     ▪ Manufacturing                   : Bangalore / Haridwar


    Supply Chain                                                Key Financial Indicators

     ▪ Two manufacturing plants (Bangalore and Haridwar)        ▪ Net sales: INR 100 Crores
     ▪ Majority raw materials purchase on cash and carry        ▪ EBTIDA Margin: 4%
     ▪ Major sales in Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad and         ▪ COGS: 75%
       Mumbai from Bangalore unit                               ▪ Exports: <5% (Canada, UK, Nigeria)
     ▪ Selects transporters based on requirements               ▪ Imports: 0%
     ▪ 2 people in production planning, 4 in purchasing
     ▪ Tally ERP (but no reorder point calculation)

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                           |   31
Universal Power Transformer’s total logistics costs is approximately 4.4%
of sales

Build up of logistics cost of Universal Power Transformers



                                                                                                                                      0.4%
                                                                                                                 0.4%
                                                   0.1%                 0.1%                 0.3%




                                                                                                                                                          4.4%
                               2.3%                                                                                                   4.0%
                                                                                                                 3.6%
                                                   3.1%                 3.2%                3.3%




            0.8%

                                                In-Transit:             Buffer
      Inbound:              Outbound:                                                     Packaging           Damages              EBITDA                 Total
                                                 Inventory            Inventory
        Direct               Direct                                                         Costs              in transit         contribution           Logistics
                                                  Carrying             Carrying
       Freight               Freight                                                         FG              / insurance          of lost sales           Costs
                                                   Costs                 Costs
    Note:   1) For the calculations of the inventory carrying costs, only transit and buffer inventory are considered, not the overall inventory value. The overall inventory
            value will be significantly higher due to seasonality of demand and / or additional inventory to take care of the variability of product lines

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                                       |   32
Comparison of logistics costs across different companies


   Logistics Cost Comparison

                                            Logistics Cost                                      Industry KPIs
                                                                           Storage Battery Industry (FY2011-12)
                                                                               Capital value of inventory = 18% of Net Sales
              XYZ                                 9.2%
            Company                            of Net Sales                    Distribution Expenses = 2.7% of Net Sales
                                                                               PBDITA = 15% of Net Sales
                                                                               Raw Material Turnover = 8.4

                                                                           Beer & Alcohol Industry (FY2011-12)
                                                                               Capital value of inventory = 16% of Net Sales
             Amrut                                6.0%                         Distribution Expenses = 4.2% of Net Sales
           Distilleries                        of Net Sales
                                                                               PBDITA = 14% of Net Sales
                                                                               Raw Material Turnover = 8.0


                                                                           Generators, Transformers & Switchgear (FY2011-12)

           Universal                                                           Capital value of inventory = 15% of Net Sales
                                                  4.4%
            Power                              of Net Sales                    Distribution Expenses = 1.4% of Net Sales
         Transformers                                                          PBDITA = 12% of Net Sales
                                                                               Raw Material Turnover = 10.4


Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013; Prowess Data for FY2011-12                                                   |   33
Comparison of key parameters across the three companies


                                                                            All figures in % of Net Sales (unless otherwise stated)

                              INDUSTRY                                    XYZ Company                        Amrut                          UPT

       Total Logistics cost as % of Net Sales                                   9.2%                          6.0%                          4.4%

       Employee costs as % of Net Sales1                                        1.9%                          6.7%                         10.8%

       Power and Fuel Costs as % of Net Sales1                                  0.5%                          0.3%                          0.6%

       Cost of Inward Freight as % of Net Sales                                 1.4%                          1.5%                          0.8%

       Cost Outward Freight (including
                                                                                4.7%                          2.4%                          2.3%
       warehousing) as % of Net Sales
       Average Inbound Distance of Raw Material
                                                                                 470                           700                           410
       (KMs – weighted by raw material value)2
       Average Outbound Distance (in KMs only
                                                                                1350                           250                           500
       domestic sales)3
       Inventory Carrying Costs (Only for Buffer
                                                                                0.3%                          0.9%                          0.2%
       and Transit Inventory) as % of Net Sales
       EBITDA lost due to inefficient freight as %
                                                                                1.2%                          0.5%                          0.4%
       of Net Sales


    Note:   1) XYZ Company data for FY2009-10 (Prowess), Amrut Data for FY2010-11 (Prowess), UPT Data for FY2011-12 (Company Annual Report)
            2) Average inbound raw material distance is estimated from the top-3 raw materials largest supplier weighted by the value of raw material
            3) Average outbound distance has been estimated from the manufacturing plant to the major destinations

Source: World Bank – RedSeer Freight Survey, 2013                                                                                                       |   34
Other insights from repeater interviews

  Online Road Permit: “The harassment at            Excise Delays in Alcoholic Beverage:          Reasons for Delay: “The state of
  the check-posts has been reduced quite a          “There are huge inefficiencies in inter-      road infrastructure is not upto the
  lot by using online-road permit. For example:     state movement of alcoholic spirits (our      global standards. All transporters use
  If I have to buy goods from Maharashtra, I        raw material and also finished goods). It     second hand trucks. However, both
                                                    takes 25 days of approval to transport        Tata and Leyland have launched
  will generate a e-sugam form and send it to
                                                    spirits from one state to the other. Every    newer trucks which are not only fuel
  my supplier. At the Karnataka border
                                                    distillery in India is supposed to have an    efficient but also have powerful
  checkpost, the official will check the validity   excise department. Government officials       engines”
  of the goods and will release the                 sitting on the production premises. The                   - ED at Amrut Distilleries
  consignment to reach our factory.In fact, we      buyer has to send a request letter to the
  do not even have to carry the printout, we        selling company. Selling company has to
  just need to SMS the e-sugam number to the        send the consent letter back, after which,
  driver.”       - Purchase Head at UPT             the buying distillery’s excise department
                                                    creates a import permit .This import
                                                                                                  Reasons for Delays: “Major
  Online Road Permit: “Most of the states           permit is first approved by the excise
                                                    office at distillery then by the Deputy       reasons of delays are due to
  now have the online road permit that is                                                         transshipments, errant behavior by
                                                    commissioner of excise and then the
  issued for clearance at the border                joint commissioner excise, followed by        the driver (driver stopping to rest /
  checkposts. Only Rajasthan and HP (in my          the commissioner of excise. All these         attend a party / visit hometown in
  knowledge) still have offline road permit that    approvals have to happen in hard copy         between etc.). However there are
  need to be issued by the buyer in these           and have to be sent via post to the           also breakdowns in approximately
  states.      - Purchase Head at UPT               selling company. Similar process needs        1-2% of the consignments.
                                                    to repeat for the selling company.”
                                                                                                             - Logistics Manager at
  Online Road Permit: “Earlier (1.5 years                                                                    XYZ Company
  back), the truck drivers used to ask for Rs       “Government should computerize the
                                                    whole excise procedure. It is not just the
  100 per checkpost as a bribe to be paid at
                                                    duty that is killing us but also the delays
  the state checkpost but now the drivers don’t
                                                    in obtaining the approvals. Every
  ask for this since we have the e-sugam. The       distillery should be given a code and
  queues at state border checkpost have also        they should transact these permits
  been reduced drastically”                         online. “      - ED at Amrut Distilleries
                   - Purchase Head at UPT

                                                                                                                                      |   35
                                                                            Thank You !
                             “The government doesn’t realize that an improvement in freight
                        infrastructure can save us 5-10% of the logistics cost and thus valuable
                           foreign exchange by reducing oil spent on vehicles in traffic jams”
                                                                                                            Vikas Zutshi, Gati


© 2011 RedSeer Consulting Confidential `and Proprietary Information   www.redseerconsulting.com   Query@redseerconsulting.com
                                                                                                                                 |   36
	  
	                                             	  




       Effect	  of	  Freight	  System	  on	  Indian	  Manufacturing	  Industry	  
       Presented	  to	  The	  World	  Bank	  

       Lita	  Das	  
Table	  of	  Contents	  

1.INTRODUCTION	                                                                                                         3	  

2.DOMESTIC	  SHIPMENTS	                                                                                                4	  
DESCRIPTION	  OF	  THE	  DATA	                                                                                       4	  
(A)	  RAW	  DATA	  INFORMATION	                                                                                      4	  
(B)	  TRANSFORMING	  RAW	  DATA	  TO	  DESIRED	  VARIABLES	  WHICH	  ARE	  USED	  IN	  THE	  MODELS	        5	  
INFERENCES	  FROM	  THE	  REGRESSION	  MODELS	                                                                      6	  
(A)	  ABOUT	  DOMESTIC	  PURCHASES	                                                                                  6	  
(B)	  ABOUT	  DOMESTIC	  SALES	                                                                                      7	  

3.INTERNATIONAL	  SHIPMENTS	                                                                                           8	  
DESCRIPTION	  OF	  THE	  DATA	                                                                                      8	  
(A)	  RAW	  DATA	  INFORMATION	                                                                                     8	  
(B)	  TRANSFORMING	  RAW	  DATA	  TO	  DESIRED	  VARIABLES	  WHICH	  ARE	  USED	  IN	  THE	  MODELS	      10	  
INFERENCES	  FROM	  THE	  REGRESSION	  MODELS	                                                                    12	  
(A)	  ABOUT	  IMPORTS	                                                                                              12	  
(B)	  ABOUT	  EXPORTS	                                                                                              14	  

4.FUTURE	  WORK	                                                                                                     15	  

APPENDIX	                                                                                                             17	  
I.	  RESULTS	  OF	  THE	  REGRESSION	  MODELS	                                                                  17	  
II.	  DISTRIBUTION	  OF	  THE	  TRANSIT	  TIME	  FOR	  THE	  LARGEST	  SUPPLIER/CUSTOMER	                   23	  
(A)	  HISTOGRAMS	  OF	  THE	  APPROXIMATE	  NORMAL	  DISTRIBUTION	  SIMULATED	  FOR	  THE	  LARGEST	  MARKET
	                                                                                                                    23	  
(B)	  MEAN	  AND	  STANDARD	  DEVIATION	  RANGES	  FOR	  THE	  LARGEST	  SUPPLIER/CUSTOMER	                 26	  
III.	  INTERNATIONAL	  SUPPLIER	  AND	  CUSTOMER	  LOCATIONS	  GROUPING	                                       29	  
	  


	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  




	                                                                                                                       2	  
1.Introduction	  
	  
This document presents recommendations for further research and the supporting
analyses to inform The World Bank of the sources of variation in transportation time
performance for Indian manufacturing industries. This variability is seen both in the
average values of transportation time and in its standard deviation. For the purposes of
this document, the standard deviation (or extent of dispersion from the expected value) is
denoted as the measure of uncertainty.

The analyses are performed across two broad parts of freight transportation associated
with the industry. They are domestic and international shipments. Each of the two parts is
further analyzed as sales and purchases segments.

A number of predictor variables were used to explain uncertainty and average transit time
performance for all the 72 companies that were surveyed. Regression was used to
understand the effect of the various predictor variables on the parameters of interest. The
best regression models were chosen based on the adjusted R2 value that gives us an idea
of the explanatory power of the variables for the variability in the dependent variables1.
The analysis discussed in this document sheds light on a few interesting ones.

For instance, analysis revealed that size of the company (measured as the amount of
revenues generated and the profitability) is never significant in explaining variability in
the transit time. Therefore, large revenue generating or profitable companies are
susceptible to the same factors as the smaller companies when it comes to explaining
uncertainty of transit time in case of all kinds of shipments (domestic or international (. It
could probably mean that there are some inherent factors in the freight system that are not
under the control of individual companies but perhaps should be addressed by the
government. (E.g. regulations or infrastructure)

Effectiveness of port operations and the origin locations are found to affect delay in
transit time. Specifically, it was observed that requiring a special screening process2,
goods originating from specific country or owning infrastructure equipment that are used
for freight handling and transportation3 impact variability in transit time.

This finding raises questions about the level of automation; congestion management (like
optimizing berths at the ports) and administrative regulations exercised on freight
movement and hence need to be investigated. For instance, for imports it was observed
that requiring a special screening process could add 2.3 days to the average number of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  A decision about retaining an insignificant variable in the model was based on running the model with
and without the variable. It was accepted in the model if the adjusted R2 increases by a fairly reasonable
amount relative to when it is not included in the model.	  
2
  Special screening process is a binary variable factor and is a Yes/No response collected in the survey
3
  Owning infrastructure equipment for a company is described as is one of the three options as defined in
the survey namely a) No logistics handling equipment is owned. Material handling and transportation is
completely outsourced b) The company holds excellent infrastructure or c) The company owns only a few
trucks and cranes	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3	  
days spent in customs (ANDC). This value is about 55% of the average of the ANDC
across all companies, which is 4.2 days. Therefore it is worthwhile to investigate
questions like (i) what is the level of automation of equipment used at the ports for
customs process? (ii) Are goods that are imported from specific countries subject to a
more aggressive screening process as compared to others, which could add to the amount
of time spent at the customs? If yes, how can we reduce it? Is it a matter of low number
of personnel or a result of inefficient management of the customs process?

It was also surprising to see how sectors have variable effects on the uncertainty of
transportation time values. The international exports are the only segment that sees an
effect of sectors. However, in the rest of the segments while certain parameters (distance,
state borders) explain variability in transit time to a fair extent, they are not enough for
other sectors. For instance, while distance and the number of state borders explain the
variability in the Auto sector, they fail to explain the same in the others for domestic
sales.

The rest of the report is structured as follows. The whole report is divided into two broad
parts – domestic and international shipments. Each part discusses the corresponding sales
and purchase sections. After this introduction, the report discusses domestic shipments in
section 2. This includes description of the raw data available along with the transformed
data created from the raw survey responses, which are the basis for this analysis.

This is followed by brief discussion of the simulation results of the transportation time
values to indicate the range of means and standard deviations. The section then concludes
with inferences from the regression models, which are tabulated in Appendix I. Section 3
follows the same pattern but discusses the international shipments in detail.

Finally, section 4 lays out a few recommendations for future work that could be adopted
to increase the predictive power of the models used to explain transportation time
performance levels.


2.Domestic	  Shipments	  
Description	  of	  the	  data	  
(a)	  Raw	  data	  information	  
The data available with us that are pertinent to the regression models used for analysis
include the following.
                       a) Name and Sector of the Company
                       b) Transit time information for the largest supplier/customer both domestic sales and
                                                  purchases. This includes the longest, average and the shortest total transit time
                       c) Number of state borders crossed
                       d) Revenues & Profitability
                       e) If the company being interviewed own their own logistics infrastructure 4
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
       Please refer to footnote one for definition of “Owning logistics infrastructure”


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4	  
       f) Average distance between the origin and the destination locations
       g) Percentage of the total value of raw material that the largest raw material
          comprises in case of domestic purchases


(i)	  Domestic	  Purchases	  
57 out of 72 companies interviewed, procure their materials domestically. These
companies provided information about the top raw material, which is defined based on
the percentage of total revenues that it comprises. The division of the companies
categorized across the 4 sectors is tabulated below: -
	  
                        Sector                         Number of Responses
                         Auto                                  18
                     Electronics                                8
                     Engineering                               18
                        Textile                                13
                        Total                                  57
	  
(ii)	  Domestic	  Sales	  
71 out of 72 companies that were interviewed provided information about the domestic
sales that they transact. The division of the companies across the 4 sectors is tabulated
below: -
                         Sector                        Number of Responses
                            Auto                                 20
                      Electronics                                18
                      Engineering                                17
                        Textile                                  16
                           Total                                 71

(b)	  Transforming	  raw	  data	  to	  desired	  variables	  which	  are	  used	  in	  the	  models	  
	  
Mean	   and	   standard	   deviation	   of	   the	   largest	   import	   supplier	   and	   largest	   export	  
customer: The total transit time for the largest domestic supplier and domestic customer
is modeled as a truncated normal distribution (truncated within the specific bounds of
shortest and longest transit times for each). There are 2 main reasons why a normal
distribution was used to model the transit time distributions.

       •   There is no information available for the distribution of transit time. Under these
           circumstances, the standard procedure followed is to assume normal distribution
           of transit time.

       •   My past research experience suggests that freight transported over oceans are
           frequently normally distributed in their transit time. As an example, examining
           imports into US for a leading manufacturing firm revealed that 88% of trade lanes
           (defined as unique origin-destination pairs) are normally distributed.


	                                                                                                                        5	  
The simulation used to create normal distribution gives us the standard deviation of the
transit time distribution. This is equivalent to a measure of uncertainty in transit time.

For domestic purchases, the simulation could be used to model transit time distributions
for 45 out of 57 companies. The other 11 (out of remaining 12) companies reported the
average and the minimum transit time to be equal and hence could not be simulated as a
truncated normal distribution using the setup followed for the rest. One out of the 12
companies reported to have an invalid response for their longest time value.

For domestic sales, simulation could be used to model transit time distributions for 62 out
of 71 companies. The other 9 companies reported the average and the maximum transit
time to be equal and hence could not be simulated as a truncated normal distribution
using the setup followed for the rest.

Some basic statistics for the transit time distributions are shown in Appendix II.


Inferences	  from	  the	  regression	  models	  
(a)	  About	  Domestic	  Purchases	  
	  
       1. Logarithm of distance provides better predictive power in explaining
          uncertainty in transit time distribution as well as the average value of transit
          time for domestic purchases as compared to distance itself. Specifically, every
          1km increase of logarithm of distance increases the uncertainty of transit time in
          form of standard deviation by 0.4 days. The corresponding increase in the mean
          value of transit time is 2.9 days. This predictor variable by itself explains 64% of
          variability in uncertainty of transit time. On the other hand it explains 79% of
          variability in mean value of transit time values.

          Let us consider a response from the survey to illustrate the effect of distance on
          uncertainty in the distribution and the mean value of transit time. The distance
          between the origin and the destination for an auto manufacturer is 100 kms and
          the transit time distribution has a mean of 2 days and an uncertainty is 0.3 days
          for domestic purchases. Adding 1km to logarithm of distance (log (100)+1 = 2+1
          =3) gives us a new value of 1000 kms. The model suggests that this increase of
          average distance between the supplier and the manufacturer (from 100 to 1000
          kms) corresponds to an increase of 0.4 days in its uncertainty (from 0.3 to 0.7
          days in this specific example). Although this increase might seem low in absolute
          terms, comparing it to the corresponding mean value of transit time puts the effect
          into perspective. The mean value goes 2 to 4.9 days. In other words, the largest
          value of transit time at an instant could be 5.6 days (4.9+0.7) as compared to 2.3
          days.

       2. As expected, uncertainty in total transit time for the largest supplier of the
          top raw material increases with increase in the number of state borders. The


	                                                                                          6	  
          mean value of transit time also increases with the number of state borders.
          Adding one new state border between the origin and the destination location
          increases uncertainty in transit time for the largest supplier by 0.2 days and the
          mean value in transit time by 1.2 days. State borders explain 64% of variability in
          uncertainty associated with transit time for the top domestic raw material. On the
          other hand, it explains 87% of variability in the mean value of transit time.

       3. Sectors and the size of the companies (in terms of revenues, profitability and
          cost of goods sold) have insignificant effects on the uncertainty in total
          domestic purchase transit time.

       4. Composition (or the percentage of purchase value comprising from the
          largest domestic supplier) of the top raw material does not have an effect on
          the uncertainty in total transit time for the domestic purchases.

       5. Looking into companies that procure their largest raw material within a
          domestic state or across a single domestic state border, the model suggests
          that the logarithm of distance explains only 35% of variability in uncertainty
          in transportation time. However adding sectors to the above predictor variable
          increases the predictive power to 43%. Revenues, COGS, profitability and the
          composition of the top raw material as a percentage of the total cost are still
          insignificant variables and addition of these factors does not improve the adjusted
          R2 of the model.

       6. However, the uncertainty factor for a company procuring the top raw
          material from a supplier that is situated at least 2 state borders away, is not
          well explained by the logarithm of distance. Specifically, this predictor variable
          only explains 10% of the variability in uncertainty of transit time for domestic
          purchases.

          Similar to the above cases, revenues, COGS, profitability and the composition of
          the top raw material as a percentage of the total cost continue to be insignificant
          variables. This suggests that there are some other latent factors explaining the
          uncertainty parameter in transit time for these companies as compared to those
          who use one or 0 state borders for domestic purchases.


(b)	  About	  Domestic	  Sales	  

       1. The average total transit time between the respondent’s manufacturing
          facility (origin) and the customer’s warehouse (destination) increases with
          the average distance between the origin and destination. However, distance is
          able to explain only 9% of variability in the average total transit time for domestic
          sales across all sectors. Specifically, for every 100 kms increase in the average
          distance between the origin and the destination, the average total transit time goes
          up by 1 day.



	                                                                                           7	  
       2. The number of domestic state borders crossed added to the average distance
          between the origin and the destination can explain 12% of transit time
          variability. However, the number of state borders alone does not explain any
          variability. But it was surprising to see that the average transit time decreases
          while increasing the number of state borders crossed (and keeping the average
          distance between the origin and the destination locations constant) in the case of
          domestic sales.

       3. In the Auto sector, the numbers of state borders along with the logarithm of
          average origin to destination distance are good predictor variables in transit
          time uncertainty. Specifically, these variables individually explain 37% and 57%
          of variability in uncertainty of transit time respectively. Unlike the results for the
          effect of state borders observed on the uncertainty in transit time, it was found
          that increasing the number of state borders increases the uncertainty in
          transit time for the major customers in the Auto sector.

       4. On the other hand, the number of state borders and average distance between
          the origin and the destination explains very little or no variability in the
          uncertainty of transit time for the 3 other sectors (Textile, Engineering and
          Electronics).

       5. Size of the company with respect to its revenue and profitability do not
          (significantly) affect the average total transit time or uncertainty in
          transportation time for major customers.

       6. The number of carriers or transporters used by the respondent as a supplier
          or whether they own infrastructure used during freight transportation
          operations have no effect on the average total transit time or uncertainty in
          transit time associated with domestic sales.


3.International	  Shipments	  
Description	  of	  the	  data	  
(a)	  Raw	  data	  information	  
The data available with us that are pertinent to the regression models used for analysis
include the following.

       a) Name and Sector of the Company
       b) Transit time information –
          (i) For Imports
              • Average, Shortest and Longest total transit time values for the largest
                  value import supplier
              • Average total transit time (Including all the segments of ocean transit i.e.
                  Supplier origin to Origin port; Origin port dwell or waiting period; Port to
                  port transit; Destination port waiting and customs; Destination port to


	                                                                                            8	  
                  Final destination (the respondent’s factory or manufacturing facility) for
                  all imports
              •   Average delay in the import orders
              •   Average destination port dwell or waiting time (In the Indian ports)
              •   Average amount of time that the shipment goes through customs at the
                  destination port
              •   Average amount of time taken from the destination port to destination
                  (either by trucks or trains)

          (ii) For Exports
               • Average, and Longest total transit time values for the largest value export
                  supplier and the corresponding percentage of revenues that it comprises.
               • Average total transit time (Including all the segments of ocean transit i.e.
                  Supplier origin to Origin port; Origin port dwell or waiting period; Port to
                  port transit; Destination port waiting and customs; Destination port to
                  Final destination for all exports
               • Average amount of time between the origin and the origin port
               • Average amount of time spent at the origin port waiting (origin port dwell)
                  and time through customs

       c) Import and export countries:
               • All the countries that the respondent imports or exports from
               • Country for the largest import supplier and largest export customer
       d) Revenues & Profitability
       e) If the freight that is transported requires a special screening process (Yes/No)
       f) If the company being interviewed own their own logistics infrastructure (Yes/No)
       g) The amount of revenues comprised by imports as a percentage of total revenues
          of the company and the equivalent numbers for exports
       h) Number of sea ports used and the average distance of ports (import and export)
          from the manufacturing facility (often the destination of the freight)
       i) Percentage of freight lost or stolen during customs for both imports and exports
	  

(i)	  Imports	  
	  
40 out of 72 companies that were interviewed import their products internationally. The
division of these across the four sectors is as follows: -

                    Sector                                 Number of Responses
                     Auto                                          12
                  Electronics                                      15
                  Engineering                                       9
                    Textile                                         4
                     Total                                         40




	                                                                                          9	  
It is important to note that engineering and textile sectors form a very low population
amongst all the sectors. Hence, the analysis does not discuss any results related to these
sectors.
(ii)	  Exports	  

43 out of 72 companies that were interviewed export their products internationally. The
division of these across the four sectors is as follows: -

                        Sector                                          Number of Responses
                         Auto                                                    7
                      Electronics                                               12
                      Engineering                                               12
                        Textile                                                 12
                         Total                                                  43

(b)	  Transforming	  raw	  data	  to	  desired	  variables	  which	  are	  used	  in	  the	  models	  
	  
Import/Export	   Countries: There were a total 23 unique countries that the companies
import from. It was observed that there was fair amount of repetition of specific locations
across the 43 respondents. However, there were also a few countries that are unique
origin for a given company. Hence it was not reasonable to see the effect of these
countries, that occur only once amongst the 40 companies, as individual entities.

A new categorization criterion was therefore used to reasonably group the import
countries. The countries that are import locations of at least 10 different companies were
accumulated as one group for each unique country. However for the case when the
frequency was less than 10, the countries were accumulated into Americas (North and
South), Europe and Rest of Asia groups. Each location group is denoted as an
independent variable corresponding to every respondent.

Similarly, there were a total 46 unique locations that all the 43 companies export to.
However, in contrast to import country locations, majority of companies ship to unique
countries (or in other words a given country is specific to only one company). Therefore,
these 46 locations are categorized into just four exports location groups (Asia (and
Australia); Europe; Americas and Africa).

Each location group is denoted as a binary variable for a given company. The value for
the location group is 1 if the company transacts (imports/exports) from the specific group
otherwise it is 0. The estimates of the regression model pertaining to each group is
understood as an effect of adding a country from this group to the current list of
import/export countries, on the average total transit time.

For instance let us assume that a company exports from 3 out of 4 above-mentioned
groups and not from Africa. If the estimate for Africa in the model is +x days, it implies
that starting to export from a country in Africa increases the average transit time of



	                                                                                                             10	  
exporting from the 4 groups together increases by x days than just exporting from the
initial 3.

The groupings and the corresponding frequencies for both import and export are
tabulated in Appendix III.

Transit	  time	  segments: For imports, the total transit time between arrival at destination
port and arrival at the final destination is defined as the sum of 3 transit times:
              • Destination port dwell time period
              • Time through the customs process
              • Landside travel between the port and the manufacturing facility or factory
For exports, the transit time information mentioned under raw data information is used
for the models. The mean of all the average total transit time across the 4 sectors is
tabulated below.

                      Mean of the average total transit time
Sector                    Imports (in weeks)             Exports (in weeks)
Auto                      5.4                            6.5
Electronics               6.6                            1.9
Textiles                  3.9                            3.6
Engineering/Fabrication   4.9                            5.5


	  Mean	   and	   standard	   deviation	   of	   the	   largest	   import	   supplier	   and	   largest	   export	  
customer: The total transit time for the largest import supplier and export customer is
modeled as a truncated normal distribution (truncated within the specific bounds of
shortest and longest transit times for each). The simulation gives us the standard
deviation of the transit time distribution. This again is equivalent to a measure of
uncertainty in transit time.

For imports, simulation was used to model transit time distributions for 31 out of 40
companies. The other 9 companies reported the average and the minimum transit time to
be equal and hence could not be simulated as a truncated normal distribution using the
setup followed for the rest.

For exports, simulation was used to model transit time distributions for 38 out of 43
companies. The other 5 companies reported the average and the maximum transit time to
be equal and hence could not be simulated as a truncated normal distribution using the
setup followed for the rest. Because of unavailability of data, the shortest time for exports
is assumed to be 0 units.

Some basic statistics related to the distribution of transit time are shown in Appendix II.




	                                                                                                                          11	  
Inferences	  from	  the	  regression	  models	  
(a)	  About	  Imports	  
       1. Findings regarding revenues and profitability margins of company

             a) Higher revenue companies have lower number of percentage of
                delayed orders. For every 100 crore INR revenue difference (higher)
                between the companies (while assuming everything else like sector,
                geographic location etc. to be exactly similar.) implies 0.03% lower in
                delayed orders.

             b) Surprisingly, higher profitable companies were found to have a higher
                percentage of orders delayed. A difference of 1% in the profitability
                margin of two companies would imply a 0.4 percentage increase in the
                orders delayed for the higher profitable company.

             c) Revenue and profitability of companies do not have a significant effect
                on the number of days spent at customs.

             d) Revenue and profitability of companies explain almost no variability
                in the average transit time of freight.

             e) More profitable and higher revenue companies have a lower total
                average transit time only in the Auto sector. The model with only
                revenues is able to explain 13% of variability in the average total transit
                time for imports in the auto sector. On the other hand profitability explains
                20% of variability in the average transit time.

                  The model suggests that smaller revenue companies have larger average
                  total transit time. Specifically, a company that has revenue of 100 crore
                  INR less than that of another similar one implies that the average total
                  transit time for import freight increases by a unit day. On the other hand,
                  increasing the profitability of a company by 1% decreases the average
                  transit time by 0.1 days.


2) Point of origin finding

             a) Starting to import from China, Germany, Japan and the Americas to
                the current import countries for a company increases the average
                number of days spent at the customs. On the other hand, starting to
                import from Europe (outside of Germany), Singapore, Japan, Taiwan
                and the rest of Asia decreases the average number of days spent at
                customs for a company.

                  Deciding to import from America, adds 1.4 days to the average number of
                  days spent in the customs process. Future investigation might therefore


	                                                                                        12	  
               include investigating what kinds of goods are imported from these
               countries as compared to the others or trade laws between India and the
               above-mentioned countries.

           b) Revenues and country groups give the best model that explains the
              variability in average total transit time. This model explains about 15%
              of variability in the average total transit time. Starting to import from
              China, Germany, Taiwan and Japan to the current set of countries for
              a given company increases the average total transportation time. On
              the other hand, starting to import from Europe (outside of Germany),
              Singapore, Americas, Taiwan and the rest of Asia decreases the
              average total transit time.


3) Destination port and final destination findings

           a) Again, revenue and profitability of companies have no effect on
              transit time between the destination port and the final destination.

           b) The best model in terms of the error term (adjusted R2) is explained
              by deciding to add Europe, Singapore and Taiwan to the current list
              of import countries of a company. Starting to import from these
              countries reduces the average amount of time spent between destination
              port and final destination.

4) Other findings

       a) Revenues and profitability explain a fair amount of variability in the
          average transit time in the auto sector (13% and 20%). They are however
          dramatically less useful when explaining variability in the electronics
          sector. This would mean that there are some missing predictor variables that
          explain variability in the electronics sector.

       b) Requiring special screening process for freight increases the average
          number of days spent at customs by about 2 days.

       c) As of now, revenues, average distance of the seaport from the final
          destination and waiting time at the ports best explain percentage of
          orders delayed. Specifically, the above factors explain about 25% of
          variability in the percentage of orders delayed.

       d) Longer the average distance between the seaport and the final
          destination, larger is the percentage of orders delayed. Specifically, for
          every 100 kms increase in the average distance between the seaports and the
          final destination implies a 4% increase in the orders delayed.




	                                                                                  13	  
          e) Increasing the waiting time at the destination ports increases the
             percentage of orders delayed. Every increase of waiting time at the Indian
             ports by 1 day increases the percentage of orders delayed by 2%.

          f) Uncertainty in transit time for the largest import supplier is found to be
             dependent on profitability (P) and the percentage of imports purchased
             from this supplier (V). This combination of variables explains 23% of
             variability of transit time by the largest import supplier. A nonlinear
             relationship was observed between uncertainty and the two predictor
             variables. Standard deviation (σ) is best explained as:

                               σ =    −1.1 + 0.14P + 0.07V − 0.004PV
          	  
	  

(b)	  About	  Exports	  
	  
       1. The total average transit time is affected by the sector of the companies. The
          sectors alone explain about 38% of variability in the average transit time. The
          auto sector is observed to be the slowest in terms of the transit time of exports.
          Compared to the auto sector, electronics, textile and the engineering/fabrication
          sector are about 5,3 and 1 week faster respectively. While auto is the slowest
          sector, electronics appears to be the fastest.

       2. The percentages of total revenues that are comprised by exports help explain
          variability in the average transit time for exports. This percentage along with
          the sectors helps explain about 41% of variability in the average total transit
          time in exports. As compared to exports comprising of a low percentage of total
          revenues (less than or equal to 10%), higher percentages (values greater than 10
          and less than 50%) imply slower transportation of freight.

          Specifically, a company which exports goods worth greater than 20 and less than
          50 % of the total value, takes about 2 weeks more than that of low percentage
          composition. However, very large composition (exports form greater than 50 % of
          the total revenues) companies tend to be faster than that of a low percentage of the
          total revenue. Companies with very high proportion of exports (as compared to its
          total revenue) are about 3 days faster.

       3. Owning logistics infrastructure equipment makes the exports faster in terms
          of the average of the total transportation time as compared to not owning.
          However, (as per the survey definitions) owning excellent infrastructure and
          owning a moderate level of infrastructure (a few trucks/ or cranes) has about the
          same effect on the average total transit time as compared to not owning any.

       4. Average total transit time can vary depending on the combination of export
          countries for a company. Specifically, adding a new export country to the
          current list from the Asia and Australia group as compared to when not exporting


	                                                                                         14	  
          to a country in this group adds about 0.1 weeks to the average total freight transit
          time. The equivalent numbers for Americas, Europe and Africa are 0.9, 0.2 and
          0.04 weeks respectively.

       5. Revenues and profitability of a company do not have any significant effect on
          the total average transit time for the exports. The age of the company
          denoted as a binary variable (Establishment year <2000 then the age factor of
          the company is assigned as 0 else it takes a value of 1) is also found to explain
          no amount of variability in average total transit time.

       6. When compared to contracting with low number of carriers/transporters
          (less than 5), having a moderate number (between 6 and 10) makes the amount
          of time spent in customs and at the port longer (about 2 days more). However
          on the other hand, contracting with much larger number of
          carriers/transporters (more than 10), surprisingly, suggests a faster (about 0.8
          days faster) process through customs.

       7. Exporting to countries in Asia (and Australia) and Americas adds about 0.2
          days for both at the port and through customs as compared to not exporting
          to those groups. On the other hand, the equivalent numbers for Europe and
          Africa groups are about 2 days less.

       8. Exports to Africa location group of the largest export market have the
          largest uncertainty in transit time. As compared to exports into Africa, exports
          into Americas, Asia and Europe groups have 0.1, 1 and 0.4 weeks of less
          uncertainty. In other words, exports to other countries in Asia from India appear
          to be the least uncertain when compared to exports to Africa.


4.Future	  Work	  
	  
In short, there are ample opportunities to improve the predictive power of the models that
are used to explain the effect of freight system on the Indian manufacturing industry. The
models and the inferences provided here offer a foundation for the following future work.

       1. Obtain information about the specific port locations used for both domestic
          and international transportation. Results of the models suggest variable effects
          of origin and destination locations on the uncertainty of the transportation time. It
          might be helpful to identify the exact ports so as to investigate the specific
          geographic locations that are more likely to be uncertain.

       2. Collect and use relevant information about port operations for international
          shipment analysis. Results suggest that regulatory factors like customs and
          screening process play a significant role in explaining variability in transportation
          time. It will be helpful to collect relevant information like level of automation at




	                                                                                          15	  
          the Indian ports, number of administrative documents that need to be filled etc. to
          understand the specific impacts of regulations on the transportation time.

       3. Collect and incorporate information related to the state borders to
          understand the impact on transportation time. The number of state borders
          explain significant amount of variability in domestic shipments. It might be
          helpful to collect more relevant information like number of tollbooths, average
          time spent at these booths, a measurement of “level” of infrastructure (roads,
          trucks etc.).

       4. Analyze the effect of specific origin and destination pairs on the variability in
          transportation time. Specific origin and destination locations or “trade lanes”
          are identified to understand the variability in transit time across these lanes. This
          would give us a new point of view of investigating specific locations in India that
          are more susceptible to large variations in transit time.

       5. Investigate the effect of predictor variables on other measures of uncertainty
          (other than standard deviation). Other measures could include coefficient of
          variation, which has the advantage of measuring uncertainty relative to the mean
          as compared to standard deviation, which is explained in absolute terms.

       6. Conduct analysis on a larger dataset (one can get access to relevant information
          from a company’s SAP system) to ascertain that the causal links discovered in
          the analysis discussed in the report is generalizable than just being specific to
          the current dataset.

       7. Research relevant literature to ascertain the different transit time
          distributions observed in practice. Normal distribution was used for this
          analysis. It is because my past research experience suggests that ocean transit time
          distributions are frequently normally distributed for freight transported over
          ocean. While in the ideal case, the distributions are best known from transit time
          data collected over a period of time, survey did not provide us access to it.

       8. Use information about the percentage of instances that transportation time
          can exceed the average. This information could not be included into the
          simulation model because of scarcity of time. However, the information should be
          included in the future to give us a more realistic scenario of transit time values.
          [A suggestion of how to incorporate it in the simulation: Use “dichotomy”
          algorithm to narrow down to the value of standard deviation that best fits all the
          other available parameters of the distribution (shortest, longest, mean and the
          percentage of instances that transportation time can exceed the average value]




	                                                                                          16	  
     	  
                                                              	  



     	  


     Appendix	  
     	  
     I.	  Results	  of	  the	  Regression	  models	  

            The estimate values with a p_value >0.5 (or smaller significance) is shown in italics in
               the table above and all the following tables that shows the results of the models

      1.	  Domestic	  Purchase	  
      	  
 Dependent Variable: Uncertainty in the total transit time (represented by standard deviation) for
                                the largest supplier of raw material 1 (in days)
Predictor Variable           Estimate     Estimate    Estimate   Estimate Estimate Estima Estima
                             _Model1 _Model2 _Model3             _Model4 _Model5 te         te
                                                                                   _Mode _Mode
                                                                                   l6       l7
Intercept                    -0.2         0.2         -0.5       -0.2        -0.3  -0.2     -0.1
Sector (With respect
to Auto)

Electronics                                                                    0.04
Textile                                                                        -0.005
Engineering                                                                    0.08
State Borders                                  0.2                   0.09      0.09         0.09            0.09
 Distance of the              0.0004
manufacturing
facility from supplier
location for the
largest supplier)


Log(Distance)                                                 0.4    0.08      0.08         0.08            0.09
Revenues                                                                                    0
COGS                                                                                        0.0006
Composition                                                                                                 -0.002
Profitability                                                                               0.0004


     	                                                                                            17	  
Adjusted R2          55%          64%           63%         67%        66%          65%       67%
      	  
      	  
Dependent Variable: Mean value in the total transit time for the largest supplier of raw material 1
                                             (in days)
Predictor Variable                                 Estimate                  Estimate
                                                   _Model1                   _Model2
Intercept                                          -4.1                      0.6
State Borders                                                                1.2
Log(Distance)                                      2.9
Adjusted R2                                        79%                       82%
      	  
      	  
Dependent Variable: Uncertainty in the total transit time (represented by standard deviation) for
                        the largest supplier of raw material 1 (in days)
                                1 or 0 state borders                More than 1 state borders

Predictor Variable                  Estimate      Estimate         Estimate          Estimate
                                    _Model1       _Model2          _Model3           _Model4
Intercept                           -0.2          -0.2             -0.7              -0.9
Sector (With respect to Auto)


Electronics                                       0.1                                0.001
Textile                                           -0.01                              0.05
Engineering                                       0.1                                0.2
State Borders
Log(Distance of the                 0.08          0.08             0.2               0.2
manufacturing facility from
supplier location for the largest
supplier)



Adjusted R2                         35%           43%              10%               2%

     	  

     2.	  Domestic	  Sales	  
     	  

                     Dependent Variable: Average total transit time (in days)
Predictor Variable                               Estimate           Estimate
                                                 _Model1            _Model2
Intercept                                        -0.2               -0.5
Average distance between the origin and customer
location                                         0.01               0.01


     	                                                                                    18	  
Average number of state borders crossed                                                    -0.3
Adjusted R2                                                          9%                    12%
        	  
     Dependent Variable: Uncertainty in the total transit time (represented by standard deviation) for
                                                   major customers (in days)	  
	                    Across              Auto                    Textile               Electronics      Engineering/Fabri
                          all            Estimate	              Estimate	              Estimate	               cation
                      sectors	                                                                                 Estimate	  
Predictor            Estima Mode Mode Model4	   Model Model6	   Model                                 Model8	   Model
Variable 	          te           l2	        l3	                     5	                      7	                    9	  
                     _Mode
                     l1	  
Intercept	          0.4 	       0.2	       -3.5	     0.9	         -1.0	   2.4	           1.5	   2.7	          -16	  
Average distance                              	         	            	       	              	      	             	  
between the
origin and
customer
location	           0.002 	   	  
Log (Avg.                                     0.7	      	            0.4	    	              0.5	   	             2.8	  
distance between
the origin and
customer
location)	          	           	  
Average number                                	         0.1	         	       -0.05	         	      -0.03	        	  
of state borders
crossed	            -0.1 	      0.2	  
              2
Adjusted R 	        7%	         37%	   57%	   0%	                 10%	    0%	            0%	    0%	           4%	  
        	  

      3.	  Imports	  

                                     Dependent Variable: Average total transit time (in days)
                             Across all sectors                 Auto Sector              Electronics Sector
Predictor Variable           Estimate      Estimate   Estimate Estimate       Estimate Estimate Estimate
                             _Model1       _Model2    _Model3 _Model4         _Model5 _Model6 _Model7
(Intercept)                  40            54.9       30.0      42.9          49.9       48.9        -72.3
                                                      -0.0006
Revenues (in INR cr)         -0.0002                            -0.01                    -0.0002
Profitability (in %)                       -1.4                               -1.1                   -3.1

Americas                                                      -2.4
Europe                                                        -19
Rest of Asia                                                  -27
Singapore                                                     -8.9
China                                                         45.8
Germany                                                       12.7


      	                                                                                                      19	  
Taiwan                                             9.3
Japan                                              43.7
           2
Adjusted R             0%            0.1%          15%       13%          20%       0%              0%
     Note: (1) The other two sectors (textile and engineering are not shown because of very
     low import responses corresponding to these sectors)

               Dependent Variable: Average time taken for the customs process (days)
                                                              Across all sectors
Predictor Variable                   Estimate             Estimate             Estimate
                                     _Model1              _Model2              _Model3
(Intercept)                          3.9                  4.6                  4.4
Revenues (in INR cr)                 -0.00001
Profitability (in %)                                      -0.1
Americas                             0.04                 -0.2                1.4
Europe                               -0.7                 -0.7                -2.1
Rest of Asia                         -0.3                 -0.3                -0.9
Singapore                            -1.2                 -1.3                -1.4
China                                1.6                  1.5                 0.7
Germany                              -0.1                 0.3                 0.3
Taiwan                                                                        -0.1
Japan                                1.4                  0.7                 1.1

If the freight requires special
screening process (yes vs. no)                                                2.3
Adjusted R2                     4%                        5%                  16%

                           Dependent Variable: Percentage of orders delayed
                                                                      Across all sectors
Predictor Variable                                     Estimate          Estimate
                                                       _Model1           _Model2
(Intercept)                                            -1.8              -7.9
Revenues (in INR cr)                                   -0.0003
Profitability (in %)                                                     0.4
Average distance of the port from the manufacturing
facility                                               0.04              0.04
Destination port dwell time in days                    2.2               2.4
Adjusted R2                                            25%               19%

       Dependent Variable: Total transit time from Destination port to final destination (in days)
                                                                 Across all sectors
Predictor Variable                            Estimate                  Estimate
                                              _Model1                   _Model3
(Intercept)                                   4.3                       3.9
Americas                                      0.3


     	                                                                                    20	  
Europe                                      -1.7                      -1.6
Rest of Asia                                -0.03
Singapore                                   -1.6                      -1.5
China                                       -0.6
Germany                                     -0.08
Taiwan                                      -1.9                      -1.9
Japan                                       -0.2
Adjusted R2                                 15%                       25%


Dependent Variable: Uncertainty in the total transit time (represented by standard deviation) for the
                             largest value import supplier (in weeks)

                                                                      Across all sectors
Predictor Variable                                      Estimate         Estimate        Estimate
                                                        _Model1          _Model2         _Model3
(Intercept)                                             0.85             0.4             -1.1
Revenues (in INR cr)                                                     -0.000002
Profitability (in %)                                 -0.05                               0.14
Percentage of total purchase of imports from largest                                     0.07
supplier (denoted by %_largest_supp)                 0.02                0.01
Profitability*%_largest_supp                                                             -0.004
Adjusted R2                                          5%                  0.5%            23%
      	  

     4.	  Exports	  
                                                 	  
                   Dependent Variable: Average total transit time (in weeks)
Predictor Variable          Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate        Estimate        Estimate
                            _Model1 _Model2 _Model3 _Model4 _Model5             _Model6         _Model7
Intercept                   6.5         2.4         0.6       4.5        3.4    5.0             -0.5
Sectors (WRT Auto)
Electronics                 -4.6                                                -3.6
Textiles                    -2.9                                                -1.7
Engineering/Fab.            -1.1                                                -0.1
Profitability (in %)                    0.2
Location groups (WRT
not exporting to a
country in that particular
group)
Asia +Australia                                     0.1                                         2.7
Americas                                            0.9                                         0.2
Europe                                              0.2                                         1.4
Africa                                              0.04                                        2.6
Infrastructure       (WRT


     	                                                                                21	  
owning none)
Own             excellent                                   -2.8
Infrastructure
Own moderate amount of                                      -2.7
infrastructure
Total exports as a % of
total revenue (WRT the
value being less than
10%)
11%<=value<=20%                                                           0.8     0.6               0.8
21%<=value<=50%                                                           2.4     2.0               3.0
Value>=51%                                                                -0.6    -0.006            -0.04
Adjusted R2               38%        8%         7%          10%           12%     41%               27%

        Dependent Variable: Average time taken for the customs process and port dwell (days)
Predictor Variable                     Estimate     Estimate    Estimate    Estimate
                                       _Model1      _Model2     _Model3     _Model4
(Intercept)                            4.6          5.1         2.8         3.1
Location groups (WRT not included in
that particular group)
Asia +Australia                        0.3          0.2                     1.1
Americas                               0.05         0.2                     0.2
Europe                                 -1.9         -2.2                    -1.4
Africa                                 -2.1         -2.3                    -1.8
Special Screening process (WRT no
such special process required)                      -1.6
No. Of carriers/transporters (WRT
having less than 5)
Having between 6 &10                                            2.3         2.3
Having >10                                                      -0.4        -0.8
Infrastructure (WRT owning none)


Own excellent Infrastructure
Own moderate amount of infrastructure
Adjusted R2                             5%           9%              8%          15%


Dependent Variable: Uncertainty in the total transit time (represented by standard deviation) for the
                             largest value import supplier (in weeks)

Predictor Variable                                        Estimate
                                                          _Model1
(Intercept)                                               1.4
Location group of the largest market (WRT Africa)


     	                                                                                    22	  
       America                                                                             -0.1
       Asia                                                                                -1.0
       Europe                                                                              -0.4
       Adjusted R2                                                                         25%

                	  
                II.	  Distribution	  of	  the	  transit	  time	  for	  the	  largest	  supplier/customer	  
                (a)	  Histograms	  of	  the	  approximate	  normal	  distribution	  simulated	  for	  the	  largest	  
                market	  

                1.	  Domestic	  Purchase	  
                	  
                	  
Frequency	  
values	  




                                                                                                                                             	  
                	  
                                        Total	  average	  transit	  time	  values	  (in	  days)	  




                	                                                                                                                  23	  
                2.	  Domestic	  Sales	  
Frequency	  
values	  




                                                                                                                    	  

                                       Total	  average	  transit	  time	  values	  (in	  days)	  
                	  
                         	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  
                                                                               	  


                	                                                                                         24	  
                                                                              	  
                                                                              	  
                3.	  Imports	  
                                                                              	  
Frequency	  
values	  




                                                                                                                  	  
                                                                              	  
                        	  
                                    Total	  average	  transit	  time	  values	  (in	  weeks)	  
                        	  
                        	  

                	  

                	  
                	  
                	  




                	                                                                                       25	  
                	  

                	  

                	  

                4.	  Exports	  
                	  
Frequency	  
values	  




                                                                                                                                   	  
                	  
                	  
                	                    Total	  average	  transit	  time	  values	  (in	  weeks)	  
                	  
                	  

                (b)	  Mean	  and	  standard	  deviation	  ranges	  for	  the	  largest	  supplier/customer	  
                                                                             	  

                1.	  Domestic	  Purchase	  
                	  
                Parameter                                 Minimum Value                             Maximum Value
                              Mean                              0.031 days                                 8.01 days
                       Standard Deviation                        0.01 days                                 1.22 days
                     Coefficient of Variation                       0.03                                      2.67
                	  
                	  
                	  


                	                                                                                                        26	  
               Histogram	  for	  Mean	  value	  of	  transit	                                Histogram	  for	  Standard	  deviation	  
               time	                                                                              value	  of	  transit	  time	  

	  

                                       Histogram of means                                                                        Histogram of stdevs
               12




                                                                                              10
               10




                                                                                              8
               8




                                                                           Frequency
   Frequency




                                                                                              6
               6




                                                                                              4
               4




                                                                                              2
               2
               0




                                                                                              0
                    0         2           4                 6        8                                 0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6              0.8        1.0    1.2



                                                                                                                                                                                      	  
                                               means                                                                                        stdevs




	  

2.	  Domestic	  Sales	  
	  
Parameter                                            Minimum Value                              Maximum Value
              Mean                                                    0.61 days                              91 days
       Standard Deviation                                             0.34 days                              20 days
     Coefficient of Variation                                            0.11                                 4.15
                                                                           	  
               Histogram	  for	  Mean	  value	  of	  transit	        	  
               time	                                                      	   Histogram	  for	  Standard	  deviation	  
               	                                                          	   value	  of	  transit	  time	  
                                                                           	   	  

                                       Histogram of means
                                                                                                                                 Histogram of stdevs
               7




                                                                                                   8
               6
               5




                                                                                                   6
   Frequency

               4




                                                                                       Frequency
               3




                                                                                                   4
               2




                                                                                                   2
               1
               0




                                                                                                   0




                    0         20          40                60      80                                       0         5               10                    15         20



                                                                           	                                                                                                  	  
                                               means                                                                                    stdevs




	  

3.	  Imports	  

Parameter                                                        Minimum Value                                                   Maximum Value
                         Mean                                          0.88 weeks                                                       45 weeks
                  Standard Deviation                                   0.17 weeks                                                      7.74 weeks
                Coefficient of Variation                                  0.05                                                            1.01


	                                                                                                                                                                                           27	  
               Histogram	  for	  Mean	  value	  of	  transit	                                                                  Histogram	  for	  Standard	  deviation	  
               time	                                                                                                                value	  of	  transit	  time	  


                                                 Histogram plot for mean transit time                                                                                   Histogram plot for SD of transit time




                                                                                                                                 6
               6




                                                                                                                                 5
               5




                                                                                                                                 4
               4




                                                                                                                   Frequency
   Frequency




                                                                                                                                 3
               3




                                                                                                                                 2
               2




                                                                                                                                 1
               1




                                                                                                                                 0
               0




                                0       10                   20                        30          40                                0                              2                       4                         6                8



                                                                                                            	                                                                                                                                 	  
                                                       Mean Transit time (in weeks)                                                                                         Standard Deviation of Transit time




	  
4.	  Exports	  
	  

Parameter                                                                                       Minimum Value (Weeks)                                                       Maximum Value (Weeks)
                           Mean                                                                       0.86 weeks                                                                  9.45 weeks
                    Standard Deviation                                                                0.15 weeks                                                                  3.48 weeks
                  Coefficient of Variation                                                               0.09                                                                        1.43



               Histogram	  for	  Mean	  value	  of	  transit	  time	                                                                                 Histogram	  for	  Standard	  deviation	  value	  
               	                                                                                                                                           of	  transit	  time	  
                                                                                                                                                            	  
                                                                  Histogram of averages                                                                                                                          Histogram of stdevs
                           10




                                                                                                                                                            8
                           8




                                                                                                                                                            6
                           6
               Frequency




                                                                                                                                                Frequency

                                                                                                                                                            4
                           4




                                                                                                                                                            2
                           2
                           0




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                    0        2                     4                        6           8                  10                                   0                               1                           2              3            4



                                                                                                                                         	                                                                                                                 	  
                                                                            averages                                                                                                                                      stdevs




	  

	  
	  
                                                                                                                          	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             28	  
III.	  International	  supplier	  and	  customer	  locations	  grouping	  
1.	  Imports	  
                                                       	  
                      Country Group                                           Frequency
                        Americas                                                  17
                         Europe                                                   29
                       Rest of Asia                                               29
                        Singapore                                                 13
                          China                                                   27
                        Germany                                                   19
                         Taiwan                                                   10
                          Japan                                                   12
                                                       	  
2.	  Exports	  
                                                       	  
                                                       	  
                      Country Group                                           Frequency
                          Americas                                                22
                           Europe                                                 29
                    Asia (and Australia)                                          34
                           Africa                                                  8
                                                       	  
                                                       	  
                                                       	  
	  




	                                                                                        29	  
