The Uganda
Poverty Assessment
Report 2016
Farms, cities and good fortune: Assessing poverty
reduction in Uganda from 2006 to 2013

Abridged Version
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of The World Bank Group concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank Group encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial
purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.

Photography: Clarence Tsimpo, Great Lakes Film Production Ltd and Digital Media Network Ltd
Cover design : Artfield Graphics Ltd, www.info@artifield.com
Design and Layout: Artfield Graphics Ltd.
Printed in Uganda by Artfield Graphics Ltd


Additional material relating to this report can be found on the World Bank Uganda website (www.
worldbank.org/uganda). The material includes a fact sheet.



© 2016 © International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development
Association or


The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
www.worldbankgroup.org




SEPTEMBER 2016
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The World Bank greatly appreciates the close collaboration with the Government of Uganda (the Ministry
of Finance, Planning and Economic Development [MoFPED] and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics [UBOS],
in particular) in the preparation of this report. The team preparing this report was led by Ruth Hill (Senior
Economist, GPV01) and Clarence Tsimpo Nkengne (Senior Economist, GPV01) and consisted of Habtamu
Fuje (Chapter 1), Alvin Etang (Chapters 2 and 7), Carolina Mejia-Mantilla (Chapter 4), Siobhan Murray (Chapter
4), Johanna Fajarado Gonzalez (Chapters 4 and 5), Tomomi Tanaka (Chapter 5), Michael O’Sullivan (Chapter
6), and Edouard Mensah (Chapter 6). The list of background papers, authors, and reviewers that formed the
basis of Chapters 2 to 7 is provided below.

This report was prepared under the guidance of Diarietou Gaye (Country Director, AFCE2), Christina
Malmberg-Calvo (Country Manager, AFMUG), Thomas O’Brien (Country Program Coordinator, AFCE2),
Apurva Sanghi (Program Leader, AFCE2), Johan A. Mistiaen (Program Leader, AFCE2), and Pablo Fajnzylber
(Practice Manager, GPV01). Markus Goldstein (Lead Economist, AFRCE), Kathleen Beegle (Program Leaders,
AFCW1) and Obert Pimhidzai (Economist, GPV02) were peer reviewers for the report. In addition the team
is grateful for comments and input from Maura Leary, Jeeyeon Seo, Jean-Pascal Nganou, Rachel Sebudde,
Sheila Kulubya, Franklin Mutahakana, Dr. James Muwonge (UBOS), Vincent Ssennono (UBOS), Albert Musisi
(MoFED), Joseph Enyimu (MoFED), Dr. Jean-Louis Kasekende (BoU), Dr. Sarah Ssewanyana (EPRC), Dr.
Ibrahim Kasirye (EPRC) and seminar participants at seminars held at the Economic Policy Research Center
(EPRC), Makerere University, and United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), Kampala.

The team also thanks Martin Buchara, Senait K. Yifru, Damalie Nyanja, Gladys Alupo, Barbara Katusabe for
assistance provided during the preparation of this report. In addition, the report benefited from proofreading
by Shlamraj Ramraj and Akashee Medhi. Financial support from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery, and the Belgium Trust Fund is gratefully acknowledged.



Background papers

“Beyond Income Poverty: Non-Monetary Dimensions of Poverty in Uganda” by Alvin Etang and Clarence
Tsimpo and reviewed by David Newhouse and Carolina Mejia-Mantilla.

“Welfare, Income Growth and Shocks in Uganda” by Ruth Hill and Carolina Mejia-Mantilla and reviewed
by Johannes Hoogeveen and Luc Christiaensen. Funding was also provided by GFDRR for the analysis
undertaken in this paper.

“Moving Out and Up: Panel Data Evidence on Migration and Poverty in Uganda” by Edouard Mensah and
Michael O’Sullivan and reviewed by Joao Montalvao and Francis Mwesigye (Makerere University and EPRC,
Uganda).

“Education and Health Services in Uganda: Quality of Inputs, User Satisfaction, and Community Welfare
Levels” by Clarence Tsimpo, Alvin Etang, and Quentin Wodon and reviewed by Andrew Dabalen and
Christophe Rockmore.
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY




Uganda’s progress in reducing poverty over the last two decades is a remarkable story of success. From
1993 to 2006, annual reduction in the national poverty rate of 1.9 percentage points a year resulted
from the restoration of peace and stability to much of the country after Yoweri Museveni came into
power, the series of economic liberalization reforms that were implemented, and the investments of
households and firms that these encouraged.

Poverty reduction has remained impressive since 2006—the period of focus for this report—even
though it has fallen more slowly. The national poverty rate fell by 1.6 percentage points per year
and the international extreme poverty rate fell by 2.7 percentage points per year, the second fastest
reduction in extreme poverty per year in Sub-Saharan Africa during this time.

Uganda’s poverty reduction since 2006 has coincided with a period of slower economic growth. Despite
this, poor households still experienced consumption growth and poverty fell. Understanding why this
was and whether it is sustainable offers lessons for other countries grappling with how to ensure that
the poor can still see improvements in their lives, even in the face of a slowing global economy.

However, Uganda’s success is not without caveats. In 2013, more than a third of its citizens lived below
the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90 a day. What’s more, the low national poverty rate
of 19.7 percent is based on a poverty line that was set over twenty years ago and is now too low, and
not reflective of a reality in which too many Ugandans live today. Vulnerability has also remained high.
For every three Ugandans that moved out of poverty, two fell into poverty. Poverty has also become
increasingly concentrated in the Northern and Eastern regions of the country.

And, of more concern, it is not clear that the processes that brought about gains in the past will be
enough to address the future poverty challenge in Uganda, particularly in the impoverished Northern
and Eastern regions.

Acknowledging both the impressive progress and its limitations, however, it is helpful to look at the
factors that contributed to Uganda’s poverty reduction since 2006 and to examine policies that have
worked alongside possible improvements to make progress more sustainable into the future.

Much of Uganda’s poverty reduction was built on agricultural income growth that particularly benefited
poor households. Peace in northern Uganda, improved regional crop markets, and good weather
drove growth in agricultural incomes. Modest gains in education also contributed to growth, as did
urbanization.
Uganda’s formula for success is one that works especially well when conditions are favorable, particularly
in agriculture. And luck has been on Uganda’s side in the last decade. Good rainfall and prices can
account for two-thirds of the growth in crop income of the bottom 40 percent from 2006 to 2012. Prices
reflect not just improvements in marketing efficiency resulting from market liberalization, but also many
factors beyond domestic policy control: positive price trends in international markets and increased
demand for Ugandan crop exports in regional markets as a result of peace in South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

There was little fundamental change in how the households earned their income that benefited poverty
reduction—either in agriculture or in other sectors. Most households continue to earn income in informal,
low-investment, low-productivity activities such as traditional crop farming and small-scale retail
trading, and there has been little change in the proportion of households that count agriculture as their
main sector of employment since 2006. In addition, persistently high fertility rates held back poverty
reduction. A quarter of Uganda’s households are female headed and these households experienced lower
productivity largely because of the higher time-burden of childcare that they face. Limited spending on
safety nets also resulted in fiscal redistribution having little direct impact on poverty reduction.

Uganda has set out an ambitious agenda for its future; its 2040 Vision foresees a middle-income country
with the majority of its citizens living in urban areas, having smaller families, and earning income in non-
agricultural sectors. Sustained gains in poverty reduction and the achievement of this vision for Uganda
will require a fundamental shift in the nature of production—from low-investment, informal activities to
higher-capital, more productive employment and a more rapid reduction in fertility rates.

To make this happen, effective public investment in services such as education, health, agricultural
extension, and safety nets will be crucial. Structural change undoubtedly also requires a focus on firm
growth and job creation, but for this growth to be inclusive of the poorest households, it must be paired
with investments in education, skills, and finance, especially for vulnerable groups such as adolescent
girls. The significant increase in primary enrollment rates brought about by the benefits of the Universal
Primary Education (UPE) program has yet to translate into substantial improvements in educational
outcomes. Primary completion rates were merely 53 percent in 2011, much lower than countries with
similar income levels. Pregnancy is the fourth most common reason for dropping out of secondary
school: in 2013, 1 in 10 girls report dropping out of secondary school as a result of pregnancy. Public
transfers to households are negligible in Uganda—total spending on direct income support to poor
households was 0.4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) compared with 1.1 percent in other low-
income countries in Africa.

But for these public investments to be effective, Uganda cannot let implementation gaps and poor
service delivery continue. Teacher absenteeism keeps students from learning and achieving, and teachers
and health workers often lack the minimum knowledge to properly teach pupils or treat patients. As a
consequence, children may go to school, but not master the knowledge that they need to be successful in
the labor market. Similarly, public and private spending on health access does not guarantee that people
are receiving quality service. All these can have a negative impact on people’s skill attainment and health,
even more so for the poor as they experience the lowest quality of services. Improving community-based
monitoring and demand-side accountability is an important part of the solution, but more than this will
be needed. Poorer communities are more likely to express satisfaction with any services that they are
receiving, even though their quality is worse than in better-off communities.

Liberalization of markets has been important to Uganda’s success in the past, but some markets are
currently failing to work. The low quality of agricultural inputs in domestic markets results in poorer
quality outputs and lower earnings. If authentic technologies replaced these low-quality products,
average returns for smallholder farmers would be over 50 percent. Increasing the adoption of more
modern technologies will entail improving the quality of inputs in local markets through certification
(public or private). Improvements in rural financial markets are also needed to increase the access to
financial capital that is required for agricultural input purchases, nonfarm employment growth, and rural
to urban migration. This will be imperative to ensure consumption growth for poor households regardless
of weather variations and regional and international prices.

Although there is an important role for the state in bringing about the change Uganda needs to see, the
continued importance of security and liberalized markets cannot be underestimated. Ensuring continued
stability in the region and further promoting efficient crop markets and regional exports will be important
for future income growth in Uganda. This growth, when paired with an inclusive policy framework and
stronger investments in basic services, can lead to more sustainable poverty reduction and improvements
in the quality of life of millions of Ugandans.
OVERVIEW




1.	   Uganda’s progress in reducing poverty from 1993 to 2006 is a remarkable story of success that
      has been well told. Annual reductions in the national poverty rate of 1.9 percentage points a year
      resulted from the restoration of peace and stability to much of the country after Yoweri Museveni
      came into power in 1986, the series of economic liberalization reforms that were implemented in the
      1990s, and the investments of households and firms that these encouraged (see for example, Collier
      and Reinikka 2003; World Bank 2007).


2.	   The narrative of Uganda’s continued, albeit slightly slower, progress in reducing poverty since
      2006 is less familiar. Uganda reduced the proportion of people living on less than US$1.90 per
      person per day by 2.7 percentage points per year, the second fastest percentage point reduction
      in extreme poverty per year in Sub-Saharan Africa during this period.1 The national poverty rate
      continued to fall by 1.6 percentage points per year. However, during this time the national poverty
      line, set using data from 1993, became an increasingly poor standard against which to measure who
      was poor.


3.	   This was a period in which growth slowed as the gains from reforms years earlier had been
      fully realized, and weak infrastructure and increasing corruption increasingly constrained
      private sector competitiveness (World Bank 2015). How, in this context, was Uganda still able to
      secure inclusive consumption growth for many of its citizens? Understanding the drivers of recent
      poverty reduction is important for offering lessons on how to reduce poverty further in the future not
      only in Uganda, but also for other countries in the region that have not experienced such progress.


4.	   This report examines Uganda’s progress in reducing poverty, with a specific focus on the
      period 2006 to 2013. The report shows that high growth from 2006 to 2010 benefited poverty
      reduction. Although growth slowed for all households from 2010, poor households were able to
      maintain above average consumption growth and poverty reduction did not falter. Agricultural
      income growth particularly benefited poor households aided by peace in northern Uganda,
      improved regional markets, and good weather. Modest gains in education also appear to have
      contributed to the growth for poor households, as did urbanization. However there was little
      fundamental change in the nature of production that benefited poverty reduction—either in
      agriculture or in other sectors. In addition, persistently high dependency ratios held back poverty
      reduction, and limited spending on safety nets resulted in fiscal policy contributing to neither
      poverty reduction nor to improving vulnerability.

1. Uganda reduced the extreme poverty rate by 2.7 percentage points a year, second only to Chad, which reduced the extreme poverty
rate by 3.1 percentage points per year. This is using poverty numbers reported in Povcalnet as of January 2016 and using the surveys
deemed comparable by World Bank 2016.
5.	   Is Uganda on a path to end extreme poverty? The benefits of security and liberalized markets for
      poverty reduction cannot be underestimated and will likely aid future poverty reduction as they
      have done in the past. However, sustained gains also require a fundamental shift in the nature of
      production from low-investment, informal activities to higher-capital, more productive employment.
      This in turn requires effective public investment in services (such as education, health, rural finance,
      quality of agricultural inputs and extension services), infrastructure (such as regional corridors and
      electricity), and safety nets. Addressing this requires addressing public investment implementation
      gaps and improving service delivery.


6.	   Before turning in further detail to the key findings of the report, it is important to note that the
      analysis undertaken in this report is only possible because the Government of Uganda (GoU)
      has invested in a high quality series of household surveys to document progress in well-being
      since 1993. The UBOS has conducted high-quality household surveys every three to four years
      that have provided a comparable series of data on poverty and other household characteristics for
      the last twenty years. Uganda is one of the few countries in the region to have achieved this level
      of comparable, frequent poverty monitoring over time. Without this, it would not be possible to
      document the lessons Uganda provides.


A RECORD OF PROGRESS


7.	   Uganda recorded impressive rates of poverty reduction in the last two decades. The proportion
      of the Ugandan population living in poverty—whether measured using the national poverty line or
      the international poverty line—more than halved from 1993 to 2013 (Figure 1). The proportion of the
      population living below the national poverty line declined from 56.4 percent in 1993 to 19.7 percent
      in 2013.2 The proportion of households living below the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90
      a day (2011 prices) fell from 68.1 percent in 1993 to 34.6 percent in 2013. The depth and severity of
      poverty have also fallen consistently.

        FIGURE 1: Headcount poverty rate, national and international poverty line, 1993 to 2013




                              Source: Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS) 2006–2013.




2. The national poverty line ranges from US$0.88 to US$1.04 2005 PPP per capita depending on the region. Poverty in Uganda is
calculated using a cost-of-basic-needs approach. Consumption expenditure data is collected on food and non-food items through the
UNHS conducted every three to four years. The poverty line was set in 1993 by calculating the cost of consuming 3,000 calories per
adult equivalent and then adding an amount (the amount depending on the region) to capture non-food expenditures. The poverty
line has only been updated for the cost of inflation since then and is low by international standards.
8.	   Progress in the period of focus for this report, 2006 to 2013, has been a little slower but
      still very fast by regional standards. The international extreme poverty rate—the proportion
      of households living on less than US$1.90 purchasing power parity (PPP) per day—fell by 2.7
      percentage points per year since 2003. Although this was slower than the rate of progress in earlier
      years, it was still the second fastest percentage point reduction in poverty per year in Sub-Saharan
      Africa (Figure 2). The high percentage point reduction is in part due to the fact Uganda started with
      a high poverty rate. However, even considering the percentage reduction in poverty, Uganda’s
      performance has been impressive—the fifth fastest in the region during this time. The national
      poverty rate fell by 1.6 percentage points a year during this period, only slightly slower than the 1.9
      percentage point reduction recorded from 1993 to 2006. However, the national poverty line has not
      been updated since 1993, causing this to become an increasingly poor measure of who is poor in
      Uganda today.

             FIGURE 2: Annual reduction of poverty headcount at international poverty line,
             selected sub-saharan africa countries (2003-2013)




                                   Source: Staff calculations using Povcalnet.


9.	   Recent gains in poverty reduction have occurred during a period in which growth started to
      slow. Although growth slowed for all households, poor households still experienced consumption
      growth and poverty fell. Peace in northern Uganda and agricultural income growth aided
      consumption growth for poorer rural households, even though better-off urban households did not
      fare as well. As a result, the period from 2010 to 2013 was the only period in the last twenty years in
      which consumption growth was higher among the bottom 40 percent (2.3 percent per year) than
      among the top 60 percent (1.6 percent per year).


10.	 In general, growth brought rising inequality as well as rising consumption but the increase
     has been marginal and inequality fell from 2010 to 2013. Inequality increased in rural and urban
     Uganda from 1993 to 2010, by any measure. National inequality, as measured by the Gini index,
     increased from 0.36 in 1993 to 0.42 in 2010 (Figure 3). This finding holds when looking at other
     measures of inequality such as the Theil index with the parameter α=−1 which emphasizes inequality
     for lower incomes, and the absolute and relative difference between the bottom 10 percent and the
     top 90 percent. However, the increase has been marginal and Uganda has a moderately low rate of
     inequality compared to other countries in the region (Figure 4). Inequality fell from 41.5 percent in
     2010 to 38.5 percent in 2013, a reduction of 1 percentage point in the Gini per year.
11.	 Trends in non-monetary well-being also point to improvements in the well-being of Ugandan
     households. Infant mortality dropped from 88 in 2001 to 76 in 2006 and 54 in 2011. Under-five
     mortality stood at 90 in 2011, having declined from 152 in 2001 to 137 in 2006.3 Between 2001 and
     2011, under-five mortality dropped by 5.6 annually in Uganda. This was a considerable improvement
     in comparison to regional and global averages. For example, between 2001 and 2011, under-five
     mortality dropped by 5.2 annually for Sub-Saharan African countries and by only 2.4 for the world.
     Education outcomes have also improved over time, for example the primary net enrollment rate
     increased from 84 percent in 2006 to 86 percent in 2013. In addition, ownership of modern assets such
     as telephones and motorcycles increased, while ownership of traditional assets, such as bicycles, fell.


                        FIGURE 3: Rising inequality: the Gini coefficient from 1993–2013




                                                     Source: UNHS 1993–2013.

              FIGURE 4: Inequality is increasing, but remains moderate compared to the region
                                          (percent, latest survey year)




                                          Source: World Development Indicators (WDI).

       BUT MANY CHALLENGES REMAIN

12.	 However, despite the substantial progress that has been sustained over two decades, Uganda
     remains a very poor country. In 1993, Uganda was one of the poorest countries in the world, so,
     even after two decades of progress, poverty is still widespread. In 2013, more than a third of its
     citizens live below the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90 a day.


13.	 The low national poverty rate of 19.7 percent reflects a poverty line that is too low and not
     a reality in which only a fifth of Ugandans are unable to meet their basic needs. When the
     national poverty lines are converted into 2011 PPP they vary from 72 percent to 82 percent of the
     international extreme poverty line of US$1.90. The international extreme poverty line is 	

3. Infant mortality and under-five mortality are per 1,000 children
     designed to capture the average national poverty line among the world’s poorest countries, so the
     fact that Uganda’s poverty lines are much lower, suggests that the poverty lines used in Uganda are
     too low.


14.	 An updated national poverty line that reflects the changes in consumption patterns of
     Ugandan households since 1993 suggests a poverty rate in the range of 33 to 35 percent. The
     national poverty lines were set using data from 1993 and have not been updated to reflect the real
     price increases of some foods that poor households consume and the changing nature of food and
     non-food consumption in Uganda. Poverty lines that are 25 percent to 30 percent higher would
     reflect the changes in consumption over the last 15 years and would bring the lines closer to the
     standard used by other low-income countries.

15.	 Although there was improvement in the non-monetary dimension of well-being, the country
     still faces widespread deprivation. Despite improvement over the last decade, access to basic
     infrastructure services remains abysmally low, particularly for the poor. Access to improved
     sanitation facilities remains very low by regional and international standards. Less than a third of
     households (31.3 percent) have adequate sanitation and a quarter of poor households have no toilet
     facility at all. Access to electricity in Uganda is one of the lowest in the world. Only 14 percent of
     households in Uganda use electricity for lighting.

16.	 In addition, vulnerability to poverty in Uganda is high. Between 2005 and 2009, for every three
     Ugandans who were lifted out of poverty, two fell back into poverty, illustrating the fragility of the
     gains realized by the poorest households (Ssewanyana and Kasirye 2012). Uganda’s success in
     reducing poverty has resulted in many households that are living just out of poverty who remain
     vulnerable to falling back in to poverty in the face of a negative shock.

17.	 Poverty has become increasingly concentrated in the Northern and Eastern regions of Uganda
     as the Central and Western regions have experienced more rapid poverty reduction. There
     are large and increasing regional variations in poverty with most of the poor concentrated in the
     north and the east. In 2006, approximately 68 percent of the poor lived in the northern and eastern



                      FIGURE 5: Share of poor population in each region, 2006–2013




                                          Source: UNHS 2006–2013.
    parts of the country. Seven years later, this proportion increased to 84 percent. Poverty has fallen
    in all regions, but gains have been slower in the poorer Northern and Eastern regions (Figure 5).
    The annual percent reduction in poverty has been almost twice as high in the Central and Western
    regions (7.4 and 7.9 percent respectively) than in the Northern and Eastern regions (3.1 and 4.7
    percent respectively).

18.	 High fertility rates and widespread acceptance of discriminatory attitudes to women hold
     back the participation of women in Uganda’s development, despite impressive gains in
     primary female enrollment, maternal mortality, and poverty reduction among female-headed
     households. Although, on average, female-headed households are no poorer than male-headed
     households, some groups of female-headed households are particularly vulnerable to poverty.
    Female widows are almost twice as likely to be poor compared to male widowers. Maternal mortality
    rates have been falling but are still high and given each woman goes through six births on average,
    having children still poses a significant risk to women. High pregnancy rates, particularly among
    teenage girls, also jeopardize educational attainment. Pregnancy is the fourth most common reason
    for dropping out of secondary school: in 2013, 1 in 10 girls report dropping out of secondary school
    as a result of pregnancy. Lower rates of agricultural productivity among female-headed households
    can largely be accounted for by the higher childcare demands they face (Ali et al. 2015). Perceptions
    also limit Uganda’s progress in reducing gender inequalities: perceptions of gender appropriate
    economic roles have been found to account for lower female earnings (Campo et al. 2015), and
    worryingly, nearly four in every five Ugandan women accept domestic violence—the second highest
    acceptance of domestic violence in Sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank 2016a).
THE DRIVERS OF PROGRESS: AGRICULTURE, URBANIZATION, AND EDUCATION

AGRICULTURE

19.	 Poverty reduction among households in agriculture accounts for 79 percent of national poverty
     reduction from 2006 to 2013 (Figure 6). To some extent this is to be expected as the agricultural
     sector is the main sector of employment for households in Uganda, particularly so for poorer
     households. Although the agricultural sector is the main sector of employment, half of those engaged
     in agriculture have additional sources of income from non-agricultural activities. However, poverty
     fell just as fast for agricultural households that were solely engaged in agriculture as for those with
     diversified income sources, suggesting that growth in agricultural incomes drove poverty reduction.


    FIGURE 6: Sectoral contribution to poverty                 20.	 High rates of agricultural income
    reduction, 2006 to 2013, main source of income                  growth were observed from
                                                                    2006 to 2012, particularly for
                                                                    the poorest. Figure 7 shows
                                                                    how different sources of income
                                                                    have grown for households in the
                                                                    bottom 40 percent from 2006 to
                                                                    2012. Agricultural income grew
                                                                    at 6 percent per capita per year.
                                                                    Agricultural income growth is also
                                                                    found to be more strongly correlated
                                                                    with consumption growth than
                                                                    other sources of income growth,
                                                                    particularly for the bottom 40
                                                                    percent.


                 Source: UNHS 2006–2013.


               FIGURE 7: Real income per capita by source of income, bottom 40 percent




                           Source: Uganda National Panel Survey (UNPS) 2006–2012
21.	 Agricultural incomes grew because the government got right some key fundamentals that
     provided the incentives to invest time in agricultural production and engage in agricultural
     markets. Conflict with the Lord’s Resistance Army in the Northern region of Uganda was stabilized
     in 2008 and this had a positive impact on crop income. Establishing peace was associated with a
     doubling (a 112 percent growth) in crop income in affected areas. In addition, markets, particularly
     in the north and east, have been improving since 2006 because of infrastructure investments,
     new export markets opening up in South Sudan, DRC and in Kenya, better market information
     for farmers and traders (because of the development of a well-functioning information and
     communication technology [ICT] sector), and growth in trade services, which improved marketing
     efficiency. This has contributed to real relative price increases for agricultural commodities that
     poor farmers grow and sell.


22.	 Luck was also on Uganda’s side: good weather benefited many households and positive price
     trends in international and regional markets aided real crop price increases. Prices reflect
     not just improvements in marketing efficiency, but also favorable changes in supply and demand
     conditions within and outside of Uganda. Peace in South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
     Congo provided new sources of demand for Ugandan food production. Good rainfall and prices
     account for 51 percent of the improvement in crop income for all households and 66 percent of the
     improvement in crop income for the bottom 40 percent. A 10 percent increase in water sufficiency
     increases crop income by 9.9 percent. A 10 percent increase in the price of maize or beans increases
     crop income by 4.5 and 9.2 percent, respectively.


23.	 The importance of regional and domestic markets in contributing to agricultural growth is
     confirmed by the fact that the share of household income coming from crop sales increased
     from 2006 to 2012. The share of households in the bottom 40 percent that are selling crops
     increased from 60 percent in 2006 to 72 percent in 2012 (Figure 8). It is crops that are produced
     for domestic and regional consumption that dominate crop income. Coffee is important for some
     households, but does not comprise more than 10 percent of crop income in any region. This is
     consistent with the export data that shows that coffee fell from comprising three-quarters of exports
     at the beginning of the 1990s to a third of exports by 2005 (World Bank 2007) and that 41 percent
     of exports now go to Uganda’s four regional neighbors (in order of importance): South Sudan, the
     Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, and Rwanda (World Bank 2016b).


24.	 Agricultural growth was not driven by technology adoption or change in the nature of
     production. When extension services were provided crop income was 20 percent higher, but few
     households received extension services. Extension services expanded from 8 percent of households
     in 2006 to 12 percent of households in 2013. There was very little growth in the use of improved
     inputs and as a result modernization of agricultural practices contributed very little to crop income
     growth. Understanding why farmers did not adopt agricultural technologies during this time of
     high prices and designing policies that help farmers overcome these constraints needs to be a key
     area of action going forward. Recent research suggests that poor quality of inputs, limited access
     to credit, and lack of knowledge are binding constraints. The high prevalence of low-quality inputs
     in domestic input markets results in negative returns on average, even though prices are high. If
     authentic technologies replaced these low-quality products, average returns for smallholder farmers
     would be over 50 percent.
FIGURE 8: Share of crop income derived from                    25.	 Urbanization can account for
crop sales, bottom 40 percent, 2006–2012                            one-tenth of the poverty reduction
                                                                    that took place from 2006 to 2013,
                                                                    accounting for the movement of
                                                                    180,000 people out of poverty.
                                                                    While the bulk of Uganda’s 35 million
                                                                    inhabitants live in rural areas, the
                                                                    country is urbanizing at a considerable
                                                                    pace. Between 2002 and 2014 the
                                                                    share of Uganda’s population living in
                                                                    urban areas increased by more than
                                                                    50 percent, from 12.1 percent to 18.4
                                                                    percent (UBOS 2014b). Urbanization
                                                                    has been an important driver of
                                                                    poverty reduction from 2006 to 2013
                                                                    (Figure 9). Migration, in addition to
                                                                    demographics and redistricting,
                                                                    contributes to urbanization.

Source: Staff calculations using rural income-generating activities
(RIGA) income aggregates calculated from UNPS 2006–2012




FIGURE 9: Locational contribution to poverty                   26.	 Careful analysis on the impact of
reduction                                                           migration suggests it results in
                                                                    consumption growth that is 14.6
                                                                    percent higher per year for migrants
                                                                    compared to those who do not
                                                                    migrate. Migration has a large and
                                                                    positive impact, both for those who
                                                                    move to rural destinations and those
                                                                    who move to urban destinations, but
                                                                    the impact of migration is larger when
                                                                    it entails moving to an urban area.
                                                                    Annual consumption growth is 16.3
                                                                    percent higher for those who migrate
                                                                    to urban destinations and 14 percent
                                                                    higher for those who migrate to rural
                                                                    destinations. Migration can bring
                                                                    about welfare gains if individuals are
                                                                    able to move from areas where the
                                                                    return to labor is low to areas where
                                                                    the return to labor is higher because of
    Source: Staff calculations using UNHS 2006–2013
                                                                    better market opportunities.
This appears to have been the case for both rural-urban migration and rural-rural migration in which
migrants often came from remote, conflict affected rural areas. Migration can also aid poverty reduction
through the remittances that it allows. Currently little is known about the role of remittances in bringing
about poverty reduction in Uganda.


27.	 Urban migration is facilitated by education and access to finance and hindered by
     remoteness and lack of access to social networks in urban areas. Those who are more
     educated are more likely to migrate and more likely to send household members to migrate. Even
     once controlling for other factors, a one-year increase in schooling leads to 0.1 percent increase in
     the incidence of out-migration. Having a formal loan and a savings account increases the likelihood
     of becoming a migrant-sending household by 3 and 6 percentage points, respectively, controlling
     for other factors. Access to finance can also help overcome the costs associated with migrating
     from a remote area to a distant urban center. There is also some evidence that access to mobile
     phones helps overcome barriers associated with limited social networks in urban areas.

28.	 Some migration—both rural and urban—is the result of experiencing loss of income, assets,
     or security. Young, working age individuals from areas with higher levels of conflict-related
     fatalities were more likely to migrate and migrated to rural areas. Young, working age individuals
     from areas with high levels of rainfall-induced harvest losses were more likely to migrate to urban
     areas. Losing assets and having no network to rely on in a time of need also encouraged migration.
     While migration helped increase the welfare of these individuals in the face of shocks, it is not
     clear whether migration is the optimal instrument to manage risk. Reducing exposure to risk and
     increasing access to other tools with which to manage shocks when they do occur may prove more
     beneficial in the long term.

EDUCATION

29.	 Although progress on education has been slow, progress has aided poverty reduction,
     accounting for half of the consumption growth experienced by poor households. Households
     with higher levels of education have higher agricultural incomes and more productive nonfarm
     enterprises. Education also enables migration and helps households gain more productive wage
     employment. The estimated returns to education in Uganda range from 4.5–8.3 percent (Lekfuangfu
     et al. 2012). Over the last decade, there was slow improvement in human capital outcomes but the
     slight increase of the share of households with secondary education aided consumption growth.
     Decomposition analysis suggests this improvement can account for half of the consumption growth of
     households at the bottom of the consumption distribution (Figure 10). The strong positive correlation
     of secondary education and consumption growth is particularly important for poor households.

30.	 Higher educational outcomes contribute to growth in wage employment income and migration
     and enables households to diversify in the face of shocks. Panel data analysis shows that as
     households have increased the level of education of household members they are more likely to
     see growth in wage income and in migration, particularly to urban areas. Having some secondary
     education implies a 1.4 percent reduction in the intensity of a weather shock for households in the
     bottom 40 percent. More education facilitates diversification by enabling increased participation in the
     labor market. Productivity in agriculture is also higher for those with higher levels of education.
                      FIGURE 10: Contribution of education to consumption growth




                                Source: Staff calculations using UNHS 2006–2013.


WHAT DID NOT CONTRIBUTE? DEMOGRAPHICS, STRUCTURAL CHANGE, AND REDISTRIBUTIVE
FISCAL POLICY

DEMOGRAPHICS
31.	 Uganda has one of the youngest and most rapidly growing populations in the world. About half
     (48.7 percent) of Uganda’s population is younger than 15, well above Sub-Saharan Africa’s average
     of 43.2 percent and world average of 26.8 percent. The country’s population growth rate, currently at
     3.3 percent, is also above Africa’s average.


32.	 An increasing dependency ratio held back consumption growth from 2006 to 2013, reducing
     the consumption growth of the poorest households by 15 percent to 20 percent. Although the
     fertility rate is high, it has been slowly falling over the last two decades. However, the drop in fertility
     rates in recent years has yet to substantially change the demographic composition of Ugandan
     households. The dependency ratio has been increasing, particularly for poorer households. This
     increase held back consumption growth from 2006 to 2013 (Figure 11). Reducing the dependency
     ratio will benefit consumption growth, particularly for poorer households.


                              FIGURE 11: Higher dependency ratios held back
                              consumption growth, especially for the poorest




                                Source: Staff calculations using UNHS 2006–2013
STRUCTURAL CHANGE

33.	 There has been little change in the proportion of households that count agriculture as
     their main sector of employment since 2006. This is despite high growth rates in services and
     manufacturing during this period. Additionally few households have diversified into nonfarm
     activities. From 1993 to 2006, many households stayed in agriculture, but diversified their sources of
     income by taking additional income activities in non-agricultural sectors (Fox and Pimhidzai 2011).
     This trend has not been observed since 2006. The high rates of growth in non-agricultural sectors
     resulted in job creation keeping pace with growth in the working age population, but not outpacing
     growth.


34.	 Structural change and diversification was not a major driver of poverty reduction since 2006,
     although growth in nonfarm incomes helped some households. Although diversification may
     have driven poverty reduction before 2006, when diversification was rapidly increasing, it was not
     a major driver of progress from 2006 to 2013. Poverty reduction was just as fast for those solely
     in agriculture as it was for those with diversified income sources. However, some households did
     experience growth in non-agricultural incomes and this aided improvements in consumption and
     reductions in poverty.


35.	 Diversification has increased the resilience of households to shocks by making them less
     vulnerable to the impact of bad weather. Weather has a smaller impact on consumption than
     it does on crop income because households are able to increase income from non-agricultural
     activities (Table 1). If agricultural income is affected by climate shocks, households can offset this
     with increased nonfarm income. As a result, a lot of movement in and out of nonfarm activities by
     agricultural households is observed.

 TABLE 1: Impact of weather on diversification

  Impact of 10 percent re-          Crop income         Non-agricultural        Nonfarm self-em-   Consump-
  duction in rainfall on…                                wage income            ployment income      tion
  All households                        18.9***              −36.3***                 −28.0***      4.8***

  Bottom 40 percent                     24.2***              −43.7***                 −33.3***       4.0**
  Source: Staff calculations using UNPS 2006–2012.

  Note: Significance levels are reported as follows: *p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



36.	 Unhelpful gender norms, low levels of education, and lack of access to infrastructure and
     finance has limited the degree to which households move out of agriculture. Low education,
     lack of access to financial instruments (both savings and credit), and lack of access to requisite
     infrastructure (such as electricity) has constrained non-agricultural income growth for many
     households. In addition, strong gender norms have constrained non-agricultural income growth for
     many women during this period. Female adolescents are likely to give birth and get married young,
     limiting their income earning potential (Bandiera et al. 2015). Gender norms influence the type of
     activities women engage in, causing them to go into lower productive sectors (Campo et al. 2015).
37.	 Limited firm growth and job creation has also resulted in structural change contributing little
     to poverty reduction. While an analysis of the constraints to firm growth is beyond the scope of
     this report, and have been discussed elsewhere (for example, World Bank 2015), the results of the
     analysis undertaken show that the limited growth of non-agricultural jobs for the bottom 40 percent
     has been a missed opportunity for Uganda. Structural change could have contributed to poverty
     reduction more had this been present.

REDISTRIBUTIVE FISCAL POLICY

38.	 Growth, not redistribution, drives poverty reduction in Uganda reflecting a limited use of
     fiscal policy to redistribute incomes in comparison to other countries in the region. Public
     transfers to households are negligible in Uganda. The proportion of poor households receiving any
     kind of transfer is 5 percent. Uganda’s total spending on social security in 2013 was 1 percent of GDP
     compared to an average of 2.8 percent for other countries in Africa. Of that 1 percent, only 0.4 percent
     was spent on direct income support to poor households, compared with 1.1 percent in other low-
     income countries in Africa (World Bank 2015).


39.	 There is also limited government support available to households to manage shocks to welfare.
     Figure 12 indicates that households rely on savings (35 percent) and help from family (25 percent) to
     mitigate the impact of shocks. Very few report receiving support from the government, highlighting
     the absence of reliable official safety net programs. Safety nets provided by savings, family, and
     friends are of paramount importance in the absence of official safety net programs. In a context
     in which income volatility is high, limited formal safety nets result in considerable vulnerability to
     poverty. Savings cannot help mitigate large shocks and reliance on families and friends in the absence
     of formal safety nets is not always ideal. If all are affected by the same bad event (for example, poor
     rains or low cash crop prices), they are unable to provide help. Not only does the lack of formal safety
     nets result in households falling into poverty when setbacks occur, it also limits consumption growth
     for poor and vulnerable households. These households avoid investing in risky production activities
     even when returns are high. In addition, excessive reliance on informal networks can result in
     individuals hiding or foregoing income to avoid the risk of this type of informal taxation in the future
     (Fafchamps and Hill 2015; Jakiela and Ozier 2015).


                               FIGURE 12: Self-reported coping mechanism




                                Source: Nikolaski et al. (2015) using UNPS 2011.
IMPROVING HEALTH AND EDUCATION OUTCOMES FOR POVERTY REDUCTION IN UGANDA

40.	 Although fiscal policy does not play an important role in directly redistributing income to
     reduce poverty, public spending can provide an important role in facilitating poverty reduction
     through the provision of basic services. However, the share of public spending on education
     and health services is low in Uganda, in comparison to regional peers. In 2013, public spending on
     health accounted for only 24 percent of the total expenditure on health. In contrast, this share was
     37 percent among low-income countries and almost 44 percent among developing economies in
     Sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank 2015). This is compounded by the fact that overall public spending
     is low because of limited tax revenue generation. Because of low levels of spending, out-of-pocket
     payments are generally higher in Uganda than those in other countries in the region and in countries
     with similar levels of GDP per capita. Public investment in education also remains low, averaging
     about 3.2 percent of GDP annually. It is also here that the implementation gap that has been
     increasing in recent years has limited the effectiveness of government.


41.	 The significant increase in primary enrollment rates has yet to translate into substantial
     improvements in educational outcomes. The high primary school enrollment rates among both
     poor and rich children reflect the benefits of the UPE program that was introduced by the GoU in
     1997. However, primary completion rates are lower than expected, and the trends show that the
     completion rate fell as more children were enrolled in school. Uganda’s gross primary completion
     rate was 53 percent in 2011. When compared with its peers, Uganda’s primary completion rate is low
     (Figure 13). As a consequence, the out-of-school rate for lower secondary is much higher than its
     income peers.


                 FIGURE 13: Primary completion rate is among the lowest in the world




                                              Source: WDI.
42.	 More and better health and education inputs seem to be available in better-off locations, as
     expected. Consider, for example, the number of pupils per classroom. These ratios are much
     higher for the poorest quintile of communities than the richest. A typical classroom in the poorest
     quintile has 116 pupils, while the corresponding figure for the richest quintile is 58 pupils. Teacher
     absenteeism rates at the level of schools or classrooms are also negatively correlated with welfare.4
     For communities in the poorest quintile, about four out of ten teachers are absent from school.
     Teachers are more likely to be absent in poorer areas. Unlike in the education sector, there is no
     apparent correlation between health workers’ absenteeism and the welfare level of communities.
     However, there is a clear correlation between patient caseload and community welfare.5 A health
     worker in the poorest quintile provides consultations to six outpatients per day (median value) versus
     three for staff in facilities in the richest quintile of communities. Sick people in poor areas are more
     likely to face overcrowding and long queues while visiting their health centers.


43.	 The low quality of inputs negatively affects service delivery outcomes, especially in poor areas.
     Teacher’s absenteeism constitutes a barrier to pupil’s achievement. Similarly, teachers and health
     workers often lack the minimum knowledge to properly teach or treat patients. Evidence suggests
     that workers knowledge is lower in poor communities. As a consequence, children may go to school,
     but not master the necessary knowledge that they need to be successful on the labor market.
     Similarly, public and private spending on health will not guarantee value for money. All these have the
     potential to have a negative impact on human capital accumulation, even more so for the poor, as
     they experienced the lowest quality of services.


44.	 Poorer communities are more likely to be satisfied with the services that they are receiving,
     even though it is clear from the analysis that the level of inputs and their quality is higher in
     better-off communities. The perceived quality of service is negatively correlated with community
     welfare. The likely explanation is that poor communities are so deprived that their expectations
     are low. This leads them to be more rapidly satisfied with the services they get. By contrast, better-
     off communities have higher expectations and, therefore, are more demanding about quality and
     less satisfied even if objectively they are getting comparatively better services. This has a series of
     implications on how to deal with community feedback, including importance of access to information
     and education of beneficiaries on what quality to expect. This result also implies that community
     feedback as such is useful, but should not be the sole source of monitoring information.


45.	 The contrast between satisfaction and quality of service provision raises questions for the
     effectiveness of community based monitoring and the demand for accountability. If the
     population in poor communities has low expectations or is not exposed enough to what services of
     good quality should look like, to be able to indeed assess quality, it is not clear that it can effectively
     lobby for quality services. For social accountability mechanisms to be effective, additional measures
     may be needed to enable disadvantaged communities to properly monitor the services they receive.
     The issue is not specific to Uganda, and there are examples of social accountability initiatives with
     mixed results (Fox 2015). Issues of political economy may also have to be considered for social
     accountability measures to work (Joshia and Houtzagerb 2012). The importance of information for a
     positive impact of community monitoring has been documented for the case of Uganda by Reinikka


4. That is, whether teachers are in the classroom even if they may be in the school.
5. Patient caseload is defined as the average number of outpatient visits a health worker attends to per working day.
  and Svensson (2005) and Svensson et al.                   monitoring. They found that local monitoring
  (2015) among others. Reinikka and Svensson                improves teacher attendance but only when
  (2005) conducted an experiment that shows                 the head teacher is responsible for monitoring
  that making information on budget allocation              and there are financial incentives for teachers
  available to beneficiaries reduces corruption             at stake. Moreover, they also found that
  and elite capture and has a positive impact               parents generate significantly less reliable
  on enrollment and educational outcomes.                   reports than head teachers do. Overall, in a
  Svensson et al. (2015) conducted an                       context where poverty and expectations are
  experiment on community-based monitoring                  a problem, more needs to be done for social
  of absenteeism versus head teachers                       accountability to be effective.



       FIGURE 14: Inputs and user satisfaction by welfare quintiles in education sector

Absenteeism, Pupil per classroom
                                                     Teacher and pupil knowledge
per teacher




Satisfaction and health workers
                                                     Satisfaction and child mortality
absenteeism




       Source: Staff calculations using the 2013 Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) survey, the UNHS
       2012/13, and the Uganda Demographic and Health Survey (UDHS) 2011.
ENDING EXTREME POVERTY IN UGANDA

46.	 This report has documented that Uganda has continued to reduce poverty from 2006 to
     2013, even as growth faltered. Although growth slowed for all households, poor households still
     experienced consumption growth and poverty fell. Agricultural growth drove much of this poverty
     reduction aided by peace in the north, improvements in domestic and regional food markets,
     favorable international prices, and good weather. Urbanization and modest improvements in
     education outcomes also contributed to poverty reduction.

47.	 However, it is not clear that the processes that brought about gains in the past can be relied
     upon to address the continuing challenge of extreme poverty in Uganda, particularly in the
     impoverished Northern and Eastern regions. Uganda’s formula for success is one that works
     when conditions are favorable, particularly in agriculture. Moreover, luck was on Uganda’s side.
     There was little fundamental change in the nature of production that benefited poverty reduction—
     either in agriculture or in other sectors.

48.	 The benefits of security and liberalized markets cannot be underestimated and will likely
     aid future poverty reduction, as they have done in the past. Ensuring continued stability in
     the region, and further promoting efficient crop markets and regional exports such as through
     investments in regional corridors and improving export efficiency will be important for future
     agricultural growth in Uganda, and this benefits poor households.

49.	 However, sustained gains also require a fundamental shift in the nature of production from
     low-investment, informal activities to higher-capital, more productive employment. This in
     turn requires effective public investment in services (such as education, health, and agricultural
     extension) and safety nets. Without this, it is hard to ensure sustained progress in poverty reduction,
     reduce vulnerability, and address regional inequality.

50.	 Modernizing agricultural production will require a focus both on fostering demand for
     agricultural products and on addressing the constraints households face in making
     investments. Continued efforts in increasing demand for agricultural production through regional
     trade, growth in urban demand, and investments in agro-processing industries are needed to
     keep prices of agricultural commodities high. Addressing constraints to modern input adoption
     will entail improving the quality of inputs in local markets through certification (public or private),
     and complementary investments in extension and credit to address the knowledge and financial
     constraints farmers face. This is particularly important in the Northern and Eastern regions where
     agricultural income growth is particularly vulnerable. Addressing the volatility of returns to investing
     in agriculture in this region—through safety nets or other insurance mechanisms—may also be
     needed.

51.	 Increasing the contribution of non-agricultural income growth to poverty reduction requires
     a focus on firm growth and job creation, but also investments in education and increased
     financial inclusion. An assessment of the constraints to firm growth are beyond the focus of this
     report, but this report has shown that for non-agricultural growth to be inclusive of the poorest
     households, investments in education and skills training for the poorest are needed (especially for
     vulnerable groups such as adolescent girls), as well as stronger financial markets for savings and
     credit. When urbanization occurs this brings direct gains to those who move, and evidence suggests
     that investments in education and financial markets will aid migration.

52.	 Improving educational outcomes and addressing knowledge gaps through extension and
     vocational training will require improving service delivery. Although the analysis highlights
     many benefits to higher education, progress in improving educational outcomes has been slow.
     The quality of service delivery is lower for poorer households and poorer households are also less
     vocal about the poor quality of service delivery they receive, limiting the effectiveness of local
     accountability mechanisms to improve service delivery in poor communities.

53.	 Concerted action to reduce fertility rates is also needed to reduce the strain that high
     dependency ratios puts on poverty reduction and to improve the socioeconomic status of
     women. Investing in education and economic opportunities for adolescent girls helps to reduce
     fertility rates.
   REFERENCES

Ali, Daniel Ayalew, Frederick H. Bowen, Klaus W. Deininger, and Marguerite Felicienne Duponchel. 2015.
      “Investigating the Gender Gap in Agricultural Productivity: Evidence from Uganda.” Policy Research
      Working Paper, No. WPS 7262, Washington, DC.
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Markus Goldstein, Niklas Buehren, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, and
    Munshi Sulaiman. 2015. “Women’s Empowerment in Action: Evidence from a Randomized Control
    Trial in Africa.” Economic Organisation and Public Policy Discussion Papers, EOPP 50, The London
    School of Economics and Political Science.
Campos, Francisco; Goldstein, Markus; McGorman, Laura; Munoz Boudet, Ana Maria; Pimhidzai, Obert.
   2015. Breaking the Metal Ceiling: Female Entrepreneurs Who Succeed in Male-Dominated Sectors.
   Policy Research Working Paper No. 7503. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.
Collier, Paul and Reinikka, Ritva. 2003. “Uganda’s Recovery: The Role of Farms, Firms, and Government”.
      World Bank Publications, The World Bank, number 13850, February.
———. 2015. “Redistribution and Group Participation: Comparative Experimental Evidence from Africa and
   the UK.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers 21127.
Fox, Jonathan A. 2015. “Social Accountability: What Does the Evidence Really Say?” World Development
      72: 346–61.
Fox, Louise, and Obert Pimhidzai. 2011. “Is Informality Welfare-Enhancing Structural Transformation?”
      Policy Research Working Paper 5866.
Jakiela, P., and O. Ozier. 2015. “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimental Evidence from
     Village Economies.” The Review of Economic Studies 1–38.
Joshia, A, and P. P. Houtzagerb. 2012. “Widgets or Watchdogs?” Public Management Review 14 (2).
Lekfuangfu Nuarpear Warn, Machin Stephen, and Rasul Imran. 2012. “IGC Rapid Response Project:Report
     on Uganda’s Returns to Schooling”, International Growth Centre, Working paper No F-43007-UGA-1.
Nikoloski, Zlatko, Luc Christiaensen, and Ruth Hill. 2015. “Household Shocks and Coping Mechanism:
     Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa.” Mimeo, World Bank.
Reinikka, R., and J. Svensson. 2005. “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a
     Newspaper Campaign in Uganda.” Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (2/3): 259–67.
Ssewanyana, Sarah, and Kasirye, Ibrahim. 2012. “Poverty and Inequality Dynamics in Uganda: Insights
    from the Uganda National Panel Surveys. 2005/6 and 2009/10.” EPRC Research Series 94.
Svensson, J., A. Zeitlin, T. Bold, and K. Bjorvatn. 2015. Improving Services Delivery: An Assessment of
    Absenteeism Data. Ideas for Growth, International Growth Center.
UBOS (Uganda Bureau of Statistics). 2006. Uganda National Household Survey 2005/2006 Report.
   Kampala: Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS).
———. 2010. Uganda National Household Survey 2009/2010 Report. Kampala: Uganda Bureau of Statistics
   (UBOS).
———. 2011. Uganda National Panel Survey 2009/10: Wave I Report on the Key Findings. Kampala:
   Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS).
———. 2013a. Uganda National Panel Survey 2010/11: Wave II Report. Kampala: Uganda Bureau of
   Statistics (UBOS).
———. 2013b. Uganda National Panel Survey 2011/12: Wave III Report. Kampala: Uganda Bureau of
   Statistics (UBOS).
———. 2014a. Uganda National Household Survey 2012/2013 Report. Kampala: Uganda Bureau of
   Statistics (UBOS).
———. 2014b. National Population and Housing Census 2014: Provisional Results. Kampala: Uganda
   Bureau of Statistics (UBOS).
Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and ICF International Inc. 2012. Uganda Demographic and Health
    Survey 2011. Kampala, Uganda: UBOS and Calverton; Maryland: ICF International Inc.
World Bank. 2007. Country Economic Memorandum for Uganda. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015. Uganda Systematic Country Diagnostic Report: Boosting Inclusive Growth and Accelerating
   Poverty Reduction. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016a. Poverty in a Rising Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016b. Country Economic Memorandum for Uganda. Washington, DC: World Bank.
For more information, please visit:
www.worldbank.org/uganda
Join the discussion on:
http://www.facebook.com/worldbankafrica
http://www.twitter.com/worldbankafrica
http://www.youtube.com/worldbank
