                                        ACS10692 v2

Report No: ACS10692B




 Socialist Republic of Vietnam

 Study on e-ID Infrastructure to Improve Public
 Services Delivery

 Electronic Identification PPP Report




  April, 2015


  .


  GITDR


  EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC




            	

            	             	
           	

           	

.


Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.


.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-
750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, could be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




           	                                 	
                                                  Table of Contents

	

Contents	

ABBREVIATIONS ............................................................................................................. 5 

2      Executive summary ................................................................................................. 1 

3      Introduction............................................................................................................ 5 

     3.1     Purpose ........................................................................................................... 5 

     3.2     Project Background .......................................................................................... 6 

4      Review and Analysis of the NID Project Context in Vietnam .....................................8 

     4.1     Current Technical Context for eID Services in Vietnam .....................................8 

     4.2     Need for eID Services, and Assessment of Demand ........................................10 

     4.3     Proposed Electronic Identity Service Delivery Framework ................................12 

5      Defining Public-Private Partnership ....................................................................... 18 

6      Vietnam’s Legal and Regulatory Framework for PPP ...............................................20 

     6.1     Forms of PPP Models ...................................................................................... 21 

     6.2     Key Principles of Vietnam’s PPP Legal Framework ...........................................22 

     6.3     Eligible Infrastructure Sectors for PPP ............................................................. 22 

     6.4     Legal Conditions for Direct State Financial Participation and Support ..............23 

     6.5     Recommendations for Strengthening PPP Legal and Regulatory Framework ....24 

7      Assessment of Institutions and PPP Processes in Vietnam ......................................27 

     7.1     Institutions for the Implementation PPP Projects .............................................27 

     7.2     Institutional Procedures and Resources for Preparing and Implementing PPPs.28 

8      PPP Models and Review of International Lessons Learned ......................................31 

     8.1     PPP Models for eID and Similar Electronic Government Services ......................31 

     8.2     Case Example #1: Albania’s National eID PPP Experience: ...............................33 

     8.3     Case Example #2: eID-related PPPs in the Philippines .....................................35 

     8.4     Case Example #3: Victoria, Australia Mobile Emergency Database Experience .39 
     8.5      Lessons Learned from International Experiences ............................................41 

9      Assessment of PPP Options and the Recommended Structure ................................46 

     9.1      Identification and Assessment of PPP Structuring Options ..............................46 

     9.2      Recommended PPP Business Model ................................................................ 49 

       9.2.1        Recommended eID PPP Pilot Project Structuring Option: BOO...................49 

       9.2.2        Recommended PPP Risk-Allocation Matrix...............................................49 

10          PPP Business Case Description ........................................................................... 57 

     10.1        Proposed Service Offering and Tariffs Structure ..........................................57 

     10.2        PPP Financial Model Considerations ............................................................58 

     10.3        Estimated Benefits of PPP vs. Public Sector Provision for Key Stakeholders ..58 

     10.4        Assessment of Potential Private Sector Partners ..........................................61 

     10.5        Recommendations ...................................................................................... 62 

11          Annex: Recommended Terms of Reference for PPP Transaction Advisor .............65 

	

	                                         	
ABBREVIATIONS



 Abbreviation   Definition
 ASA            Authorized State Agency
 BOO            Build Own Operate
 BOT            Build Operate Transfer
 eID            Electronic Identification
 e-KYC          electronic Know-Your-Customer
 GoV            Government of Vietnam
 IA             Implementation Agreement
 ISWT           Inter-Sector Working Team
 MIC            Ministry of Information and Communications
 MoH            Ministry of Health
 MPI            Ministry of Planning and Investment
 MPS            Ministry of Public Security
 NID            National Identification
 EISDF          National Identify Service Delivery Framework
 PPP            Public-Private Partnership
 VGF            Viability Gap Funding
 VSS            Vietnam Social Security
2      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Government of Vietnam (GoV) has expressed a strong interest in exploring the
opportunity to deploy a full-fledged Electronic Identity (eID) system in Vietnam. The
country is already putting in place the necessary prerequisites for its deployment,
including a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and the compulsory issuance of national ID
cards. These initiatives have been undertaken with World Bank support under the Vietnam
ICT Development Project. The GoV is also planning to develop the National e-
Authentication Framework (NAF) which will provide the much-needed capacity for users
to be able to access government services and social benefits using a single electronic
identity, including through mobile phones.

This Public-Private Partnership (PPP) assessment report provides an essential component
of the World Bank and the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) effort to
assist the GoV in formulating a sound strategy for the design and execution of eID
systems, including mobile-based identity platforms (mobile ID), in partnership with
private service providers. This report is intended to be read in tandem with the “Vietnam
Electronic Identification Technical Report”, which provides the vision and implementation
strategy for the proposed eID system in Vietnam.

Currently, what is known as the People’s Identity Card is a paper-based identification
issued by the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) at the provincial level to all residents aged
14 and above. Due to the lack of a resident identity creation and deduplication process at
the national level, it is possible to issue more than one identity card to one resident. And
since there is no established mechanism to ensure that one identity number issued to a
resident at the local level is unique nationally, the same identity number could be issued
to more than one resident across the provinces. This leads to difficulty in uniquely
identifying a resident at the time of service delivery based on the current identity card
alone. The present approach to identification results in numerous issues, e.g., undetected
misuse of identities and leakages of welfare benefits.

To resolve the various issues confronting Vietnam’s service providers and residents with
regard to unique identification creation and identity authentication, a technically robust
and effective national identity system could have to be put in place. An eID system is a
collection of technologies that could enable individuals to electronically prove their
identity  or an attribute of their identity  to a given information system. To facilitate the
implementation of an eID system, it is proposed that the Electronic Identity Service
Delivery Framework (EISDF) be established with the aim of delivering a national-level,
                                                                                  Page 1 of 77
electronic-based service for the unique identification and identity authentication of
residents physically or online. Such a system could provide economic and social benefits
to the country and its people.

The rationale for a PPP model for eID is compelling. The need for an eID project is clear
for Vietnam, and all levels of a countrywide eID program could require new frameworks,
processes and technologies. However, many of the required changes are not only capital-
intensive, but also technically and commercially complex to manage; it is also outside of
the scope and skill set of most governments.           Having the private sector perform
operations and services on behalf of the Government could be a potential solution
beneficial to all. With the private sector financing and operating the eID system, the
Government could be in a better position to ensure effective delivery, and the citizens
could be receiving a higher quality of service.

This paper provides a summary of the technical context of the National eID (NID) Project;
the details are in the “Vietnam Electronic Identification Technical Report” mentioned
above. In Vietnam, both public and private service agencies typically require Proof of
Identity (PoI) before providing services to individuals. Establishing the identity of an
individual and confirming that they are entitled to receive the specified benefits are
necessary to the actual delivery of services or payments to the citizen. Hence a robust eID
system could need to have a sufficiently trustworthy eAuthentication system as the
foundation of a quick and reliable service delivery.

The GoV issues the identity card and number to all residents of Vietnam. It is used as the
PoI document by the service providers to establish and authenticate the identity of a
resident. The demand for a reliable eID and eAuthentication system in Vietnam has been
established through the developmental goals and objectives of the flagship NID Project.
The introduction of eID services will allow online electronic identification and
authentication/verification as a value-added service that could be an integral part of
realizing the expanded NID Project’s goals and objectives; at its completion, the eID
function could only be a sub-system of a larger process. Meetings with key stakeholders
in Vietnam confirmed that eID services could be of tremendous benefit to a significant
number of public sector customer agencies such as Vietnam Social Security (VSS), Ministry
of Health (MoH), and Department of Taxation, as well as to private sector enterprises like
commercial banks and telecommunications companies.




                                                                               Page 2 of 77
A review and analysis of Vietnam’s legal framework reveal that PPPs are authorized based
on regulations currently in force, specifically Decree 108 of 2009, and Decision 71 of
2010 issued by the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI). There may be some areas
of ambiguity in these decrees regarding the specific legal powers and official duties
assigned to stakeholder organizations such as MPI, and Ministry of Finance (MoF), but
there are precedents for successfully addressing them.

From the institutional perspective, it is recommended that relevant public sector
institutions to be involved in the NID Project, e.g., MOJ, MPI, MPS, Ministry of Information
and Communications (MIC); and beneficiary organizations, e.g., MoF, VSS, and MoH, take
steps to strengthen their institutional capacity to be able to carry out the PPP procedures
described above. Vietnam’s pilot PPPs in the transportation sector have addressed these
gaps by drafting detailed PPP Implementation Agreements (IA) which spell out specific
public sector powers and responsibilities for the individual PPP transactions. A similar type
of solution could meet the needs of a future eID PPP project.

International experiences in electronic government services implementation using PPP are
still limited. Although the eID sector is growing rapidly worldwide, it is a relatively new
service. Consequently, there are only a few PPPs that have been completed in the eID
sector. This report examines the experiences and lessons learned in Albania, Australia,
and the Philippines. These countries have designed and implemented PPP arrangements
for different parts of their eID projects. Key lessons learned that may be of benefit to the
NID Project include:

      Sharing Demand Risks. For a sector such as eID where level of demand is either
       unknown or not within the ability of the private partner to control, risk-sharing by
       the Government such as structuring fixed “availability payments” is often needed.


      Active Support for Education on and Awareness-building of eID Services.
       Governments need to actively help service providers in setting up, seeding and
       using the new National Identity Number (NIN) database. Without this, service
       providers (public and private) and end-users tend to continue to rely on traditional
       paper-based identity mechanisms.


      Need for Clear Output Standards of Performance. When dealing with new
       technologies that the public sector has limited experience with managing, it can
       be challenging to develop the PPP performance indicators. Time and resources

                                                                                 Page 3 of 77
       need to be invested in ensuring that final output performance standards are
       comprehensive, clear, concise, and unambiguous.


      eID Data Security. For PPPs to succeed in the eID sector which could have access
       to millions of unique identity files and data on citizens, clear measures could need
       to be incorporated in any PPP contract to ensure that clear standards of data
       security are met. This includes standards for security, facility, human resources,
       and operational processes of the private partner, as well as regular auditing to
       confirm compliance with security standards.



There are four types of PPP structuring options that were identified and assessed based
on different combinations of private providers of eID services (single provider vs. multiple
providers), and clients and purchases of eID services (single-purchaser vs. multiple
purchasers). Of the four options, the recommended PPP structure is of a single private
provider rather than a group of multiple qualified providers. The technical and
administrative challenges of ensuring inter-operability of multiple private providers, as
well the challenges of “fragmentation” of the sector among the various private eID service
providers, could not be beneficial to the early development phase of a new project
implementing a new concept. One of the key PPP bid evaluation criteria that may be
recommended as the basis for awarding a contract in a future tender is, which bidder
could require the lowest level of guaranteed minimum revenues from the Government.

The overall conclusion of this assessment is that not only could a PPP be feasible, but that
it could also be an attractive option for the GoV as it could be allocating key technical,
commercial, and performance risks to a qualified and experienced private partner. The
next step could be for the Government to retain qualified PPP transaction advisors to
finalize the detailed design of the project who could also prepare tender documents and
the PPP contract. They could also advise the Government throughout the process of
tendering, bid evaluations, final contract negotiations, and establishment of the Project’s
PPP contract monitoring unit and plan. A draft terms of reference for the hiring of PPP
transaction advisors is provided as annex to this report.




                                                                                Page 4 of 77
3       INTRODUCTION

3.1   Purpose

The purpose of this report is to assess the feasibility of a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
contracting structure to deliver the Electronic Identity (eID) and related authentication and
verification services that the Government of Vietnam (GoV), individual citizens,
businesses, and non-governmental organizations could need in the implementation of
the National eID (NID) Project.

The NID Project is a significant, long-term undertaking to assign unique national
identification numbers to over 62 million Vietnamese citizens. The proposed NID numbers
are to be used in the delivery of services not only by public sector Authorities and Statutory
Agencies (ASAs), but also by numerous private sector firms such as commercial banks and
financial institutions.

The proposed NID Project comprises several types of services, all of which could function
in order for the overall goals and purposes to be met. The initial stage is scheduled for
completion in 2020 by which time Vietnam’s entire population could have been assigned
unique NID numbers. A crucial service requirement of the Project is for the NID system to
perform reliably and quickly. The NID could also be broadly accessible to dozens of public
sector ASAs and private sector firms for verifying the unique identity of both individual
citizens and firms when public services are being delivered and new accounts are being
established.

The focus of this report is to systematically assess the feasibility of the eVerification
process to be performed by a qualified private sector partner through a PPP contract. That
process could provide an effective and attractive solution with significant, long-term
benefits with regard to Value for Money (VfM).

It is highlighted that there are aspects of eID PPP that will need to be examine further. eID
are different than traditional e-government projects. It deals with sensitive data about
people, and the ownership structure of the data is an integral part of a PPP arrangement.
Given the role of private date, policy provisions of security and privacy need to be endemic
for eID PPPs. PPP arrangements should include strong provisions to prevent any vendor
lock-in, especially for such eID projects.




                                                                                  Page 5 of 77
3.2   Project Background

The assessment on the feasibility of a PPP for the NID Project builds on – and was done in
parallel with the “Vietnam Electronic Identification Technical Report”. The technical report
defined the vision and implementation strategy for eID-based service delivery in Vietnam.
It further defined the innovative and relevant uses of eID in transforming and enhancing
the accountability and efficiency of the delivery of a broad range of public and consumer
services by the public and private sectors.

National elD systems, including mobile-based identity systems, offer a wide range of
important benefits to individuals, governments, and commercial businesses. Digital
biometric identification technologies (collectively referred to as eID) significantly expand
the scope of formal identification systems that are an essential prerequisite to further
economic development. For instance, the inability of an individual to authenticate himself
or herself before service providers significantly limits access to basic rights and services
in the contemporary setting; they include the ability to vote in elections, and to receive
public health care, education benefits, electronically-transmitted payments, and other key
technology-based privileges.

Across the globe, governments are putting in place eID systems to accelerate the delivery
of services and benefits to those who rely on them the most, i.e., the poorest members of
the population. Common examples of the eID-supported public services include the
delivery of social benefit; as in the case of disaster relief aid in Kenya and Pakistan,
pension benefit to older people in Nigeria, and conditional cash transfers to mothers for
their children’s education in India and Tanzania.

The eID services enable key economic innovations for public organizations and private
firms: they facilitate stronger electronic authentication, and enable higher value services
that require an elevated level of security assurance. The eID also provides major economic
benefits by reducing costs and increasing productivity in the public sector, and increasing
the application of online services. Increased trust with regard to identities online – and
bi-directional trust between parties transacting or communicating online – is also of
paramount advantage to all participants. The eID system can help reduce identity fraud
and enable individuals to access key services more securely across a range of activities
such as mobile banking and payments, and mobile applications for health care.

In the context of the NID Project’s rationale, the GoV has expressed a keen interest in
exploring the opportunity of deploying a full-fledged eID system in Vietnam. The GoV is

                                                                                Page 6 of 77
already piloting a NID system. In addition, the Ministry of Information and
Communications (MIC) is putting in place the necessary prerequisites for its deployment
– a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and a compulsory issuance of NID cards. Several
government agencies are being involved in the deployment of the critical PKI, and the GoV
has achieved significant progress towards the projected timeline. The Government is also
planning to develop the National eAuthentication Framework (NAF) that is envisaged to
create the much-needed enabling environment for users to access public services and
social benefits with the use of a single eID.

The private sector’s role in deploying eID-based service delivery infrastructure is critical
as it can potentially ensure the financial viability and sustainability of the Project.
Internationally, the role of the private sector in designing, financing, and installing eID
infrastructure, and offering eID services such as authentication and verification, has been
growing.

Through PPPs, several governments have launched projects for the development of eID
systems. The scope of these PPPs varies from assigning the private sector responsibility
for one specific eID service (e.g., manufacture and issuance of ePassports) to assigning
responsibility for a range of eID services, including electronic verification and
authentication. Countries that have pursued PPPs for the development of all, or part, of
their eID system have included the Philippines, Albania, Estonia, India, Belgium, Malaysia,
Norway and Sweden. The lessons learned from a selected number of these international
experiences provide valuable guidance on good practices to emulate in structuring eID
PPPs in Vietnam, and on common mistakes and practical pitfalls to avoid. This report
examines several of the eID PPP experiences mentioned above.




                                                                                Page 7 of 77
4          REVIEW AND ANALYSIS OF THE NID PROJECT CONTEXT IN VIETNAM

This section of the assessment report looks into the review and analysis of the current ID
landscape in Vietnam, ascertains its need for eID services, and proposes an eID framework
for the Government’s consideration. The background for the proposed NID Project is laid
out according to: (i) its technical context, and (ii) the level of demand needed for eID
services. Finally, it presents the envisaged Electronic Identity Service Delivery Framework
(EISDF).

4.1       Current Technical Context for eID Services in Vietnam

The eID system is a relatively new concept to most key stakeholders in Vietnam: the public
and private sectors, and the individual citizens. To assess the feasibility of a PPP approach
to eID services, it is important to understand the technology, and how the Project’s eID
services could operate. Most of the information summarized here is extracted from the
companion technical report prepared, in parallel, for this activity.

In Vietnam, public and private service agencies typically require PoI before providing
services to individuals. Residents of Vietnam need to establish their identity on a regular
basis before receiving services from providers. This includes common activities as
opening a bank account, withdrawing or depositing money, getting a tax code, receiving
pension benefits, or availing of healthcare services.

In the current environment, any service agency in Vietnam needs to first establish the
identity of individuals and then confirm that they are, in fact, entitled to receive the
specified benefits; these are prerequisites to delivering services or payments to the
citizens. In an ideal environment, an individual’s identity could be unique and verifying
that identity could be conducted independent of services availed. In the present practice
in Vietnam, establishing entitlement is very specific to each service availed of and has to
be done by each service agency separately. For instance, the creation of a health insurance
card involves not only individual identity (name, address), but also verification and
establishment of health insurance entitlement. Identity establishment typically involves
two steps:

          Identity creation, the mechanism for establishing an individual’s identity by
           issuing identity token(s) of some form (this may be physical and/or electronic).
           This is typically a one-time activity.




                                                                                 Page 8 of 77
        Identity authentication, the process of verifying “who an individual claims to be”
         by checking identity tokens assigned to the person. This can be performed
         manually, electronically, or through a combination of both.

In Vietnam, the MPS issues what is known as the People’s Identity Card to residents aged
14 and above; it comes with a corresponding identity number. The card is presented to
service providers as the individual’s PoI document; it establishes and authenticates the
identity of the resident at the time of service delivery.

Due to the lack of a reliable resident identity creation and a deduplication process at the
national level, it is possible to issue more than one identity card to one resident. Also,
since there is no established mechanism to ensure that the identity number issued to a
resident at the local level is unique nationally, the same identity number could be issued
to more than one resident across the provinces. As a result, it is difficult to uniquely
identify a resident at the time of service delivery with the use of the current identity card
alone.

In Vietnam today, residents interact with various service providers, each with its own
identity creation system and authentication mechanism. Service providers in the public
and private sectors typically follow their own process for identity creation and for
determining service entitlement eligibility at the time of service delivery. For instance, the
Vietnam Social Security (VSS) maintains its own database of beneficiaries, and systems of
verifying service entitlements for its various welfare programs such as social insurance,
health insurance, etc. A separate identity token, i.e., in the form of a paper-based card,
is provided to the resident for each of the programs, and each program uses its own
system for identity authentication and entitlement verification.

Set in the technical context described above, identity creation and authentication
mechanisms in Vietnam have resulted in these key challenges:

   1. Since each programs’ identity creation process is different, the personal information
         captured for the resident and the procedures for the verification and validation of
         that information have resulted in the creation of multiple identities for the same
         resident.
   2. There have been leakages of welfare benefits, e.g., in health insurance, due to the
         creation of multiple and fake identities within the same benefit program as it is
         not possible to uniquely identify each individual in Vietnam.



                                                                                  Page 9 of 77
      3. The inability of public service agencies to correlate the various benefits given to
         an individual through various programs has resulted in the technical inability to
         verify correct entitlement status for each resident.
      4. Many service providers in the public and private sectors have designed and defined
         their   own    customer/beneficiary    identification   and   identity   authentication
         processes following their own requirements, with limited or no inter-operability
         as most of the identity tokens are accepted only for a specific purpose and at a
         specific location.
      5. Given the current paper-based identity card system, with multiple identities
         created for the resident at various locations, there is a higher risk of identity theft
         and misuse of the photocopies of identity documents frequently submitted as
         proofs. It is relatively easy to forge a physical identity document, but it is difficult
         to prove that the documents or copies are indeed fakes.
      6. The duplication of identity creation processes within “separate silos” by each
         service provider has increased the overall cost of identification services in Vietnam.
         Moreover, it has caused significant inconvenience to individual residents who are
         required to maintain and produce different identity tokens and numbers for every
         key public service they avail of.
      7. The practice of having each service provider design its own specific identity
         creation and authentication process has led to higher setup costs of authentication
         mechanisms important to service providers. There have been no efficiencies of
         scale from a common identity authentication process. The cost inefficiencies will
         continue to grow if most of the identification tokens provided by the service
         agencies are physical tokens based on the “what-you-have” approach.
      8. At the moment, it is not possible to verify that the person carrying the identity
         token is indeed its rightful owner, unless it comes with a photograph printed on
         it.
      9. It is difficult to establish misuse of identities and tokens since there is no authentic
         audit trail.   To do so under the current situation could require an exhaustive
         manual audit process.

4.2     Need for eID Services, and Assessment of Demand

An important task of any assessment of the delivery of a public service through a PPP
arrangement is to determine if there is a clearly established need for the service, and if
there is a reliable estimate of the level of demand. The estimate of the level of demand


                                                                                   Page 10 of 77
defines the capacity that the private partner will be required to provide which, in turn,
determines the level of capital investment needed to provide this capacity.

The overall need for a reliable eID and eAuthentication system in Vietnam is elaborated
on in the eID technical report. The proposed eID services will provide online electronic
identification and verification/authentication services as a value-added service that will
form an integral part of realizing the goals and objectives of the expanded NID Project.
The NID system will be made up of eID sub-systems – a collection of technologies that
will enable individuals to electronically prove their identity, or an attribute of their identity,
to a given information system. A robust eID system in Vietnam could be able to provide
quick and reliable service delivery, but it could need to have a sufficiently powerful and
trusted electronic authentication and verification system at its foundation.

Key stakeholders in Vietnam have confirmed that eID services could be needed by a
significant number of public sector customer agencies – VSS, Ministry of Health (MoH),
Department of Taxation, among others – as well as private sector enterprises (commercial
banks, telecommunications companies, etc.). The demand for electronic authentication
and verification services by this core group of stakeholders is acutely urgent. The absence
of available electronic means to identify and verify citizens is a significant bottleneck on
these agencies’ ability to deliver services to residents in a timely manner. The NID will not
be able to function without an efficient and reliable process of verifying and authenticating
identities electronically.

While the need for eID services in Vietnam is widely acknowledged by major stakeholders
as the essential component of any available, reliable, and sustainable NID project,
estimating and quantifying the level of demand for it is challenging due to a combination
of factors.

Firstly, the eID technology and the various eServices that comprise the EISDF are
fundamentally new concepts in Vietnam. There is little by way of established records of
levels of demand in the use of electronic identification and verification services. While
there is high-level estimate for the total number of eIDs that could be created (i.e., 62
million current residents in Vietnam), there is no clear timeframe yet for when all relevant
public sector agencies will migrate over to the eID system. This is a common challenge
faced when attempting to estimate future demand for new eID services.

Secondly, the NID Project is a long-term undertaking that is still being implemented;
completion is not expected until 2020. During this timeframe, as eIDs are assigned and

                                                                                    Page 11 of 77
distributed, the demand for eID services could be expected to grow. However, it will be
difficult to predict with certainty the ultimate level of demand for the services until the
issuance of eIDs is completed and the eID system is in use by all public sector agencies
across the country.

Thirdly, an important part of the demand for eID services is expected to come from private
sector organizations such as commercial banks, telecommunications companies, airlines,
online firms, and any other firm that regularly requires its customers to provide
identification. While it is been assumed by most stakeholders contacted in Vietnam that
demand for eID services from private firms is expected to grow in the future, it is decidedly
difficult to project the level of demand month-by-month or year-by-year during the
short- to medium-term (i.e., over the next 3-5 years).

Most demand assessments for proposed PPP projects follow a methodology of first
identifying all public sector organizations that could use the new service, and then
conducting a systematic survey to assess the level of demand by each public sector
subscriber.

Potential public sector subscribers of eID services in Vietnam include MPS, MOJ, VSS, MoF,
MoH, Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MoLISA), General Taxation Department,
Citizen Migration Board,      National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, Vietnam
Government Certification Authority, and Vietnam Post and Telecommunications Group
(VPTG).

Potential private sector subscribers of the eID services include commercial banks, financial
institutions, insurance companies, telecommunications companies, healthcare services,
transportation companies, hotels, tourism operators, and other commercial services
providers.

4.3   Proposed Electronic Identity Service Delivery Framework

To respond to the technical challenges mentioned in Section 3.1 facing Vietnam’s service
providers and residents with regard to unique identity creation and authentication, it is
essential that an up-to-date, technically robust and effective national electronic identity
system be implemented. The proposed EISDF aims to address these challenges and fulfill
the needs of the residents and service providers.




                                                                               Page 12 of 77
                                              	




                    Figure 1: Technical Organization of the National eID System

Services Offered. Some of the key services that may be delivered with the implementation
of the EISDF are explained below.

   1. Electronic Identity Authentication Service. The EISDF could facilitate the delivery
       of a national-level, electronic-based service for the unique identification and
       identity authentication of residents physically or online. It could be used by service
       providers in the public and private sectors for delivering eID-enabled services
       using eID-enabled applications to their Customers / Beneficiaries / Subscribers
       (CBS).


   2. Electronic Identity Seeding Service. The EISDF could provide eID seeding service
       that enables the use of eID authentication by mapping the CBS profile to its unique
       National Identity Number (NIN) generated at the national level on registration.


   3. eSignature Service. The EISDF could put into effect the use of eSignatures by
       residents on eDocuments in transactions with the public and private sectors. This



                                                                               Page 13 of 77
       could enable paperless eService workflows and do away with the need for physical
       signatures.


   4. Electronic Know-Your-Customer Service (eKYC). The EISDF could provide a
       centralized eKYC process by which a service provider could be able to identity its
       CBS electronically with the explicit authorization of the latter. The eKYC, being
       eID-based, could furnish an instant, non-repudiable PoI and Proof of Address
       (PoA), along with date of birth and gender. In addition, it could also yield the
       resident’s mobile number and email address to the service provider, further
       streamlining the process of service delivery.


   5. Electronic Payment (ePayment) Service. The EISDF could provide a centralized eID-
       based ePayment service through the Electronic Identity Service Delivery Platform
       (EISDP).   With ePayment, government agencies could be able to make fund
       transfers of public program benefits such as social pension, healthcare benefits,
       scholarships, etc., to the intended beneficiaries. The ePayment would facilitate
       seamless transfers of Government-to-Citizen payments to the beneficiary’s bank
       account which is identifiable through the beneficiary’s electronic ID.


   6. Mobile ID. The EISDF could also enable the use of the mobile phones as the mobile
       ID for delivering identity services. This will greatly expand the level of access and
       timeliness of eID services to Vietnam’s residents.

EISDF Key Concepts. Some of the key concepts that could enable the seamless delivery of
the eID services are described below.

   1. Centralized National-level Identity Service Provider. The envisioned EISDF could be
       designed and implemented by a centralized, government-owned and national-
       level identity service provider.


   2. Electronic Identity-enabled Applications and Service Delivery. Service delivery
       applications that use eID functions to identify and authenticate the resident could
       be referred to as “eID-enabled applications”. The use of eID-enabled applications
       may be broadly referred to as “eID-enabled service delivery”.


   3. Centralized National-level Identity Creation Process. The EISDF could be based on
       a central identity creation system operated by a national government agency that
                                                                                Page 14 of 77
           could issue the eID. A centralized process for identity creation ensures uniqueness
           of the eID. Hence, the service providers using the EISDF for identity authentication
           of their CBS could not need to recreate a separate process for its purposes. This
           could prevent the generation of multiple identities for the same resident by various
           service providers.

           This mechanism could eliminate the need for duplication of effort in identity
           creation by the service providers, and result in a reduction of the overall cost of
           identification. The framework could leverage advancement in technology to enable
           providers to deliver a better quality of service to the residents, and empower the
           latter to prove their identity anywhere, anytime, and in multiple modes using the
           global and irrevocable eID.

      4. Identity that is Digital, Online-verifiable and Inter-operable. The online channel
           has always proven to increase access, convenience and transparency to the
           common man. Given that Vietnam has good Internet penetration1 with fiber optic
           cables laid all the way to the commune level, and wireless broadband connectivity
           at the village level with more than 100 percent mobile penetration2, there is an
           increasing demand from the CBS for eServices in both government and private
           sector organizations. The eServices could require a digital and online-verifiable
           eID for delivery. The EISDF could leverage advancement in technologies with the
           use of the eID that is digital, online-verifiable and standard-based inter-operable
           for unique identification of residents.


      5. Identity Based on NIN, Demographic Attributes, and Biometrics. The EISDF could
           leverage the use of the eID as defined by the identity creation process of the MPS.
           The unique eID could be defined in terms of a person’s demographic attributes
           (name, gender, age, address, etc.), biometrics (fingerprints, iris images) and the
           central government-issued NIN. Demographic data alone may not guarantee
           uniqueness; however, they could be linked to the biometric attributes of the
           individual to create a unique identity for NIN generation.




1   Report on Internet Statistics of Vietnam - http://www.thongkeinternet.vn/jsp/trangchu/index.jsp
2   Mobile-cellular subscriptions - http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2012/Mobile_cellular_2000-2011.xls


                                                                                         Page 15 of 77
6. Global and Irrevocable NIN. The NIN could identify the residents and give them the
   means to clearly establish their identity to public and private agencies across the
   country. The NIN could have three key characteristics:

          Permanence. It could remain the same throughout the lifetime of a
           resident.

          Uniqueness. One resident could have one identity number, and no two
           residents throughout the country could have the same identity number.

          Globalness. The same identifier could be used across applications and
           domains by the various service providers in the country.

7. NIN Uniqueness through Biometric Deduplication. The NIN could be issued by the
   MPS during the initiation process called enrollment where a resident’s
   demographic and biometric information are collected and the uniqueness of the
   provided data is established through a process called deduplication. The
   deduplication process could include running the demographic and biometric
   information captured during enrollment through the rigorous 1:1 mapping of the
   two sets of data to yield 99.99 percent accuracy before assigning a unique identity
   number to the resident. Post deduplication, the NIN may be issued and a letter
   containing the details sent to the resident.

   The digital and online-verifiable eID could reduce the risk of resident identity theft
   and remove the issues of photocopied fake documents. It is easy to forge paper-
   based identity documents compared to the digital-based identity, which is
   verifiable online.

   The eID could be issued using the Personal Identity Data (PID) based on an
   individual’s paired demographic and biometric information following the national
   policy of the Government to ensure inter-operability.

8. Standardized Identity Supported by Tokens. The EISDF could support standardized
   identity tokens of various types, depending on the identity authentication and
   eSignature requirements of the service providers or their specific programs. The
   EISDF could support three types of identity token: a personal identification number
   (PIN), or “what the user knows”; a mobile/One-Time Password (OTP)/digital
   certification, or “what the user has”; and fingerprints or iris images, or “who the
   user is”. The eID of the resident could be assigned multiple identity tokens that

                                                                           Page 16 of 77
       could be used, as appropriate, for authentication and eSignature based on the
       business need of the service being rendered.

More technical details on the EISDF are found in the “Vietnam Electronic Identification
Technical Report”.




                                                                          Page 17 of 77
5      DEFINING PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP

PPP are contracts between a private sector entity and a government entity that calls for
the private partner to deliver a desired service and to assume the associated risks.
Through PPP, a government is relieved of the financial and administrative burden of
providing the service; however, it retains an important role in regulating and monitoring
the performance of the private partner.

The popularity of PPP arose out of governments’ need for financing to meet increasing
demand for expansion and rehabilitation of physical infrastructure such as roads and
energy facilities. Employing PPP as a tool for meeting the obligations of governments to
their citizens; governments are able to avail themselves of state-of-the-art technology
and private sector expertise, while avoiding excessive strains on already-limited budgets.
Citizens enjoy improved service delivery without large tax increases, sometimes with
decreased user fees, and economic growth flourishes in sectors seeking to compete for
lucrative PPP contracts.   The PPP model continues to gain acceptance; it has rapidly
expanded to all areas of public life, including ICT resources and eID.

There is a vast amount of PPP literature on the potential forms and models. The forms of
PPP are characterized by the increasing degree to which responsibilities and risks are
transferred from the government to the private sector. The table in Figure 2 summarizes
the PPP models and their characteristics.




                                                                             Page 18 of 77
                    Figure 2: PPP Models and their Characteristics



The next section looks into Vietnam’s legal and regulatory frameworks for PPP covering
various models specific to Vietnam’s context, key principles in the legal framework,
eligible infrastructure sectors, legal conditions for allowing direct state financial
participation and support, and recommendations for strengthening legal and regulatory
frameworks.




                                                                         Page 19 of 77
6      VIETNAM’S LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR PPP

The current legal framework in Vietnam clearly allows for PPP. This section’s assessment
shows that PPP is authorized according to current regulations in force, specifically the
MPI’s Decree 108 of 2009, and Decision 71 of 2010. Although there are some areas of
ambiguity in these decrees as to the specific legal powers and official duties assigned to
each stakeholder organization (such as MPI, MoF, etc.) as regards PPP, there are
precedents for successfully addressing them.

The MPI recently drafted a combined decree on PPP to address the specific ambiguities of
the previous PPP regulations. The revised version is projected for release in 2014.
Additionally, Vietnam’s current pilot PPPs in the transportation sector have addressed
these gaps through the drafting of detailed PPP implementation agreements that spelled
out specific public sector powers and responsibilities for individual PPP transactions. A
similar type of implementation agreement solution could satisfy the needs of the
proposed eID PPP project.

From the Vietnamese law perspective, investment in PPP means that the State and
investors jointly implement projects on development of infrastructure or provision of
public services on the basis of project contracts. Legally, PPP projects are basically pilot
projects whose implementation is decided by the Prime Minister.

Currently, the legal status of PPP is governed by Decision No. 71 of November 9, 2010,
promulgating the regulation on pilot investment in the PPP form. This was adopted in
accordance with the Law on Investment, Law on Enterprises and Law on Bidding – all issued
in 2005. In terms of PPP investment methods, there is Decree No. 108 of November 27,
2009, which was amended by Decree No. 24 of April 05, 2011, defining PPP investments
through contract structures such as Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT), Build-Transfer-
Operate (BTO) or Build-and-Transfer (BT).

While Decision 71 and Decree 108 define the overall process of preparing and approving
PPPs, the implementation of PPP projects require that investors also comply with other key
laws, including the Law on Enterprises, Law on Bidding, Law on Competition, Law on
Construction, Law on Credit Institutions, Law on Foreign Currency Management, or other
such regulations covering PPP projects in specific sectors.

This report recommends technical solutions to amending and supplementing the legal
framework on this matter so that Vietnam could attract more PPP projects, in general, and


                                                                               Page 20 of 77
eID PPP projects, in particular, and implement them successfully. In this regard, it is
further noted that, since there is no specific legal framework yet for an eID PPP, the general
regulations on PPP projects could then apply to the eID PPP, if approved.

6.1       Forms of PPP Models

As a matter of law, Decision 71 does not define or restrict specific methods of investment
in PPP. Rather, it prescribes in general terms the process for implementing PPP form by
which the State and private investors jointly implement projects on development of
infrastructure or provision of public services on the basis of project contracts. For the
current eID project, a PPP could be required to meet the following legal requirements.

          The State and investor could jointly participate in and implement the project.
          The projects are implemented in the sector of infrastructure and provision of
           public service and projects as decided by the Prime Minister.
          The participation and coordination between the State and the investor in a project
           could be carried out through the project contract signed between the State and
           the investor.
          Currently, the main forms of PPP investment contracts are BOT, BTO, and BT.
           According to the draft decree, there are new methods of contracting PPP
           investment      and   they   include:   Build-Ownership-Operate   (BOO);   Finance
           arrangement-Operate-Transfer (FOT); Build-Transfer-Lease (BTL); and Operations
           and Management (O&M).
          The BOO contract arrangement has actually been applied in Vietnam (e.g., Thu Duc
           Water Machine Project). However, this was not mentioned in the Law of Investment
           of 2005.

International experience has indicated that many ICT and eID PPP contracts have been
structured as BOO contracts, with the private partner building new IT assets and systems,
operating them for a period, and then keeping (i.e., continuing to own) them after the
expiration of the contract. This is because most ICT sector assets become obsolete quite
rapidly, and most governments have little interest in inheriting the liability of fully
depreciated and technologically outdated assets that are no longer competitive at the end
of a PPP contract.

To protect public interests, such BOO contracts nearly always include buyout options for
the government, could they chose in the future to acquire the assets themselves. BOO
contracts are less complicated for both governments and private operators to draft and

                                                                                Page 21 of 77
negotiate, compared to BOT structures, as they avoid the issues of trying to specify the
condition of future residual assets.

6.2       Key Principles of Vietnam’s PPP Legal Framework

The design and drafting of Vietnam’s PPP-related laws, decrees, decisions, and other
regulations has been guided by the following general principles and conditions.

          The goal of PPPs in Vietnam is to attract new capital investments from the domestic
           and foreign private sector to develop infrastructure and provide public services.
          Raising new capital investments by the private sector, including investor’s equity
           capital, domestic and foreign debt and other source of private capital, could not
           increase public sector liabilities such as sovereign guarantees.
          To ensure sustainability and long-term commitment to PPP success, investor’s
           equity capital in PPP projects could be 30 percent of total capital investment.
           Investors are expected to engage in commercial loans and other forms of
           borrowing (without government guarantee) for the remaining investments needed.
          Under the draft PPP decree, these principles could be applied more flexibly. For
           instance, the current condition that investors provide at least 30 percent equity
           capital could no longer be a strict requirement in all cases. For a project with a
           total capital investment of VND 1,500 billion, investors could only be required to
           provide a minimum of 15 percent of the total investment as equity capital. For
           projects having a total capital investment of more than VND 1,500 billion, the
           minimum required equity could not be below 10 percent of the capital investment
           amount.
          The selection of private investors to implement PPP projects could be based on a
           process that is competitive, fair, transparent, economically efficient, and
           consistent with the procurement laws of Vietnam, and international competitive
           bidding standards.

6.3       Eligible Infrastructure Sectors for PPP

The sectors that are currently identified as being eligible for pilot PPP projects are:

          Roads, road-bridges, road-tunnels, ferry-landings
          Railways, railway-bridges, railway-tunnels
          Urban transportation
          Airports, seaports, and river ports
          Clean water supply system
                                                                                 Page 22 of 77
          Power plants
          Healthcare (hospitals)
          Environment (waste treatment plants)
          Other projects for development of infrastructure and provision of public services
           as decided by the Prime Minister


For infrastructure sectors and projects that are explicitly listed in Decision 71 and Decree
108, line-ministries and local authorities may collect opinions from relevant authorities
and submit PPP project concepts to the Prime Minister for approval. The Prime Minister is
allowed to select such specific projects for preparation and implementation as PPPs on a
case-by-case basis. According to the draft PPP decree, the eligible sectors for PPP will be
expanded to cover nearly all projects that provide public services.

Until the draft PPP decree is finalized and formally issued, a PPP project for eID services
could need to be approved by the Prime Minister. The criteria for selecting a project for
PPP are expected to be based on the following.

          Level of importance, size, and urgency of the project for economic development.
          Expected ability of the project to recover its own costs, including private capital
           investments from reasonable revenues collected from users (without additional
           liabilities to or guarantees from the Government).
          Ability of the project to benefit from clear advantages that the private sector can
           provide, including technologies, innovations, management, experience, and
           financing.

The NID Project clearly meets the published criteria for selection as a PPP. However, it is
recommended that other specifications, if any, under the sole discretion of the Prime
Minister, could be identified and fully assessed prior to official submission for approval.

6.4       Legal Conditions for Direct State Financial Participation and Support

Many infrastructure projects offer high economic rates of return based on their high
overall benefits (both financial and non-financial) to the national economy; however, their
financial rates of return are often lower due to the need to keep end-user tariffs affordable
to a large enough number of beneficiaries. As a result, many PPP projects may require
additional forms of state participation and support to make projects sufficiently attractive
to private investors and commercial lenders.



                                                                                 Page 23 of 77
The Prime Minister has the authority to decide on state participation levels based on
requests from relevant state agencies and the appraisal opinions of the MPI. Such direct
financial participation in PPPs is often known as Viability Gap Funding (VGF). The total
state participation portion is not allowed to exceed 30 percent of the total investment
level of a project, except in special cases as approved by the Prime Minister. According to
Vietnam’s Law on Investment, Law on Bidding, and Law on State Budget, this may take the
form of a government guarantee of a tranche of the project’s commercial loans, or capital
directly provided by the state budget (i.e., grant or subordinated equity).

Although there are limitations to the levels of direct financial participation by the State in
a PPP project as regulated in Decision 71 and Decree 108, there are other forms of indirect
public sector risk-sharing and contributions to PPP projects that are allowed. These may
include the State providing the land that a project needs, or committing to “PPP availability
payments” that essentially provide a minimum guaranteed revenue for the project,
regardless of how much service is actually being demanded by end users. These important
forms of public sector risk-sharing that are expected to be needed in the case of an eID
PPP project are evaluated and approved by the State on a case-by-case basis.

6.5   Recommendations for Strengthening PPP Legal and Regulatory Framework

a.      Identifying eGovernment and eID Projects as Eligible Sectors for Pilot PPPs

Under Article 4 of Decision 71, there are nine sectors that are explicitly named as eligible
for selection as pilot PPP projects. Item 9 of the Article stipulates that other projects not
included among the nine cited could obtain approval for PPP project implementation at
the Prime Minister’s discretion. The current decree does allow “other projects for
development of infrastructure and provision of public services as decided by the Prime
Minister.” This wording is not sufficiently clear on the needs of the proposed eID project
seeking to be considered for PPP. In order to remove any uncertainty about selection, it is
recommended that the draft decree explicitly mention the eGovernment and eID sectors
as eligible for PPP.

b.      Principles for Support

According to Decision 71, the list of projects includes their contents and related
information. However, the list of PPP projects does not give much information, and no
specific support from the Government, VGF in particular, is mentioned. Support from the
State is provided only when the feasibility study report is established. Hence, the


                                                                                Page 24 of 77
participation of the investors to propose PPP projects is limited. In the meantime, the State
faces difficulty in obtaining feasibility studies. To alleviate this, it is recommended that
the list of investment projects be amended and that the State declare principles for its
support of the projects. A declaration of the principles could better attract investor
interest in PPPs such as that for the eID.

c.       Capital Financed by the State in PPP Projects

Regulations limiting total investment qualified for VGF to 30 percent of capital investment
are imprecise. Under current laws, there are barriers to enterprises wishing to invest in
PPP projects.    It is recommended that the limit be increased to the level of capital
investment financed by the State in the projects, based on each specific project’s condition
to determine the capital participation of the State. Capital investment financed by the State
in a joint venture could also remain between the investors and the state-owned
enterprises.    Furthermore, it is recommended that loans granted with the State’s
guarantee not be considered as participation of the State.

d.       Investment Incentives for PPP Projects in Public Services (eID PPP, eGov PPP, etc.)

The NID Project is an undertaking offered to the public, and clients and users are mainly
from the public sector. In addition, the project leads to the development of and a dramatic
improvement in technology. Therefore, it is recommended that the draft PPP decree clarify
its investment incentives, such as:

        The State could collect revenue and pay expenses incurred from providing services
         on behalf of the investors.
        The State may have a mechanism to secure minimum profits for the investors.

Summary Recommendations on PPP Legal and Regulatory Frameworks

Based on the assessment of the legal system for PPP projects, and in preparation for the
implementation of PPP projects in Vietnam, the following are recommended:

The GoV could stipulate a strict legal framework that clearly demonstrates and ensures
its legality to investors in order to encourage investors and/or the private sector to invest
in PPP projects in infrastructure and public services. The legal framework can be derived
from lessons learned from Singapore, Korea and the United Kingdom where PPP projects
are commonly carried out.



                                                                                Page 25 of 77
Coordination and communications among relevant PPP authorities in Vietnam need to be
strengthened. This could increase the efficiency of PPP mechanisms, and build the
investment confidence of potential investors. Standardized documents could be designed
and drafted to improve the efficiency of implementing PPP projects. These documents
could include model contracts, model bid documents (requests for qualifications, requests
for proposals), and contract management procedures.




                                                                            Page 26 of 77
7          ASSESSMENT OF INSTITUTIONS AND PPP PROCESSES IN VIETNAM

7.1       Institutions for the Implementation PPP Projects

According to the current PPP decisions and decrees in Vietnam for the implementation of
a PPP project, an Inter-Sector Working Team (ISWT) could be set up by the Minister of
Planning and Investment to assist competent state agencies in formulating and
implementing the project. Each ISWT could composed of representatives from various
ministries (Planning and Investment, Finance, Justice, and Industry and Trade), the State
Bank of Vietnam, and other state agencies relevant to the specific PPP project.

As the NID Project is still at the early stage of being assessed as a potential candidate for
PPP, an ISWT has not yet been established for it. Members of the ISWT are to advise their
respective ministries, sectors or agencies on the projects. The team is mainly tasked to:

          Appoint its members to join the bidding expert group for selecting consultants to
           make feasibility study reports, and for selecting investors to implement projects.
          Take part in appraising feasibility study reports and the results of project investor
           selection.
          Take part in negotiating and finalizing PPP project contracts.
          Assist relevant state agencies in settling problems arising during project
           implementation.
          Review experience of pilot PPP projects to improve policies on investment in the
           PPP form, build capacity and develop human resources for sectors and localities.
          Assist relevant state agencies in determining state participation portions in
           projects.

To promote PPP projects, the GoV has established a steering committee for investment
management under PPPs. This committee is an established organization supporting the
Government and the Prime Minister in searching, controlling, and implementing projects
– particularly PPP projects. The head of the steering committee is the deputy prime
minister and its responsibilities with regard to PPP activities include drafting and
completing legal frameworks, approving the list of projects, submitting approval requests
to the Prime Minister, arranging approved public sector financial contributions and
supports to selected pilot projects, and drafting regulations on infrastructure investment
funding.

Clarification of PPP Institutional Roles


                                                                                  Page 27 of 77
Due to uncertainties about the specific institutional roles and responsibilities of each of
the relevant public sector agencies involved in the NID Project (especially responsibilities
for granting specific PPP project approvals), a 29-page Implementation Agreement (IA) or
“Pilot Mechanism” was designed and drafted specifically for the project. The IA is
essentially a new decree to be issued by the Prime Minister spelling out the roles and
responsibilities of each public sector organization specifically for this PPP project. The key
features of the IA include:

          Clarified definition of the VGF the State will be contributing to the project, and
           how it will be managed, disbursed, and monitored.
          Establishment of new public sector units for the project, including an inter-
           ministerial task team, a procurement and negotiation team, a project management
           and implementation unit, and budget resources approval mechanisms for these
           new units.
          Institutional roles and procedures for the tendering and selection of the second
           private investor in the project.
          Institutional roles and procedures for the issuance of investment certificates.
          Institutional roles and procedures for project implementation.
          Institutional roles and procedures for investment incentives and security
           provisions for private investors and lenders.

It is envisioned that the draft PPP decree will remove most of the uncertainties and gaps
in terms of institutional roles, responsibilities, resources, and procedures for efficiently
implementing PPP transactions. The new decree alone may not be sufficient to address all
these issues, given the inherent challenges and requirements of getting PPPs completed
in Vietnam. It is likely that a new pilot mechanism, or IA, could also be needed to clarify
the specific roles, authorities, and responsibilities of each of the key public sector
stakeholders for an eID PPP.

7.2       Institutional Procedures and Resources for Preparing and Implementing
          PPPs

Based on the specific conditions contained in Decree 108 and Decision 71, the process of
implementing PPPs within Vietnam’s institutional context features the following specific
steps in the PPP project management cycle:

           Phase 1: PPP Project Preparation (Selection and Identification)



                                                                                 Page 28 of 77
       Phase 2: PPP Feasibility Study Report

       Phase 3: Selection of Investors through Tender Process

       Phase 4: Project Contract

       Phase 5: Issuance of Investment Certificate and Government Guarantees

       Phase 6: Conduct of PPP Contract Monitoring and Performance Evaluation

However, the PPP institutional framework provided by Decree 108 and Decision 71 is
currently in the process of being updated, and a draft decree is expected to provide more
specific and detailed implementation guidelines for the management of PPP transactions.

Interviews with public sector stakeholder organizations in Vietnam – and previous donor-
sponsored assessments of Vietnam’s PPP environment – indicate that the current
institutional framework, as provided by Decision 71, is not clearly understood by a
significant number of key stakeholders. Moreover, a potential challenge to implementing
an eID PPP is the limited institutional resources and capacity that relevant public sector
organizations have to carry out such procedures.

The institutional context for the preparation and implementation of PPPs in Vietnam is
defined by the specific institutional procedures of the PPP project cycle, as defined by
Decision 71. It is important that the key institutions (MPI, MPS, MIC, VSS, MoH, MoF, among
others) involved in the eID PPP project have the resources and capacity – especially PPP
management skills – to implement the following procedures.

Phase 1: PPP Project Preparation

Activities for Phase 1 involves: (i) selecting and identifying suitable candidate projects; (ii)
completion of the project description/concept paper; and (iii) review of proposed
candidate projects and pre-feasibility reports by MPI.

Phase 2: PPP Feasibility Study Report

In Phase 2, the feasibility study, with the input of consultants, is completed. The project’s
required output level of service is developed and the stakeholder consultation plan is
designed and managed. Also in this phase, the project affordability analysis, the demand
analysis and technical feasibility analysis are conducted. Other analyses to be prepared
are those of project financial feasibility and legal and institutional feasibility.          To
safeguard against risks, there is the environmental and social impact assessments, risk
                                                                                  Page 29 of 77
identification, and risk analysis and mitigation for developing and recommending the risk
allocation structure. Finally, the draft agreement is prepared, and the project is appraised
for any VGF, and then presented for approval.

Phase 3: Selection of Investors through Tender Process:

Once the PPP is approved, the request for qualifications may proceed. The qualifications
submitted by interested bidders are then evaluated and the Request for Proposal (RfP) is
drafted. In the meantime, questions from bidders are entertained and the RfP is finalized.
There is a two-part evaluation of bids that follows: technical and legal, and financial.

Phase 4: Project Contract

In Phase 4, the final PPP contracts are negotiated and the ASA’s contract management unit
is designed and established.

Phase 5: Issuance of Investment Certificate and Government Guarantees

The PPP agreement is reached.

Phase 6: Conducting PPP Contract Monitoring and Performance Evaluation

At this juncture, the executing agency’s contract management unit is designed and
established. Monitoring takes place with regard to the private partner’s reaching project
financial   closure,   performance   during    construction,   and   performance     during
operation/service delivery stage. Management focuses on requests and instances of PPP
price adjustment, requests to revise or renegotiate PPP contracts, and any disputes. End-
of-PPP contract stage is also managed at this time.

It is recommended that the relevant public sector institutions for the eID project, (e.g.,
MPI, MPS, MIC) and beneficiary organizations (e.g., MoF, VSS, MoH) take steps to
strengthen their institutional capacity to carry out the PPP procedures listed and described
above. In addition, these institutions could consider receiving PPP capacity-building
assistance from various channels, such as partner-countries or donors.




                                                                               Page 30 of 77
8      PPP MODELS AND REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL LESSONS LEARNED

Although the eID sector is growing rapidly worldwide, it is still a relatively new service.
Consequently, there are also fewer PPPs that have been completed in the eID sector, as
compared to traditional economic infrastructure sectors like power generation, toll roads,
maritime ports and container terminals, water treatment facilities, etc. While a set of
common performance standards, and terms and conditions have been developed over the
past two decades for initiatives like model power purchase agreements (PPAs) across many
countries, it is too early to have a common body of standards for PPPs in eID services.

It is worthwhile to examine the PPP experiences of a selected number of countries that
have attempted to design and implement PPP arrangement for different parts of the new
eID projects and services. This section summarizes the key case data, analyzes the
strengths and weaknesses, and provides key lessons learned from the eID-related PPP
experiences in Albania, Australia and the Philippines.

It could be noted that technical scope of these eID projects varies across countries, and
so does the scope of their eID PPP contracts. For instance, in some countries PPPs have
been used for the functions of actually issuing new eIDs to residents and citizens, while
in other countries the PPP contracts have focused only on providing access to specific eID
services and databases. Therefore, the scope of some of these PPPs in other countries can
be expected to differ from the specific scope that is recommended for the eID PPP in
Vietnam.

8.1   PPP Models for eID and Similar Electronic Government Services

A PPP for eID services may be defined as a legally enforceable contract between a private
sector entity and a government body that requires the private partner to deliver a desired
electronic public service. The private sector could have to invest some of its own resources
(financial, technological, time, corporate reputation, etc.) and could become responsible
for some of the risks in service delivery. Payments to the private partner are made only in
exchange for actual performance delivered.

PPP structures are typically output-based. The government defines the required outputs
that the private partner could deliver through clear output-based performance standards,
and the private partner takes the risk of selecting the inputs (project design, financing,
sourcing equipment, construction and installation, maintenance, asset renewals and
replacements, etc.) to meet those required output standards. The mechanism that often
ensures that the private sector can deliver better services than the public sector
                                                                               Page 31 of 77
traditionally could is the payment-for-performance principle. Public clients only pay their
private partners if the latter make the services available and deliver the required outputs.

PPPs for eID and other eID-related services include a broad range of contracts in which
private partners and government bodies each share a different level of the eID project’s
risks. In some PPPs, governments are responsible for financing and owning the project’s
underlying electronic network infrastructure and equipment facilities, while the operation
of a new eID service that uses this network becomes the contractual responsibility of the
private partner. In other cases, the private partner becomes responsible for the design,
financing, installation and construction, and operation of a new electronic network,
including the delivery of electronic government services.

PPP models that have been used in other countries for eID or eID-related services include:

      Service Contracts for eID Services and ICT Facilities Management. Contracting or
       outsourcing involves the provision of services and infrastructure that have
       previously been provided by government. Contracting enables government to
       provide the specifications. Service contracts enable government to procure service
       provision for a specified period of time. The common PPP contracting mechanisms
       are service, management, and leasing.


      Build-Operate-Transfer, and Build-Own-Operate Agreements. Governments
       around the world use turnkey projects with consortia of private companies to build
       information and communication technology, telecommunication and other large
       infrastructure facilities and networks. Governments in both advanced and
       developing economies often use BOT agreements in which they buy or lease
       completed facilities constructed by private investors after the companies have
       recouped their investment and a reasonable return by operating the facilities for
       an agreed period of time.


      Concessions. Under a concession, the private partner (concessionaire) bears
       overall responsibility for an entire sector or network of eID services, including the
       design, technology, financing, operation, maintenance, and periodic asset renewal
       and replacement. In concessions, the concessionaire services the broad market of
       retail end users directly, collecting user fees in exchange for each service request
       or transaction delivered. The fixed assets either remain the legal property of the
       public authority or revert to public ownership at the end of the concession period.

                                                                               Page 32 of 77
8.2     Case Example #1: Albania’s National eID PPP Experience:

Since 2000, Albania has pulled in an estimated USD 2.45 billion of private sector
investments in infrastructure sectors. Most of this (58 percent) has been in the information
and telecommunications sectors. Albania has attracted a comparable level of private
sector investment in the infrastructure sectors relative to its neighbors in Southeastern
Europe. However, private investors and financiers have frequently cited the uncertainties
of a country’s PPP frameworks – legal, regulatory, and institutional – as a constraint to
more investments being completed. This suggests that Albania has the potential to attract
more than its current level of PPP investments.

Key PPP stakeholders in Albania such as the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Energy, the
American Chamber of Commerce in Albania, the Albania-America Enterprise Development
Foundation, and the Institute for Public-Private Policies have indicated that a clear
constraint to PPPs in the country are the numerous uncertainties, inconsistencies and even
specific legal provisions that prohibit certain forms of private sector participation within
the current legal and regulatory framework.

Although several PPP contracts have been signed and implemented in Albania, they have
been done on a “pilot-project” basis, without the foundation of a full PPP law that clearly
stipulates the required steps, procedures, approvals, and monitoring tasks to ensure PPP
sustainability. In 2011, the EBRD commissioned a systematic review and comparative
assessment of the PPP legal framework for all EBRD member-countries.

The international law firm of Gide, Loyrett, Nouel (with significant international experience
in designing PPP laws and contracts) was hired to undertake this legal assessment.
Although Albania did not have a PPP-specific law (it does have a concession law and other
laws related to private sector contracts, etc.), Albania received a score of 85 percent on
its PPP legal framework, but only 55 percent on its ability to enforce these laws and make
them work effectively in practice.3 The general indication is that Albania needs more
institutional capacity, authority, and mechanisms to enforce PPP legal and regulatory
provisions than the mere introduction of a new PPP legislation.

In April 2013, the PPP Law for Albania was passed and enacted by the Government. It was
reported by stakeholders involved in infrastructure project development and PPP-



3   See EBRD PPP Legal Assessment on Albania at:
http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/legal/concessions/albania.pdf

                                                                               Page 33 of 77
supported initiatives in Albania that the design and drafting of this new law was supported
with technical assistance from the International Finance Corporation (IFC).

PPP for National eID Documents

The Government of Albania has identified the implementation of a state-of-the-art
identification document and electronic passport system as one of its strategic objectives.
It includes: (i) central personalization center facilities (infrastructure, IT equipment,
systems, PKI); (ii) enrollment facilities infrastructure; (iii) issuance of eID cards to all
Albanian citizens above 16 years of age; and (iv) issuance of new electronic passports,
compliant with International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards and European
Union (EU) regulations.

The strategic goals of the new project are to facilitate economic development across a
broad range of sectors relying on elD procedures and requirements by: (i) providing easier
access by individuals, firms, and other stakeholder organizations to key social-economic
services rendered by the Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Labor, and other public sector
organizations; and (ii) improving security and control in Albania by eliminating identity
fraud, forgeries and other related crimes.

Although Albania’s privatization and concession laws did allow PPP contracts – such as for
eID – to be developed and signed, there were challenges that had to be overcome to clarify
the legal procedures for the structuring and implementation of the project. An
international tender procedure was followed, with bids publicly opened in February 2008.

The evaluation was done according to the standard of providing the “best value for
money”. On May 9, 2008, the French-led consortium of Sagem Sécurité (now Morpho) and
the Albanian-American Enterprise Fund (AAEF) was proclaimed winner among seven
international consortia that had submitted bids. The concession contract was signed on
July 21, 2008, between the Ministry of Interior of the Republic of Albania and the winning
consortium. A major portion of the PPP project was financed by the AAEF.

The concession requires the management of the entire production process (enrollment,
personalization, issuance and distribution) of high-security biometric identity cards and
passports. Over 2.6 million ePassports and 3.2 million eID cards have been issued,
bringing many benefits to the Albanian population. Since 2010, ePassport-holders have
been traveling in the Schengen Area without a visa; previously, it was a mandatory



                                                                               Page 34 of 77
requirement for all Albanians. Morpho continues to produce the eID which will integrate
additional features for enhanced security.

Throughout the concession period, the project’s central personalization site was certified
to meet ISO 27000 standards. The eTrusted identity services platform provides
convenient, secure access to eServices. Using devices such as computers, tablets and
smartphones, Albanian citizens have the ability to carry out both public (e.g., tax
declarations, birth certificate applications) and private (e.g., banking, insurance, legal)
transactions online.

8.3   Case Example #2: eID-related PPPs in the Philippines

The Philippines was one of the very first developing economies to design and adopt an
official long-term policy of expanding a significant portion of its infrastructure through
the private sector. Since launching its BOT policy in 1990, the country has achieved
important results, including attracting well over USD 58 billion in long-term private
investment into its power, telecom, transportation, water, and other infrastructure
sectors.


                                       Philippines

                       Sector                   Investments (USD)

                       Energy                               27,674

                       Telecom                              17,922

                       Transport                             4,351

                       Water & Sewerage                      8,276

                       Total                               58,223



            Table 1: Summary of the Philippines’ Total Private Sector Investments in
                        Infrastructure (Source: World Bank PPI Database)




Within the eID sector alone, the Philippines has implemented several PPP projects that not
only feature the creation and issuance of eID and other documents, but also PPPs for the

                                                                              Page 35 of 77
provision of public services that rely on eID services such as eAuthentication and
eVerification. This includes the National Statistics Office (NSO) Civil Registry System
Information Technology Project PPP.

Philippines’ PPP Framework:

The launching of the BOT Center in 1990 in the Office of the President was designed as a
response to the chronic deterioration of the physical infrastructure and the Government’s
inability to finance new projects during the 1970s and 1980s. The legal basis came with
the passage by the Philippine Congress of Republic Act (RA) 6957 in 1990 that allowed
for private sector participation in certain infrastructure sectors.    It created an inter-
ministerial implementation unit, the BOT Center, authorized to analyze, evaluate,
negotiate and award concessions.        The BOT program designers in the Philippines
determined that in order to succeed, the technical unit could have to be housed at a level
above the infrastructure line-ministries.

The BOT Center’s role in the Philippines has largely been that of advisor and capacity-
building nexus for line-ministries and local governments, and promoter of PPP investment
opportunities and policies. The program in the Philippines called for the creation of
“BOT/PPP cells” within each of the eligible infrastructure line-ministries to coordinate the
respective ministry’s PPP project tasks and decisions.

The PPP project approval process in the Philippines is detailed and highly regulated by the
BOT Law’s implementing rules and regulations to promote transparency and fairness. To
get implemented, a project could be evaluated and approved by three different
government committees, including the BOT Center evaluating committee and the national
investment coordinating committee; the process takes a minimum of three to six months.
The approval process requirements have been identified as being a growing impediment
to getting PPP projects completed. In other sectors, international competitive tendering
procedures are followed for projects such as Manila’s two large water concessions, and
for the Land Transport Office’s eID PPP for vehicle inspection and licensing services.

Philippines Civil Registry System Information Technology Project PPP

In May 2000, the NSO signed a 12-year contract with Unisys Corporation (Philippines)
under a BTO scheme for a USD 65 million IT system tasked with the issuance of copies of
certificates of birth, death, marriage and similar identity-related documents. The



                                                                               Page 36 of 77
objective of the system is to allow residents, individuals, and end users the ability to
obtain copies of certificates more quickly.

Prior to the project, an informal system of local “fixers” with inside connections had
developed a network of who could provide certificates of registration (sometimes valid
and sometimes forged) in exchange for expediting fees and bribes. The goal of the project
was described by the then-President of the Philippines at the launching of the PPP in 2000
to finally “address the perennial problem on storage and retrieval of records” and to help
“eradicate fixers who take advantage of co-Filipinos”.

The specific performance standards set by the NSO for residents to obtain copies of civil
registry documents were: (i) 30-minute maximum wait in the Metro Manila area; and (ii)
two-hour maximum wait at regional and provincial locations.

The system relies on imaging technology for collecting, storing, managing and accessing
all civil registry documents. As verification check, the project also features the collection,
storing, and comparison of all authorized city and municipal registrars, and other
authorized Civil Registry System (CRS) signatories to protect against forgeries. The PPP
project has no direct costs to the Government and is funded through end-user fees.

The “development phase” of the project took seven years, with full operation achieved in
the final five years of the 12-year PPP contract. By March 2004, the NSO database had
scanned, indexed and loaded records of 73.5 million births (1945-2002), 15.1 million
marriages (1945-2002), 2.3 million deaths (1996-2001), and images of vital statistics
report for 1960-1998. Aside from the six Census Serbilis Centers (CSCs) in Metro Manila,
the NSO rolled out 14 regional and 20 provincial branches.




                                      Philippines’ NSO

                                  Census Serbilis Centers


                        Manila                            6




                                                                                Page 37 of 77
                        Luzon                            18


                        Visayas                          7


                        Mindanao                         10


                        Table 2: Total Number of National Census Centers
                                     Under the CRS PPP Project




                                    Civil Registry System:

                             No. of Identity Documents Digitized


                     Birth Certificates              99.8 million


                     Marriage Certificates           22.1 million


                     Death Certificates              18.4 million


                     Total                          140.4 million


                     Table 3: Philippines Civil Registry System IT PPP Results:
                      Quantity of Identity Documents Digitized, 2000-2012



The project’s services have helped NSO increase its revenue. It is the country’s 11th largest
source of public revenue – prior to the PPP, it was not even among the top 20. Customer
satisfaction with the NSO CRS has gone up from 19 percent to 82 percent according to a
performance evaluation survey conducted by the private partner. Technology-driven
enhancements provided by the PPP have included more convenient, secure access to civil
registry document services through SMS/text messaging and online services. Additionally,
the civil registry services have been brought closer to the customer through the private
partner’s investment in a broad network of kiosks and mobile access services.




                                                                                  Page 38 of 77
8.4   Case Example #3: Victoria, Australia Mobile Emergency Database
      Experience

Australia’s federal and state governments have used PPPs across a number of sectors, not
just in eID and ICT projects, but also in roads, water, hospitals, public buildings, and other
infrastructure sectors. The Government of the State of Victoria has implemented several
PPPs for the private construction and operation of mobile emergency communications
systems for the State Government’s police and emergency workers. This has required the
private partner to provide near-instant access and authentication of data to a range of
identity-related public sector databases such those for drivers’ licenses, property
ownership, and criminal records.

State of Victoria’s PPP Framework

The State of Victoria, with a population of 5 million, has developed one of the more
effective frameworks for implementing PPP projects. In 2000, the State Government
launched its comprehensive Partnerships Victoria framework to pursue PPPs. Today
Partnerships Victoria has hauled over USD 5 billion new private investments across
multiple sectors, among them eID, ICT, transportation, healthcare, and public facilities.
The policy made clear that the goal of the PPPs is to achieve an optimal balance of risk-
sharing between the public and private sectors, thereby maximizing the value that the
State and its citizens receive from investments in infrastructure and public services.

To carry this out, Partnerships Victoria developed, beginning in June 2000 and ending in
June 2005, a series of PPP models and guidelines for each step of the PPP project cycle.
They included: (i) Partnerships Victoria Policy; (ii) Partnerships Victoria Practitioners’
Guide; (iii) Risk Allocation and Contractual Issues Guide; (iv) Public Sector Comparator –
Technical Note; (v) Contract Management Framework; (vi) Public Sector Comparator:
Supplementary Technical Note; (vii) Use of Discount Rates; and (viii) Standard Commercial
Principles.

These widely published models and guidelines have provided clear, practical procedures
for public sector agencies to follow in each step of a PPP project implementation. The
clear goals of the PPP framework in Australia are to keep the institutional roles and
responsibilities of the public sector bodies transparent, and not to complicate the process
with numerous reviews and approvals from various oversight bodies.

Mobile Emergency Data Network PPP Project


                                                                                Page 39 of 77
One of the first PPP projects done in all of Australia was the provision of a new mobile,
electronic data network for the State of Victoria’s Police and Ambulance Services4. The
project called for the private partner to design, develop, and operate a data network that
could allow police, ambulances, and other emergency response agency personnel to
access publicly-available and governmental databases both inside and outside of the
vehicles. They included identity-related data and services to simultaneously access police
and law enforcement records, drivers’ licenses, property ownership records, geographical
maps, locator functions, emergency plans, and other electronic data.

PPP Project Scope and Output Service Standards

The overall scope of the project that the private partner had to deliver according to the
contract were: (i) general technical services; (ii) project management; (iii) engineering
design and development of the Mobile Data Network (MDN); (iv) MDN services
implementation and rollout; (v) testing; (vi) documentation; (vii) training; (viii) acceptance;
and (ix) operations management and logistics support.

The contract required the private partner to ensure that the new MDN was technically
capable of inter-operating with ten existing and emerging radio systems in Australia,
including: MPT 1327, DataTAC Public, Mobitex, CDPD, iDEN, GPRS, APCO25, TETRA, GSM,
CDMA and Native IP and other mobile communications systems which have, or are
reasonably expected to have, wide acceptance in Australia.

Among the specific services that the private partner had to deliver were: (i) transmission
of important information about the emergency and the people involved to be sent directly
to the emergency response vehicles; (ii) satellite technology to track vehicle location,
allowing the closest vehicles to be sent to an emergency situation; (iii) mobile access to
databases, such as vehicle registrations and drivers’ licenses; (iv) electronic police report
submission via computer while in the field.

The project required the operator to provide 99.9 percent guaranteed level of operational
reliability throughout the term of the contract. A key goal of the overall project was to
ensure high-speed messaging between police and emergency workers in the field, and
the databases they needed to access.



4   For additional information on this PPP, including copies of the PPP contract see
http://www.partnerships.vic.gov.au/CA25708500035EB6/0/CCF275DF691DCC1CCA2570D90016
72A7

                                                                                       Page 40 of 77
The PPP contract was awarded in 2003 to Motorola Australia Pty. Ltd. for a term of five
years, with a two one-year option periods. The total cost of the project’s PPP payments
(on a net present value basis at the State’s cost of capital of 8.65 percent) to the
Government was USD 85 million. Following the Partnerships Victoria PPP models, a value-
for-money analysis was done to estimate what the project could have cost if it were
financed and implemented by the public sector, and it was determined that the State had
saved USD 7.8 million (11 percent of the project’s costs) by pursuing the PPP solution.

8.5     Lessons Learned from International Experiences

a. Have the Right Reasons for Utilizing PPPs

Governments have historically shown a practice of utilizing PPPs for three main reasons:
(i) to supplement a shortage of public funds; (iii) to leverage more flexible labor laws to
cut; and (iii) to avoid showing additional liabilities on the balance sheet in jurisdictions
where PPPs can be treated as off-balance-sheet items.

Short-term fixes have been shown to lead to poor definition of the business case and
ineffective management of PPPs. If government agencies view PPPs only as a supplemental
source for augmenting their budget, they may consider other funding and procurement
options which will be discussed in greater detail under “Consider Other Funding Sources”.
A PPP is best utilized as a vehicle for generating value for money. In all the case studies
presented, understanding the current context and identifying the right reasons for PPP
were instrumental to their success.

To ensure the projects for the GoV’s consideration achieve the outcome of value for
money, it could incorporate the following areas during the next phase of the eID program
implementation:

      1. Focus the business case for PPPs on the ability to improve program by leveraging
         the private sector partner’s innovative methodology, skills, products, and
         management practices.


      2. Before an eID PPP project can be approved, consider performing a public sector
         comparator analysis, or value for money analysis, to demonstrate that the deal will
         save cost over its total lifetime when compared to government-delivered
         alternatives.




                                                                               Page 41 of 77
     3. The eID PPP project’s business case could be backed up by domain or finance
        stakeholders/sponsors so that political uncertainty risks can be reduced and the
        vendor is in a better position to undertake the deal.


b. Understanding and Addressing Common PPP Challenges


It is recommended that the GoV be aware of the most common constraints or challenges
to PPP projects – and these are not restricted to eIDs.


     1. Underlining Corruption. The GoV could safeguard against corruption that may
        quickly disrupt the good intentions of pursuing eID PPP projects by identifying and
        introducing countermeasures, e.g., incentives to combat corrupt practices.


     2. Past Failures in Technology Investments Root of Mistrust. Past public expenditures
        in technology have not always yielded expected results. In such cases, the public
        views it as a waste of money and it has become wary of supporting other major
        investments in ICT or eID.


     3. Perceived Misuse of Taxpayer Money. When a private operator is introduced into a
        public service undertaking, there is often the risk that the population will perceive
        that as tax-payer money being transferred to profit-driven enterprises.


     4. Private Profits in Exchange for Service Quality. Often the public’s perception is that
        the only way a private operator can make a profit in PPP projects is by cutting
        corners in service quality. Past failures in large-scale PPP infrastructure projects
        cast a shadow on current PPP initiatives in other sectors.


     5. Lack of a Public Spokesperson. PPPs do not have the “champions” that more
        traditional PPPs have. There is no easily identifiable stakeholder group such as
        utility customers, doctors, or parents of school children to work with in the early
        planning stages of a PPP initiative.


     6. Lack of Local Private ICT Industry. Many emerging market countries lack private
        ICT industries that are sufficiently developed to partner with the government on
        eID PPP projects.


c.      Conduct Extensive Stakeholder Consultations




                                                                                Page 42 of 77
It is essential for the project champion to identify and consult with all potential
stakeholders, including government agencies, local authorities, end users, and
commercial service providers. Conducting a series of consultations could provide critical
information important to the project, e.g., likely level of demand, consumers’ willingness
to pay for services, the degree of interest of operators in participating in PPP projects, and
the most suitable technologies and PPP models.


d.     Establish the Right Relationship with PPP Partners


Designing the right business case and viewing PPP partners as strategic alliances (which
is echoed consistently during the interviews with the private sector) pave the way for eID
PPP success. Given the long-term nature of PPP contracts, there is need to manage partner
relationships for long-term value for money and performance management.


It is not uncommon for government agencies to focus on traditional contract management
centered on strict service-level agreements and penalties, and compliance-driven caps to
limit the private partners’ earnings. They often dwell on the payout for the life of the
contract, and the length of contract such as re-contracting every so often to avoid
concerns of political backlash and unfair competition, particularly against local small and
mid-size businesses.


To facilitate a positive relationship with PPP partners, the GoV could consider viewing ICT
firms as strategic partners, instead of in the context of a usual vendor-client
relationship. An effective collaboration needs to be formed under a formal partnership
framework with duration of 7-10 years, at the least. No less important are benchmarking
the baseline of service performance and defining the desired outcomes for the long term,
while establishing a collaborative and clear project management approach with flexible
intermediate milestones and knowledge transfer. Finally, putting in place predictable exit
strategies, taking into account major project milestones as well as election cycles, could
be beneficial to the partnership as well.

e.     Build PPP Capacity

There are internal management implications for the GoV when considering PPPs. The most
important one is in terms of competencies and resources: the relevant ministry’s IT
departments may not have traditionally developed the roles necessary to deal with the


                                                                                Page 43 of 77
legal, financial, and management complexities of eID PPPs. The GoV could consider
capacity building in the following ways:


        Establishing a designated eID PPP team comprising both PPP and eID domain
         specialists, and invest in the training of its staff.



        Hiring contractors to fill competency gaps, e.g., independent verification and
         validation of the public-sector comparator, a critical part of the business case.


        Combining the project’s financial, fiscal, legal and vendor management
         competencies to analyze and manage risks and enforce contract performance.


        Reviewing lessons learned from non-IT PPPs in Vietnam to build the business case,
         and develop the competencies, while bearing in mind that IT initiatives have a
         much higher rate of obsolescence.


f.       Consider Other Funding Sources


In addition to PPP as a funding source, the GoV could consider other possible approaches
to realizing eID PPP projects such as the technology investment fund and the private
venture capital/investment funds discussed below.


        Technology Investment Fund for eID Projects. Some governments have
         experimented with creating pools of money that can be used to finance cross-
         functional, government-wide initiatives that are innovative or high-risk/high-
         value. For instance, the Australian federal government plans to create a
         “reinvestment” fund of AUD 500 million over three years by pooling resources
         saved through the implementation of the Gershon ICT review.


         To facilitate the operations of a technology investment fund, well-defined
         processes need to be established for fund use by and release to a specific
         governance authority vested in a council or committee setup. The fund can be
         replenished via the annual budgeting process, or through savings in agency
         budgets generated by projects.


         The technology investment fund could be an attractive proposition if the line-
         agencies are not willing to take the implementation risk, but the potential for
                                                                                Page 44 of 77
         return on innovation investment is quite high. It may also be used as an incentive
         for agencies or groups of government agencies to plan and deploy shared
         technology solutions more easily. The challenge for undertaking the technology
         investment fund could be in the sourcing of the initial funding infusion, in the
         replenishment processes and levels, and in the stewardship.


        Private Venture Capital (VC) / Investment Funds. Instead of using venture capital
         funds from government-specific or agency-specific budgets, government
         agencies could use venture capital financing from private financial institutions for
         innovative eID projects. If the ICT initiative is innovative, in demand by the
         constituents with reasonably high expectations for positive results, then it may
         attract external venture capital investors.

         The GoV may want to keep in mind that investors in the public sector are usually
         highly conservative, often favoring low risks and certainty in outcomes; while
         private equities and venture capitalists prefer high-risk projects with high returns.
         This difference in attitude between the public and private sectors challenges the
         utilization of VC funds for eID projects.


g.       PPP Project Monitoring


The GoV could consider implementing effective governance mechanisms to ensure that
public funds are used appropriately, that decisions are promptly made, and that
stakeholders conduct themselves responsively. It is also important to ensure that public
funds invested in broadband projects deliver tangible benefits so that the funding
continues to flow for this type of activity without interruption. Periodic monitoring may
be undertaken by public organizations as regular surveillance is usually conducted by the
government undertaking the project.


To assist public organizations with their monitoring duties, requirements could be spelled
out in the contract with the ICT supplier possibly linking the latter’s obligations to the
payment schedule, e.g., roll-out milestones, “ready-for-service” dates, number of
customers connected, and number of eServices implemented.




                                                                                Page 45 of 77
9          ASSESSMENT OF PPP OPTIONS AND THE RECOMMENDED
           STRUCTURE

This section considers the various PPP models and procurement arrangements for
structuring the market context of the eID project and the major risk allocation
mechanisms between the public sector and the private partner. It also recommends the
PPP structure for achieving the envisaged goals and meeting the specific challenges of
such an undertaking.

9.1       Identification and Assessment of PPP Structuring Options

The PPP structuring options cover a range from short-term service contracts, which often
feature little or no upfront capital investment by the private partner, to long-term BOT
and concession contracts, which have contract terms of 20 years or more. Typically, the
latter requires private partners to finance tens of millions of dollars of initial capital
expenditures. The chart below summarizes the key features that distinguish the major
PPP structuring options.




                                                                                               	
For the NID Project, four different PPP structuring options were identified and assessed
based on different combinations: (i) single vs. multiple qualified private providers of eID
services; and (ii) single vs. multiple clients (and purchasers) of eID services. These PPP
structures are:

          Option 1. BOO: A single private operator with a single public sector purchaser of
           eID services, and a guaranteed minimum level of demand/revenue by the
           government for the private partner.



                                                                               Page 46 of 77
   Option 2. Concession: A single private provider of eID services with multiple
    individual public sector purchasers of the service. The private partner could bear
    the risk of challenges in the volume and level of demand for eID services and could
    not have a minimum guaranteed level of demand or revenue.

   Option 3. Competitive Outsourcing A: Multiple private providers are licensed to
    provide eID services, and each is paid through a single common purchaser (e.g.,
    MIC).

   Option 4. Competitive Outsourcing B: Multiple private providers are licensed to
    provide eID services, and each is paid through user fees, paid by each individual
    public sector customer (i.e., each line-ministry or public agency).




                                                                          Page 47 of 77
Matrix of Various PPP Structuring Options:

                                          Variable 1: Number of eID Service Providers

                                    Single Private Provider        Multiple Private Providers

                                   Option 1: Build-Operate-       Option         3:     Competitive
                                   Transfer (BOO): A single       Outsourcing           A:     Multiple
                                   private operator with a        private        providers          are
                Single Public      single purchaser and a         licensed       to    provide      eID
                   Sector          guaranteed         minimum     services       to     government,
                Purchaser of       level of demand/revenue        each is paid through a
                eID Services       by government for the          common purchaser.
 Variable 2:
                                   private partner.
 Number of
    Public
    Sector
                                   Option 2: Concession: A        Option         4:     Competitive
 Purchasers
                                   single private provider of     Outsourcing           B:     Multiple
    of eID     Multiple Public
                                   eID      services       with   private        providers          are
   Services        Sector
                                   individual public sector       licensed       to    provide      eID
                 Purchasers
                                   purchasers. The private        services       to     government,
               (i.e., individual
                                   partner could bear the         each      is    paid       by    each
               ministries and
                                   “demand risk” and not          individual          public      sector
                public sector
                                   have      a         minimum    customer (i.e., each public
                  agencies)
                                   guaranteed      level     of   agency or ASA)
                                   demand/revenue.




The recommended PPP structure is for a single private provider, rather than multiple
qualified providers. The technical and administrative challenges of ensuring inter-
operability among multiple private providers, as well as the risk of “fragmentation” in the
sector stemming from such a complex arrangement, could be unappealing. While the GoV
may eventually wish to consider options for developing a competitive market structure for
specific eID services in the long run, a single private provider of eID for the initial PPP
project is recommended.




                                                                                         Page 48 of 77
A key question that the Government could like the PPP feasibility assessment to respond
to concerns the minimum guaranteed level of demand that will be needed by private
bidders. One of the principal PPP bid evaluation criteria that may be recommended as the
basis for awarding a PPP contract in a future PPP tender is which bidder requires the lowest
level of guaranteed minimum revenues from the GoV.

Another prime concern for the GoV is to have a private partner with a clear contractual
and financial incentive to encourage more public sector agencies to migrate over to the
use of eID services. The PPP payment formula, assessed in the business case section
below, explores options for structuring clear monetary incentives into the PPP contract for
the private partner to work to educate and encourage more public and private sector
organizations to use the eID services.

An important dimension of aligning the incentives in a PPP contract is the possibility of
revenue-sharing with the government from eID services provided to private sector firms
such as banks, telecoms, etc. This could provide the GoV and the NID Project with a new
source of revenue so that it is not fully dependent on disbursements from the government
budget coming from the general fund.

9.2     Recommended PPP Business Model

9.2.1    Recommended eID PPP Pilot Project Structuring Option: BOO

Based on the above assessment of demand, technical context, and legal and institutional
context, the recommended PPP business model structure is for a single private provider
of eID services, rather than multiple qualified providers. The BOO model also appears to
be the most “balanced” of all PPP structuring scenarios deliberated over, assuming some
amount of risk-sharing mechanism at the level of revenue at least. Consequently, most
providers are expected to require a minimum level of demand guaranteed by the GoV for
any PPP structure to be deemed acceptable. One of the key bid evaluation criteria that
could be the basis for awarding a PPP contract is which bidder requires the lowest level of
guaranteed minimum revenue from the GoV.

9.2.2    Recommended PPP Risk-Allocation Matrix

The following matrix provides a summary description of the major risks facing the NID
Project and the recommended allocation of the risks, including risk-sharing techniques.




                                                                               Page 49 of 77
    #      Risk Name                         Risk Description                            Risk Allocation          Explanation

                                                                                Shared     GoV      Private

1       Market/ Demand         The actual quantity of demand from users          X         X                 As a new service with significant
        Level Risks             of eID services is less than anticipated.                                     uncertainty       about        levels    of
                               The project’s tariffs or prices are not                                       demand, this is not a risk that a
                                adjusted    according     to   tariff/payment                                 private operator can control. As
                                formulae agreed upon.                                                         a BOO, with a single off-taker,
                                                                                                              rather     than      a    concession,
                                                                                                              demand risk could be borne by
                                                                                                              the GoV.

2       Site/      Facility    Space, such as data centers, etc., for the                  X                 To ensure both security of eID
        Location                project’s assets and equipment is not                                         project           facilities            and
        Availability   and      available or has not been acquired.                                           interconnections with relevant
        Acquisition            There is uncertainty over how much it                                         government          databases           and
                                could cost to acquire needed site and the                                     interconnection          points,        the
                                timing of its availability.                                                   government could provide the
                                                                                                              project site.

3       Site Unsuitability     Unanticipated       adverse      site-related               X                 The GoV can manage this risk
                                conditions are discovered.                                                    better than the private sector.

4       Environmental          The project causes environmental impacts          X                           Environmental impacts due the
                                on its surrounding natural resources.                                         location     of    project       facilities
                                                                                                              could be borne by the GoV.
                                                                                                              Environmental impacts due to
                                                                                                              the performance of the project
                                                                                                              during     its    operational      phase

                                                                                                                                        Page 50 of 77
    #      Risk Name                        Risk Description                            Risk Allocation          Explanation

                                                                               Shared     GoV      Private

                                                                                                             could   be     borne     by   private
                                                                                                             operator.




5       Workplace       and    Relevant regulations and standards on                                 X      As a private enterprise, the
        Worker     Health,      workplace health, worker safety, permits,                                    private operator could earn and
        Safety          and     licenses, etc., are not complied with.                                       qualify for its own health and
        Permits/                                                                                             safety permits and licenses.
        Licenses

6       Currency               Foreign currency is not available to covert                X                 As the project will likely be
        Availability    and     project funds from local dong to other                                       implemented in part by foreign
        Transferability         hard currencies.                                                             investors and firms, currency
                               Profits earned by the PPP project inside the                                 availability   and     transferability
                                country cannot be repatriated to its owners                                  risks could be borne by the
                                outside the country.                                                         government.


7       Operating Costs        The costs of operating the project are                                X      Traditional     commercial        risk
                                higher than they were expected to be.                                        better managed by the private
                                                                                                             partner.

8       Interest Rate          Interest rates on any loans used to finance                           X      Traditional     commercial        risk
                                the initial capital investments for the                                      better managed by the private
                                project increase.                                                            partner.




                                                                                                                                      Page 51 of 77
    #      Risk Name                       Risk Description                            Risk Allocation             Explanation

                                                                              Shared     GoV      Private

9       Exchange Rate        The dong depreciates in value relative to                              X      As the project will likely be
                              the hard currencies in which the PPP                                          implemented in part by foreign
                              project’s loans and equity investments are                                    investors and firms, exchange
                              denominated.                                                                  rate risks could be borne by the
                                                                                                            government.




10      Responsibility of    The design of the project and its facilities,     X                           As a key input to the project,
        Design                assets, equipment, and operations is                                          design of the eID project could
                              inadequate to meet the project’s level of                                     be borne by the private partner.
                              demand.                                                                       During       tendering,      private
                                                                                                            bidders could be required to
                                                                                                            present their design for review
                                                                                                            by the government to confirm
                                                                                                            that     they   are      “technically
                                                                                                            responsive” and able to meet the
                                                                                                            performance standards of the
                                                                                                            eID project.

11      Project              The NID Project’s performance standards           X                           Government could bear the risk
        Performance           and       design      specifications     are                                  of selecting the detailed eID
        Specifications        inappropriate for the project’s needs.                                        performance          standards    as




                                                                                                                                    Page 52 of 77
 #      Risk Name                          Risk Description                           Risk Allocation            Explanation

                                                                             Shared     GoV      Private

     and         Output                                                                                    outputs that they require the
     Standards                                                                                             private partner to meet.

12   Design Data           Wrong or inaccurate data was used during                                X      Government could bear the risk
                            the project’s design and installation.                                         of confirming the data, such as
                                                                                                           on      eID    demand      levels    and
                                                                                                           performance          standards,      on
                                                                                                           which         the   private     partner
                                                                                                           prepares their design.

13   Procurement,          Completion        of     the   NID   Project’s                          X      As a project input, based on the
     Installation   and     construction/installation                 and                                  design and technology selected
     Construction           commissioning was delayed.                                                     by      the    private    partner,   the
                                                                                                           private partner could bear this
                                                                                                           risk.

14   Construction/         Total construction, equipment supply and                                X      As a project input, based upon
     Installation           installation     costs    were    more   than                                  the      design     and     technology
     Costs                  anticipated.                                                                   selected by the private partner,
                                                                                                           the private partner could bear
                                                                                                           this risk.

15   Program        and    The completion of the project is delayed or                             X      Traditional commercial risk.
     Implementation         there is a cost over-run due to faulty work
                            scheduling.




                                                                                                                                      Page 53 of 77
 #      Risk Name                         Risk Description                                  Risk Allocation          Explanation

                                                                                   Shared     GoV      Private

16   Performance            The project is not able to function and                                      X      Traditional commercial risk.
                             operate as fully as planned according to its
                             access, speed, and reliability standards.


     Operating Costs        The cost of operating and maintaining the                                    X      Traditional commercial risk.
     and Inflation           eID project is higher than expected.

17   Maintenance            The eID project’s assets, equipment, and                                     X      Traditional commercial risk.
                             facilities are not properly maintained.


18   Ancillary              Ancillary infrastructure services that the                        X                 Relevant        agencies         of
     Features        and     NID    Project      needs,       interconnection                                    government can best manage
     Interconnections        facilities, utilities   and      public   services                                  these risks.
                             connections      (electricity,    etc.)   are   not
                             provided and completed on time.




19   Residual    Assets     The condition of the NID Project’s assets at                                 X      As BOO, rather than a BOT,
     and Transfer            the end of the contract term is no longer                                           residual assets will remain with
                             in reliable condition to continue to meet                                           the private partner. In the PPP
                             project performance standards.                                                      contract, government will have
                                                                                                                 the option to “buy out” the
                                                                                                                 private partner and its assets if it


                                                                                                                                       Page 54 of 77
 #      Risk Name                   Risk Description                             Risk Allocation          Explanation

                                                                        Shared     GoV      Private

                                                                                                      chooses, including prior to the
                                                                                                      expiration of the contract.

20   Regulatory       The terms and conditions of the PPP                          X                 Traditional        political      and
                       contract about the private operator’s                                          regulatory risks to be borne by
                       ability to collect revenues and to seek                                        government. Government could
                       reasonable tariff increase in accordance                                       agree to allow increases in PPP
                       with   the   contract’s     price   escalation                                 payments      to    allow      private
                       formula are not fulfilled; or                                                  partner to recover the additional
                      new laws, regulations, or taxes are passed                                     costs.
                       which increase the costs or reduce the
                       revenue of the PPP contractor without
                       compensation.


21   Political/       The government nationalizes the project.                     X                 Traditional        political      and
     Sovereign        The government terminates the contract                                         regulatory risks to be borne by
                       without   following   the    PPP    contract’s                                 government.
                       termination procedures.




22   Force Majeure    The project is unable to perform due to            X                           Private partner is temporarily
                       natural      catastrophes       (earthquakes,                                  excused from its performance


                                                                                                                              Page 55 of 77
    #   Risk Name               Risk Description                               Risk Allocation          Explanation

                                                                      Shared     GoV      Private

                    flooding, etc.), acts of terrorism, riots, war,                                 obligations   during     a   force
                    etc..                                                                           majeure event. Private partner
                                                                                                    could     purchase      insurance
                                                                                                    against these specific risks.

	




                                                                                                                           Page 56 of 77
10       PPP BUSINESS CASE DESCRIPTION

10.1 Proposed Service Offering and Tariffs Structure

Based on the findings of this study and experiences with similar PPPs for eID-related
services in other countries, it appears that the required output performance standards for
Vietnam’s eID PPP could be defined in terms of:

        Capacity and volume of eID service requests, queries, or transactions
        Speed of responses to eID requests
        Availability and minimum reliability standards
        Technical inter-operability with required, existing databases
        Training and awareness-building for public and private sector stakeholders on eID
         and verification procedures and use of the Project’s services
        Other technical and project-specific performance standards

The companion technical report provides more detailed descriptions of the output
services and standards that the private partner could be required to meet. Additional
output standards that the private partner could need to meet include data center
construction,   eID   resource   management,     disaster   recovery,    and   “continuity   of
government” to ensure that the eID system will provide an environment acceptable for
individual ministries and agencies.

Based on experience with other eID facilities, an eID PPP could be required to pass a
Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 16 (SSAE-16) audit. This will
systematically examine a list of security, facility, human resources, and operational
processes which the operating organization claims, and then undergo an extensive audit
to confirm compliance with those operational claims. International industry standards are
available which can both be followed and used for measurement and audit.               Those
standards fall into the categories of facility, information security, and disaster recovery
and continuity of government.

The GoV could consider having a sole implementer to establish the entire Electronic
Identity Service Delivery Framework or identify suitable vendors for different services and
processes suited for PPP. The high-level processes could include: Enrollment, validation,
issuance, services. Enrollment could be done by private sector, but there is a strong case
for keeping validation and issuance in the public sector with of course some aspects like
dispatch of the ID documents being outsourced. On Services, the underlying IT
infrastructure could very well be outsourced, but the oversight and management will need

                                                                                 Page 57 of 77
to be with the public authority.    Taking the later approach would require an overall
program coordinating role to ensure all services and processes developed by different
vendors work seamlessly as one system.

The GoV may consider charging subscription fees to private sector firms (commercial
banks, mobile phone operators, airlines, hotels, etc.) that use the Project’s eID services
for Phase 2 of the eID PPP (i.e., national roll-out). This could provide an additional source
of revenue to the GoV that could offset the total cost of the PPP payments to the private
partner. This option could be considered carefully before it is applied. If private sector
firms are reluctant to pay for eID services, or believe that it is expensive, they may find
ways to avoid performing procedures like electronic authentication and verification on
their customers, which could reduce the overall benefits of the proposed NID Project to
the entire economy. It could also be noted that any fees charged to private firms for using
eID services will be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices for services such
as bank account opening, mobile phone number purchase, railway ticketing, etc..




10.2 PPP Financial Model Considerations

In calculating the PPP financial model for eID, the following key considerations may be
included:

      Total capital investment required by the private partner to design and install the
       eID system.
      Private partner possibly financing the pilot project version of the PPP through
       equity.
      Initial estimated availability payment the MIC could likely pay to a private partner
       to undertake this project.



10.3 Estimated Benefits of PPP vs. Public Sector Provision for Key Stakeholders

The proposed PPP project’s objectives and planned benefits are consistent with the overall
policy goals of the GoV as described in Decree 108 and Decision 71. The intended benefits
of implementing eID services through a PPP structure, rather than a publicly financed and
managed traditional public procurement include:

   1. Better Value for the Public’s Money. A PPP contract structure could be able to


                                                                               Page 58 of 77
         provide better overall quality of eID services, timeliness, and reliability for the
         amount of money paid for the service, compared to the level of service that the
         public sector itself could provide.
   2. Clear, Contracted Service Output Standards. The PPP structure features a payment
         in exchange for performance contract, featuring clear minimum output levels of
         service that the private partner could have to meet. By transferring the risk of
         making sure that eID services are available and reliable to a private service
         provider, a PPP contract may better ensure that the project’s minimum
         performance levels are met throughout the life the project.
   3. Assured Capacity to Provide and Sustain eID Services. Similar to other emerging
         market economies, Vietnam’s public sector currently faces significant challenges
         to recruiting and retaining experienced IT specialists to design, manage, and
         operate eID services. A PPP structure provides an effective means of transferring
         this responsibility to a qualified private service provider.
   4. Freeing up Limited Public Sector Capital to be Invested in other Priority Public
         Projects. Requiring the private service provider to finance the initial investments
         required for the eID PPP offers the GoV the opportunity to use its limited public
         capital for other priority projects.

The key beneficiary stakeholders and their intended benefits are summarized in the table
below:




         Beneficiary Stakeholder Groups                           Key Benefits


 GoV and client line-ministries and public          Better value for the public’s money
 authorities. They include, but is not limited        spent on eID services, including
 to, MPS, MIC, Ministry of Justice (MoJ), MoF,        information       management        and
 Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs       communications.
 (MoLISA), VSS, and Vietnam Posts and               Avoid public borrowing for financing
 Telecommunications Group (VPTG).                     of eID infrastructure, assets and
                                                      services.
                                                    Assured levels of service for eID,
                                                      including     access,      speed,   and



                                                                                   Page 59 of 77
  reliability, as required by the PPP
  contract.
 Assured privately provided capacity
  to design, manage, and sustain eID
  services for GoV.
 Greater predictability of eID costs
  over the life of the project based on
  PPP contract’s tariffs and payments
  schedule.
 Transfer of knowledge from the
  private sector on the use cloud
  services and technologies.
 Potential revenue stream for the
  government based on options to
  charge access fees to private firms
  using Vietnam’s eID services.




                               Page 60 of 77
 Private Sector Service Providers:                     Opportunities for profitable private
                                                        investments in Vietnam’s eID and ICT
        Commercial banks and financial
                                                        sectors.
         institutions, insurance companies,
                                                       Opportunities to offer more ancillary,
         etc..
                                                        commercial,      and        other    related
        Telecommunications            companies,
                                                        electronic    and    ICT      services    in
         especially mobile phone operators.
                                                        Vietnam.
        Private     providers    of   healthcare
         services.
        Transportation companies (airlines,
         railways, bus operators, etc.).
        Hotels,     tourism     operators,   and
         other        commercial         services
         providers.

 Vietnamese        Citizens,   Residents,     Civil    Better value for the public’s money
 Society, and the Public.                               spent on public sector ICT and eID
                                                        management services.
                                                       Improved      efficiency,     access,    and
                                                        reliability    of      public       services
                                                        management and performance from
                                                        improved ICT and eID performance.




10.4 Assessment of Potential Private Sector Partners

Based on global experience with eID projects in developed and developing economies,
there is clearly proven private sector interest in pursuing PPPs in this sector. The
international experience in eID PPPs shows that countries of both levels of economies have
been able to attract private investor interests.

The size of the potential market for eID services in Vietnam, with a population of 62
million, is seen as a relatively attractive potential market to private investors.
Engagements with leading locaI Internet and telecommunications service providers have
indicated that there is clear interest in an eID PPP project. However, private investors will
expect the GoV to assume responsibility for guaranteeing a minimum level of demand for

                                                                                        Page 61 of 77
eID services since this is a new service without a verified record of level of demand in the
country. The same private firms engaged were nearly unanimous in concluding that it
could not be an attractive market for speculative private investments if it is without a
clearcut minimum guaranteed level of demand from the GoV.

Private investors may also be willing to accept the market/demand risks for a larger,
nationwide Phase 2 of the PPP project if the pilot phase of the PPP project is successful,
and sufficient progress is made in the MPS’s NID creation and the migration of more public
and private sector service providers over to eID services. Private investors could also be
more interested in the pilot PPP if they are allowed the opportunity to bid on the
subsequent Phase 2. However, it is not recommended that the private partner selected for
the pilot PPP be given preferential treatment in the selection of the winning bid for Phase
2, nor is it recommended that it be allowed to directly negotiate a contract for nationwide
eID services without having to go through transparent and competitive procurement.

10.5 Recommendations

a.       Consider Implementing a Pilot eID Project

The GoV may wish to consider implementing a pilot eID PPP project to demonstrate clear
and visible value to the public and private sector stakeholders. The pilot implementation
could leverage on the National ID program which could define the ID number format.

Given the scope of the pilot project, it is recommended that the GoV, along with the
National Identity Authority of Vietnam (NIDAV), select the top five service providers from
government and private sector organizations to pilot the implementation of the eID
seeding service. Government departments that may be involved in the pilot are VSS and
MoLISA; and from private sector, the Bank of Vietnam and VNPT.

By pursuing a PPP pilot project to begin with, the larger risks of structuring a bankable
PPP for the nationwide eID may be avoided by first testing the operation on a smaller
scale.

As a result of the indisputable need for eID services in Vietnam, and the challenges of
accurately estimating their level of demand, the following key conclusions and
recommendations may be drawn.

     1. The uncertainties of the level of demand needed are far too great for a private
         partner to accept a PPP project, especially at this early stage of the NID Project.

                                                                                 Page 62 of 77
   2. The actual level of demand for eID services will be determined by both the rate of
       completion of the NID creation process and the decisions by public sector
       organizations to migrate over to using the eID services. The issues governing
       “project risks” are essentially in the hands of the GoV and the public sector
       decision makers to consider.


   3. Potential private partners for any eID PPP contract will expect that, given the
       uncertainties of the quantity of demand, the GoV could assume responsibility for
       guaranteeing a minimum level of demand for eID services that the private partner
       is expected to provide for the duration of the PPP contract.


   4. Once the NID Project has completed the creation of eIDs for the entire Vietnamese
       population of over 63 million by 2020 – and all of the public and private sector
       organizations have migrated over to the use of eID services – the total level of
       demand for eID services is expected to be quite large in terms of the total number
       of eIDs in the MPS database, the number of public and private services for which
       eIDs are required, and the frequency of requests for the various eID services such
       as eAuthentication, eSeeding, eKYC, ePayment, eSignature, etc.. Rather than wait
       several years for this process to be completed, there are important potential
       benefits to first providing eID services through a PPP arrangement on a smaller,
       more manageable pilot project basis. This structure could necessitate a smaller,
       minimum-guaranteed level of demand to a private partner that will provide the
       specific eID services of the EISDF to a specific number – e.g., five to start with – of
       key public sector organizations.

In addition, it is recommended that the GoV prepare specific PPP training initiatives for
key stakeholders of the NID Project which will cover techniques in general, and eServices
in particular. The meetings with key public sector organizations revealed that there of a
low level of understanding of what a PPP is, what it requires in terms of contractual
provisions and risk-sharing, and how the public sector’s interests and requirements may
be assured.

Concerns expressed by stakeholders also reflect the fact that the PPP is still new concept
to Vietnam and familiarity with PPP techniques in the public sector is limited. Many
stakeholders expressed concerns over how to ensure that a private service provider could

                                                                                Page 63 of 77
keep eID data and systems secure, and that the prices charged by a private service
provider are acceptable and/or affordable to public sector customers. Such issues could
be effectively addressed through PPP training and capacity building which the MPI’s PPP
unit is currently preparing with technical assistance support from the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), Department for International Development (DfID), and Agence Française de
Développement (AFD).

The GoV may also wish to provide an IA for the eID PPP to attract partners. The IA could
help provide assurance that implementation delays due to uncertainties about
institutional roles and authorities are minimized.       This is in response to concerns
expressed by private investors and other sponsors of PPP projects regarding the clarity of
the framework in Vietnam.

The GoV could retain experienced PPP transaction advisors to assist with initiating the eID
PPP project. Private ICT service providers have also expressed concerns that the GoV has
limited experience so far with preparing, reviewing, structuring, approving, and tendering
PPP projects that could lead to implementation delays or unclear project structures.
Transaction advisors could be able to help address these issues as their specific tasks
could cover finalizing the detailed structure of the PPP, including its full technical output
performance standards, risk-allocation structure, and draft PPP contract. They could also
be able to support the completion of PPP tendering, procurement, contract awarding, and
signing. A sample terms of reference for a transaction advisor is included in the Annex
for GoV guidance in the eID PPP implementation.

The proposed pilot is not within the scope of this Technical Assistance and could be
undertaken by the GoV upon deliberation on the recommendations proposed in the
“Electronic Identification Technical Report” and this report.

	

	                              	




                                                                               Page 64 of 77
11        ANNEX: RECOMMENDED TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR PPP
          TRANSACTION ADVISOR

                                  DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE
                              PPP TRANSACTION ADVISOR
                    VIETNAM ELECTRONIC IDENTITY PPP PROJECT


Introduction

The Government of Vietnam (GoV) wishes to hire a Transaction Advisor to assist it in
implementing its Public-Private Partnership (PPP) for the development and operation of
an electronic Identity (eID) services project for the country’s public sector.             The
Transaction Advisor (TA) will be required to complete the PPP transaction in two phases:

     Phase 1: Finalize the detailed structure of the PPP, including the service output
      standards, tariff setting formula, and full draft PPP contract.
     Phase 2: Support the Government in managing a competitive PPP bidding process
      which results in a private investor taking responsibility for designing, building,
      operating, and maintaining the eID Project under the terms of a PPP arrangement.
      This will include assisting the Government with all aspects of the transaction,
      including preparing PPP bidding documents and evaluation criteria, and supporting
      the Government’s PPP Project Committee as required.


Background to the Sector and the Project

The GoV has expressed strong interest in exploring the opportunity to deploy a full-
fledged eID system in Vietnam. The country is already putting in place the necessary
prerequisites for its deployment, including a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and the
compulsory issuance of national ID cards. These initiatives have been undertaken with
World Bank support under the Vietnam ICT Development Project5. The GoV is also
planning to develop the National eAuthentication Framework (NAF) that will provide the
much-needed capacity for users to be able to access government services and social
benefits using a single electronic identity, and through mobile phones.




5   The World Bank P079344 Vietnam ICT Development Project, Credit no. 4116-VN.

                                                                                  Page 65 of 77
National electronic identity systems, often implemented as mobile identity projects, offer
a wide range of important benefits to individuals, governments, and commercial
businesses. Digital biometric identification technologies (collectively referred to as eID)
significantly expand the scope of formal identification systems that are an essential
prerequisite to further economic development. For instance, the inability of an individual
to authenticate himself or herself to service providers significantly limits access to basic
rights and services in the modern setting such as the ability to vote in elections; and to
receive public healthcare, education benefits, and electronic payments, among others.
Across the globe, governments are putting in place eID systems to accelerate the delivery
of services and benefits to those who rely on them the most – the poorest citizens.

The eID services enable key economic innovations for both public organizations and
private firms: they facilitate stronger electronic authentication, and enable better quality
services that require a high level of security assurance to be offered. The eIDs also provide
important economic benefits by reducing costs and increasing productivity in the public
sector; at the same time, the application of online services is also increased. Establishing
trust or assurance about identities online – or even bi-directional trust between parties
transacting or communicating online – is also an important benefit to all participants. The
eID systems can help reduce identity fraud and enable individuals to access key services
more securely across a range of different contexts such as mobile banking and payments,
and mobile applications for healthcare.

The private sector’s role in deploying eID-based service delivery infrastructure is critical
as it can potentially ensure the financial viability and sustainability of the project.
Internationally, the role of the private sector in designing, financing, and installing eID
infrastructure, as well as offering eID services like authentication and verification, has
been growing. Through the PPP, several governments have launched projects for the
development of eID systems. The scope of the PPP has varied from assigning the private
sector responsibility for one specific eID service (e.g., manufacture and issuance of
ePassports) to assigning responsibility for a range of eID services, including
eAuthentication and eVerification services. Countries that have pursued PPP for the
development of specific components and services of the eID systems have included the
Philippines, Albania, Estonia, India, Belgium, Malaysia, Norway, and Sweden.

In 2014, the overall vision and design of Vietnam’s National Identity Service Delivery
Framework (NISDF) was completed as was an assessment of the feasibility of
implementing part of this framework under a PPP. The study was funded by the Public-
                                                                               Page 66 of 77
Private Infrastructure Investment Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and was executed by a team of
specialists (the Team) from the World Bank (WB) in close collaboration with the GoV. This
assessment concluded that establishing an eID project for delivering specific eID services
through a National eID Service Delivery Platform (NISDP) by way of a PPP structure is
feasible and that it could be expected to provide greater benefits and better performance
than a government-provided alternative. Key reason for this is that a PPP could provide a
better quality of service – with regard to access, speed, and reliability – through the
defined standards contained in a PPP contract, and that the Government currently lacks
the capacity to reliably and sustainably staff and maintain this technologically intensive
service delivery.

The technical rationale for the proposed eID services in Vietnam is well established owing
to the efficiency and improved performance it can provide to many service providers in
Vietnam’s public and private sectors. It is directly supported by the GoV’s ambitious
National Identify (NID) Project that is currently in the process of creating over 63 million
unique electronic identities for Vietnam residents by 2020. Since eID represents a new
technology, it is difficult to estimate accurately the future level of demand for it within the
public sector as the rate of creation of eIDs and the migration by public agencies over to
its use may vary. As a result, the Government has decided to first develop a smaller-scale
pilot project that will create the eIDs and provide the services to three selected districts
of Hanoi, comprising an estimated population of one million and 100,000 registered
mobile identities. It is expected that if this initial pilot phase of the eID PPP project is
successful, it will lead to a much larger-scale PPP project and contract for providing eID
services on a nationwide basis.

After comparing the costs, requirements, and potential benefits of five different options
for structuring a PPP, the recommended PPP structure is for a Build-Own-Operate (BOO)
model, featuring a single private partner providing eID services to a single public sector
client based on an offtake agreement. The Team determined that based on the lifespan
of the project’s assets, a PPP contract could have a term of 3-5 years.

The PPP could be structured to meet the legal and procedural requirements of Vietnam’s
current PPP framework currently defined by:

      Decision No. 71/2010/QD-TTg of November 9, 2010, promulgating the regulation
       on pilot investment in the public-private partnership form (Decision 71); and
      Decree No. 108/2009/ND-CP of November 27, 2009, amended by Decree No.

                                                                                 Page 67 of 77
        24/2011/ND-CP of April 05, 2011, which defines PPP investments through
        contract structures that include Build-Operate-Transfer, Build-Transfer-Operate
        or Build-and-Transfer (Decree 108).


It could be noted that a new PPP decree is currently being drafted by the Government
which, when it is finally adopted and issued, could provide new and clearer requirements
for PPP preparation, approval, and implementation procedures. The PPP contract will be
output-based, requiring the private partner to meet specific technical performance
standards throughout the term of the contract, or risk having its payments from the
Government reduced. These will include clear cut standards for how registered
beneficiaries may access eID services, and how quickly such queries and eID services,
messages, and confirmations may be completed; there will also be prescribed standards
for overall service reliability.

The PPP Transaction Advisor will be required to finalize and then implement a PPP project
structure that achieves the Government’s objectives as far as possible.

Responsibilities of the PPP Transaction Advisor by Phases

The PPP Transaction Advisor’s tasks will be divided into two phases:


           Phase 1: Finalization of the Detailed PPP Structure
           Phase 2: Support to PPP Transaction Implementation and Completion


The approval of the final PPP structure by the GoV and its PPP Project Committee at the
end of Phase 1 will be required before the Transaction Advisor may proceed to the
implementation stage (Phase 2).

Phase 1: Finalization of PPP Structure

In Phase 1, the Transaction Advisor will be required to:

           Assist the GoV in its consultations with relevant public sector stakeholder
            organizations in order to achieve consensus on the approach. This could
            include, but not be limited to, the Ministry of Public Security, Ministry of Justice,
            Ministry of Information and Communications, Ministry of Planning and
            Investment, Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance, Vietnam Social
            Security, Ministry of Health, and selected local commercial banks and

                                                                                   Page 68 of 77
           telecommunications companies.
          Obtain approval for the proposed PPP structure and approach prior to moving
           to the implementation stage.
          Organize and implement a stakeholders’ workshop to explain in detail the
           recommended alternative.


Stakeholder Consultation and Management

The GoV wishes to include all major stakeholders in its desire to actively involve the private
sector in the NID Project. At the end of Phase 1, the Transaction Advisor will conduct a
workshop where the results of the analysis and its recommendations for implementation
in Phase 2 will be presented. In the workshop, the TA will also submit his/her
recommendations for likely PPP financing alternatives.

Detailed PPP Structure Document

At the conclusion of the review and consultation, the Transaction Advisor will prepare a
detailed PPP structure document. This document could set out the recommended
transaction structure in detail, including the allocation of all risks and responsibilities
between the public and private sectors, the final PPP payment formula, and all of the
output performance standards that the private partner will be required to meet according
to the PPP contract. These are expected to include, but not be limited to:

      Capacity and volume of eID service requests, queries, or transactions
      Speed of responses to eID requests
      Availability and minimum reliability standards
      Technical inter-operability with required existing databases
      Training and awareness building for public and private sector stakeholders on eID
       and verification procedures and use of the project’s services
      Other technical and project-specific performance standards

Approval to Proceed to PPP Implementation

The detailed concept document will be reviewed by the Government’s PPP Project
Committee, and the Office of the Prime Minister. Approval will be required before the
Transaction Advisor may proceed to the implementation stage (Phase 2).

Phase 2: PPP Transaction Implementation


                                                                                Page 69 of 77
Once approval is obtained at the end of Phase 1 to proceed to Phase 2, the Transaction
Advisor will support the Government in managing the implementation’s tendering and
procurement. This will include supporting the process of pre-qualifying potential private
bidders, preparing all documents required in the procurement process, supporting the
Government’s PPP Project Committee in responding to questions and requests for
clarification from bidders, assisting with evaluation, negotiations, closing, and the design
of PPP contract management and performance monitoring arrangements. Specific tasks
are expected to include:

          Designing and drafting the PPP agreement.
          Drafting the Request for Qualifications (RfQ) document (including minimum
           qualification requirements).
          Preparing the draft PPP Request for Proposal (RfP) document.
          Submission of all tender documents to the Government’s PPP Project
           Committee for review and approval.
          Advising on the completion of required PPP pre-tendering preparations
           (acquiring needed sites and access to facilities, educating key stakeholders on
           eID service delivery and PPP requirements, establishing the PPP performance
           monitoring and contract management plan, etc.).
          Drafting    and   issuing   a   Request   for   Expressions   of   Interest   (REoI)
           announcement of the forthcoming eID PPP project and bidding opportunity to
           the private sector, and evaluating the responses received.
          Drafting and issuing a PPP project Information Memorandum (InfoMemo),
           accurately summarizing all key data about the project’s structure for interested
           private investors, as well as conducting PPP Investors’ Conferences.
          Drafting and issuing the PPP project’s Request for Qualifications (RfQ)
           document, receiving and assisting the Government to evaluate the responses
           received.
          Preparing possible project physical site inspections (i.e., bidder walkthrough)
           of relevant data center locations or interconnection facilities for the project,
           and preparing “virtual” data rooms for private bidders (i.e., data on the eID
           pilot project’s assets, beneficiary organizations, eID database creation, etc.).
          Issuing the draft RfP and drafting responses to bidders’ questions and requests
           for clarification (private bidders to review full draft of PPP agreement, bidding
           format and requirements prior to finalization of all bid documents), all the


                                                                                 Page 70 of 77
           while creating an environment where bidders can perform due diligence during
           their bid preparations.
          Issuing the final PPP tender documents and receipt of final technical and
           financial bids.
          Supporting the Government in establishing the PPP Tender Evaluation
           Committee.
          Supporting the Technical Evaluation Committee in evaluating PPP technical and
           legal proposal bids and in the announcement of results.
          Supporting the evaluation of PPP financial and cost bids and announcement of
           the selected PPP bidder.
          Supporting the Government in the final updating, negotiation, and signing of
           the PPP contract.
          Assisting in the establishment of the Government’s PPP Performance
           Monitoring and Contract Management Unit
          Supporting the Government in monitoring the PPP project company’s progress
           in reaching financial closure.
          Supporting the Government’s PPP Performance Monitoring and Contract
           Management          Team      in     supervising   PPP      performance     during
           installation/construction (Government and Special Purpose Vehicle agreement
           on     appointment    of   independent     advisor/supervising   engineer   during
           installation/construction).


Qualifications

The PPP Transaction Advisor will be expected to demonstrate skills and experience in the
following areas:

      PPP transaction implementation
      Project financial analysis
      Information and communications technology and eGovernment services
      Legal review and drafting
      PPP contract management and performance monitoring


The PPP Transaction Advisor’s experience in each of these areas will be evaluated. The
Transaction      Advisor   couldcould    have    strong   experience   in   Information   and
Communications Technology (ICT) and eGovernment sectors worldwide, including in

                                                                                 Page 71 of 77
developing countries. Both the firms’ bidding for the Transaction Advisor Consultancy
and the individual staff members being proposed for the project couldcould demonstrate
experience in these areas.




                                                                         Page 72 of 77
