Report No: ACS19178
.




Southern Africa
Southern Africa Energy-Water Nexus
Background Paper to Support Dialogue in the Region

.
June 30, 2016


.
GEE01
GWA01

AFRICA
.




.




    Document of the World Bank
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
    findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors
    of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included
    in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
    judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
    boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may
    be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages
    dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
    World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                     Acknowledgments
This World Bank paper was prepared by a core team led by Mustafa Zakir Hussain and including
Kabir Malik, Catherine Etienne, Joseph Kapika and Maria Meer. Important contributions were
received from Morgan Bazilian, Diego Juan Rodriguez, Rikard Liden, Cecil Nundwe, Ijeoma
Emenanjo, Catherine Tovey, Vladislav Vucetic, Frederic Louis and Anna Delgado Martin.
External review comments were received from Professor Mark Howells, Eunice Pereira Ramos,
and Vignesh Sridharan, all of the Division of Energy Systems Analysis at the Royal Institute of
Technology, Sweden (KTH-dESA). David Sislen, Marcus Wishart, and Daryl Fields provided
input at the concept stage. The peer reviewers were William Rex, Wendy Hughes, and Debabrata
Chattopadhyay. Overall guidance and management review was provided by Lucio Monari, Asad
Alam and Guang Zhe Chen.




                                               i
                             Abbreviations and Acronyms


AEZ       agroecological zoning
ARWRs     actual renewable water resources
BC        Bass Chute
BNL       Brookhaven National Laboratory
BPC       Botswana Power Corporation
ºC        degrees centigrade
CAEWDP    Central Asia Energy–Water Development Program
CCS       carbon capture and storage
CHP       combined heat and power
CIWA      Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
CLEWs     climate, land-use, energy, and water strategies
CMAs      catchment management agencies
CSP       concentrating solar power
CUVECOM   Cuvelai Watercourse Commission
DAM       day-ahead market
DNA       National Directorate of Water
DNI       Direct Normal Irradiation
DRC       Democratic Republic of Congo
DWA       Department of Water Affairs
ECA       Economics of Climate Action
EdF       Électricité de France
ESMAP     Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN)
GCM       general circulation model
GDP       gross domestic product
GHG       greenhouse gas
GIZ       German Agency for International Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft für
          Internationale Zusammenarbeit)

                                             ii
GW       gigawatts
GWh      gigawatt-hours
HEAT     Hands on Energy Toolkit
IAEA     International Atomic Energy Agency
IBRD     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IEA      International Energy Agency
IGCC     integrated gasification combined cycle
IIASA    International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
IISD     International Institute for Sustainable Development
IPCC     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRENA    International Renewable Energy Agency
IRP      integrated resource plan(ning)
IWRM     integrated water resource management
IWRWE    Integrated Water Resources and Water Efficiency
km2      square kilometers
KTH      Royal Institute of Technology (Kungliga Tekniska högskolan)
LEAP     Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning
LHDA     Lesotho Highlands Development Authority
LHWC     Lesotho Highlands Water Commission
LHWP     Lesotho Highlands Water Project
LIMCOM   Limpopo Watercourse Commission
m        meters
m3       cubic meters
MARKAL   Market Allocation model
mm       millimeters
MW       megawatts
MWh      megawatt-hours
MWSCs    marginal water supply costs
NSDP     National Strategic Development Plan
OKACOM   Okavango River Basin Water Commission

                                          iii
ORASECOM Orange–Senqu River Commission
PPA        power purchase agreement
PoE        Protocol on Energy (SADC)
PV         photovoltaic
RBCs       river basin commissions
RBOs       river basin organizations
RIDMP      Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan
RSAP       Regional Strategic Action Plan
SADC       Southern African Development Community
SADCC      Southern African Development Coordinating Conference
SAPP       Southern African Power Pool
SATIM      South African TIMES model
SATIM-W    South African TIMES water-smart model
SDGs       Sustainable Development Goals
SEI        Stockholm Environment Institute
SIWI       Stockholm Integrated Water Institute
STEM       short-term energy market
SWAT       Soil and Water Assessment Tool
SWISH      SADC Water Information Sharing Hub
T&D        transmission and distribution
tcf        trillion cubic feet
UN         United Nations
UNDESA     United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
WBSCD      World Business Council for Sustainable Development
WEAP       Water Evaluation and Planning
WEC        World Energy Council
WEF        water–energy–food
WEF        World Economic Forum
WELMM      water, energy, land, materials, and manpower
WSS        water supply and sanitation

                                            iv
WWC      World Water Council
ZAMCOM   Zambezi River Watercourse Commission
ZRA      Zambezi River Authority
ZRB      Zambezi River Basin
ZESA     Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority
ZESCO    Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation
ZRA      Zambezi River Authority




                                        v
                                                                 Table of Contents

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................... 2
Chapter 1: Setting the Scene ....................................................................................................................... 12
SECTION A: WHAT IS THE ENERGY–WATER NEXUS? ................................................................... 14
Chapter 2: Introducing Energy–Water Interconnectivity and the Nexus Concept...................................... 15
   2.1         Establishing the Energy–Water Nexus Concept ......................................................................... 19
   2.2         Key Implications of the Energy-Water Nexus for Electricity Generation Investments ............. 21
   2.3         Challenges of Applying the Energy–Water Nexus Framework to Investment Decisions .......... 23
Chapter 3: Energy–Water–Climate Nexus Decision Tools ........................................................................ 37
   3.1         Current Integrated Modeling Tools for Developing Countries .................................................. 37
SECTION B: FOCUS ON SOUTHERN AFRICA .................................................................................... 48
Chapter 4: The Southern Africa Landscape ................................................................................................ 49
   4.1         Regional Distribution of Economic Well-being ......................................................................... 49
   4.2         Distribution of Water Resources ................................................................................................ 50
   4.3         Southern Africa’s River Basins .................................................................................................. 51
   4.4         Distribution of Energy Resources ............................................................................................... 55
   4.5         Impact of Climate Change on the Region................................................................................... 59
   4.6         Water and energy resource planning at the national level .......................................................... 63
Chapter 5: A Regional Approach to Addressing National Priorities .......................................................... 71
   5.1         Southern African Development Community .............................................................................. 71
   5.2         Regional Water Resources.......................................................................................................... 72
   5.3         Multilateral Water Planning and the River Basin Commissions ................................................ 79
   5.4         Regional Priorities for Water Resources and Supply ................................................................. 84
   5.5         SADC Protocol on Energy and the SAPP .................................................................................. 84
   5.6         Cross-sectoral Activity at the Regional Level ............................................................................ 89
   5.7         Information Gaps ........................................................................................................................ 94
   5.8         Parallel Work in Other Regions.................................................................................................. 96
Chapter 6: Conclusions ............................................................................................................................... 98
Annex 1: A Summary of the Key Water–Energy–Food Nexus Frameworks ........................................... 102
Annex 2: Understanding National Planning and Cross-sector Coordination............................................ 105
Annex 3: World Bank nexus projects in Central Asia .............................................................................. 119
References ................................................................................................................................................. 121



                                                                               1
                                        Executive Summary

Purpose and Scope
The objective of this paper is to provide high-level background information on the interdependency
between the supply of electricity and water in Southern Africa. The paper assimilates information
based an extensive review of recent work on the energy and water sectors in the region and beyond,
and the World Bank’s sector dialogue in the region. The paper is intended to help facilitate a
dialogue on the energy-water nexus in the region, especially from the perspective of electricity
sector planning, and help the World Bank engage key sector stakeholders on the issue.
The value of this paper is in bringing together the latest knowledge work and other key information
relevant for energy-water nexus dialogue in Southern Africa. This information has been derived
from a number of fragmented sources, and an effort has been made to present the information in a
logical framework, in one document that can help initiate discussions in the region.
This paper was conceptualized as a background discussion paper and does not seek to make any
recommendations on policy alternatives to tackle challenges facing the region on energy-water
nexus issues. Any recommendations should be rooted in a thorough assessment of the specific
challenges, institutions and objectives of the region; and most importantly should follow from a
constructive regional dialogue amongst key stakeholders.
The issues and implications that surround the energy-water nexus are numerous. The use of
electricity and water as critical inputs to economic activity, implies that there are many
interlinkages that can be explored. To increase the usefulness of the information and the framework
presented, this paper focuses on the perspective of electricity supply, and highlights nexus issues
that are directly relevant to it. Important related nexus issues such as agriculture and its dependence
on reliable water and electricity (the energy-water-food nexus) are not considered and are left for
future work. Thus, in referring to the energy–water nexus, the paper considers issues on electricity
and water sectors in relation to electricity supply and long-term planning around it, including the
feedback loop to water.
By highlighting key analytical work and drawing insights relevant to Southern Africa, this paper
aims to support an informed regional dialogue on decision making about the energy–water nexus
in the region.

Key Messages from Section A: What Is the Energy–Water Nexus?

The energy–water nexus refers to the interdependence between water and energy supply.
Addressing the nexus means internalizing this interdependence in the decision making for both
sectors. In the context of major energy investments expected in Southern Africa, the scope of the
paper is focused specifically on the subset of the nexus addressing electricity supply. Water is
important for hydropower generation and for cooling in thermal generation plants. Electricity is
needed to advance various stages of the water supply and sanitation value chain. Energy and water
security are thus strongly interlinked and should be recognized as so by planners, policy makers,
and investors alike.

                                                  2
With population growth, urbanization and its associated increase in well-being, and
economic growth, there is increasing pressure on water and energy resources. In seeking to
improve allocation of resources in an increasingly scarce environment, a nexus approach can be
extremely helpful. Such a holistic approach helps to build synergies, reduce trade-offs, and
improve overall governance and decision making. It potentially has important implications for the
way decisions are made in the sectors going forward. Long-term decision making is also made
more challenging by the likelihood of climate change—which adds complexities in understanding
patterns in future resource availability and societal demands on those resources.

The link between energy, water, and climate change has been studied for several years. The
water–energy–food (WEF) nexus was broadly accepted when it was presented at the Rio+20
Summit in 2012, and two seminal frameworks—those by SEI/Hoff (2011) and the World
Economic Forum (WEF 2011b)—support this. The energy-–water nexus sits within the wider
WEF nexus and focuses solely on the interaction between energy and water (this narrower lens is
particularly appropriate for electricity supply planning). Critical to the energy–water nexus
approach is the role of water resources acting as both a state and a control variable—determining
current situations and future changes. Also fundamental to the nexus is the interconnectivity of
energy and water supply security. If water supply security is low, then depending on the
technology, this negatively affects energy supply security. There are important trade-offs here,
especially when considering the various other uses for water.

A key challenge to implementing nexus planning is how to determine the optimal allocation
of water across competing demands. In most privately traded commodities, the market acts as
an efficient allocation mechanism. Price signals allocate goods to their highest-value use.
However, such a mechanism is not well suited for water, because of its public good characteristics,
associated externalities in its use, and fundamental concerns of equity in access to potable water
as a basic necessity to human well-being. As a result, nonmarket valuation of the societal net
benefits from various uses of water guides allocation decisions.

Another key challenge is accommodating climate change uncertainty when making
investment decisions. Climate change could have a significant impact on water and energy
systems. The current state of knowledge is inadequate for understanding the likelihood of various
future scenarios and the quantification of associated impacts. This introduces ‘deep uncertainty’
into decision making regarding the energy–water nexus. As a result, decision makers may have to
adapt their approach to investment planning, opting instead for solutions that minimize potential
losses under a range of climate change scenarios. The strong interdependency between the two
sectors and fundamental uncertainty about the impact of climate change make robust long-term
nexus planning very challenging. Recent literature assesses the role of such uncertainties and
shows the significant benefits of considering adaptation to climate change for energy sector
investment planning.




                                                3
Cross-sectoral linkages and the transboundary nature of water resources put an onus on
good governance – effective and harmonized planning and decision making. Poor governance,
including ‘silo’ decision making, can have serious consequences. Decisions—whether at the local,
national, river basin, or regional level—would need to take into account these cross-sectoral
linkages, and the institutions overseeing these decisions would need to be equipped to do so.

Numerous technical tools are being developed to support the work of policy makers. These
tools enable the integration of energy and water system issues and climate change impacts to equip
planners with evidence on synergies and trade-offs. This work is not new—there are models dating
back to the 1970s. However, there is significant recent and highly practical work to produce
frameworks and models that can be adapted to address a range of issues with limited data
requirements. The climate, land-use, energy, and water strategies (CLEWs) framework featured
significantly at Rio+20 in 2012. Two recent important applications of this framework for energy–
water nexus issues include the national-level use for energy policy work in Mauritius and the
global CLEWs for use in addressing the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. This
latter model allows policy makers, for example, to consider the impact of imposing fossil fuel
limits or a carbon tax on water consumption.

The World Bank is currently working with the Government of South Africa on the Thirsty
Energy Initiative. This initiative is seeking to address the fact that the current energy sector least-
cost model for South Africa (known as SATIM, from the South African TIMES, a public domain
model developed by the University of Cape Town) does not address water demand-side
considerations (World Bank 2015b). The SATIM-W model, coming out of this work, will include
marginal water supply cost functions to produce “water-smart” outcomes. Key features of the
model include extending data on water demand beyond power plant water intensity to include
broader water-use data, enabling decision makers to understand which water infrastructure will be
needed for the energy sector, when, and where. Climate change is also considered through scenario
analyses. Initial outputs from the work suggest that Southern Africa’s water resources appear
relatively resilient to a range of potential climate change impacts, and that water for power is
supported by major interbasin transfers. The work is providing justification for decisions about
dry-cooling versus wet-cooling technology for thermal power stations and is providing guidance
in relation to investment in concentrating solar power, shale gas, and renewable energy
technologies under future climate scenarios.

Key Messages from Section B: Focus on Southern Africa

The paper focuses on the Southern Africa region, which is taken as all countries in the
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC)—i.e., those including and south of the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Tanzania. The countries in this region have
significant variation in terms of their physical geography, economic performance, population, and
the levels of water and energy services these populations can use. In addressing this region, focus




                                                  4
countries for this phase of work included South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Swaziland, and
Namibia. 1
Hydrological resources in the region are very unevenly distributed. The southernmost
countries—South Africa, Botswana, and Namibia—receive much lower levels of rainfall than the
northern countries, such as DRC, Angola, and Zambia. Differences across the region are as large
as 2,000 millimeters per year. The region is characterized by 15 major transboundary river basins.
More than 70 percent of the region’s freshwater resources are shared between two or more
countries. The largest river basins are the Congo, the Zambezi, and the Orange–Senqu basins.
The region is also well endowed in terms of energy resources. Historically, coal has been the
source of most power generation activity in the east and northeast regions of South Africa. While
an additional 10,000 megawatts (MW) of coal-fired generation capacity is in various stages of
development, the expectation is for a number of supplementary sources of generation to become
important in the region. For instance, the region has potential for 56,000 MW of hydropower in
DRC and Mozambique alone, and recent finds of gas off the coast of Mozambique are globally
significant quantities that could supply exports to Asia and the Southern Africa region
simultaneously. However, considerable investment will be required for both of these forms of
energy to be developed in significant quantities. Also relevant is the development of increased
renewable energy, including solar and wind power. The different forms of energy generation will
have very different implications for water demand in the region.
While several studies show considerable uncertainty about the likely impacts of climate
change on the region, recent evidence suggests they could be significant. For instance, the
effect of El Niño during 2015–16 has led to a more than 50 percent reduction in power generation
output from the Kariba Dam on the Zambia–Zimbabwe border and Swaziland. The dam’s typical
annual level of rainfall is only 10 percent below that of the world average, but it is currently in
severe drought.
For the five focus countries—South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Namibia, and Swaziland—
the paper considers national water sector priorities, energy sector priorities, the extent of
coordination between the two, and how these priorities fit into a broader agenda of regional
coordination. Despite the many economic and geographical differences among these countries,
there are a number of common themes in relation to water and energy security.

•   All countries face water shortages, either because of a general lack of available resource,
    or because economic centers are located far from national water resources. Thus, policies
    are focusing on both water storage and significant water transfer schemes (implying a need to
    join up water–energy investment decisions).
•   Water allocation is also a common challenge. Although countries recognize the need to
    implement an integrated approach to managing their water resources, and indeed most have
    published an integrated water resource management (IWRM) plan, doing so is a complex, data-

1
  This initial phase of countries is the set of countries that were under one World Bank Country Management Unit at
the time that the study was conceived. Future phases may focus on additional countries.

                                                         5
    and resource-intensive task, which many countries (and particularly Namibia and Swaziland)
    are struggling to develop and implement.
•   The majority of the countries in this study have recently experienced load shedding due
    to their reliance upon electricity supply from Eskom. As a result, all countries now
    prioritize self-sufficiency, and there is significant interest in developing hydropower and
    renewable energy generation. The exception is South Africa, which is considering investments
    in gas-fired generation and power imports from the broader region, including future major
    hydropower projects, such as Inga 3 in DRC and Mphanda Nkuwa in Mozambique.
•   In terms of joint planning between the water and energy sectors, only South Africa
    appears to be actively incorporating water resource availability into its energy planning.
    There is still room for improvement, though. The Thirsty Energy modeling initiative (World
    Bank 2015b) notes that South Africa’s approach to such incorporation is relatively crude, with
    no consideration of regional disparities in water supply and costs; auxiliary water use by, for
    example, coal mining; or water treatment requirements.
The shared water resources through the region’s large transboundary river basins and
significant history of electricity trade create the potential for a strong regional dimension to
addressing the national water and energy priorities.
SADC is the key institution focusing on regional integration in the region. The SADC treaty
provides that member states should develop a set of legal and institutional instruments—referred
to as protocols—that have clearly stated objectives, scope, and institutional mechanisms to
facilitate cooperation and integration on key issues for the region. SADC currently has 26
protocols, including the protocols on energy (SADC 1996) and shared watercourses (SADC 2000).
The disparities between individual countries’ water resource endowments and their overall
demand for water suggest that operating at a regional level should increase benefits and
reduce risks. A coordinated approach with benefit-sharing mechanisms to manage the region’s
shared waters could minimize social costs and improve allocative efficiency. There is significant
evidence of efforts to coordinate.
Water resource management in the region is governed by the Revised Protocol on Shared
Watercourses in the Southern African Development Community (SADC 2000). This protocol
seeks to promote and facilitate watercourse agreements and institutions, including harmonization
and monitoring of legislation and policies for the planning, development, conservation, and
protection of shared resources, and their allocation. The protocol also lays out an institutional
framework for its implementation, comprising the Committee of Ministers, Committee of Water
Senior Officials, Water Sector Coordinating Unit (based at the SADC secretariat), Water
Resources Technical Committee, and shared watercourse institutions.
Water planning at the regional level takes place at the transboundary level and has not yet
moved to the level of full regional integrated development (Schreiner and Baleta 2015).




                                                 6
Bilateral water transfer agreements are in place to address the problem of uneven water
resource distribution in the region through interbasin transfers, and to coordinate on large
infrastructure projects, such as the Kariba Dam on the Zambezi River.
The most significant water transfer agreement is between Lesotho and South Africa—the
Lesotho Highlands Water Project—which aims to address South Africa’s water scarcity through
the transfer of some of Lesotho’s abundant water resources to the Gauteng region. The revenues
from this project are enabling Lesotho to develop its hydropower capacity and improve water
distribution within the country.
The Kariba Dam is managed by a bilateral agreement between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The
Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) agreement was signed in 1987 to manage the part of the Zambezi
River that forms the border between Zambia and Zimbabwe “to obtain, for the economic,
industrial and social development of the two countries, the greatest possible benefit from the
natural advantages offered by the waters of the Zambezi River.” The main responsibilities of the
ZRA today are to operate and maintain the Kariba Dam, investigate the development of new dam
sites on the Zambezi River, and analyze and disseminate hydrological and environmental
information pertaining to the Zambezi River and Lake Kariba.

A number of river basin commissions (RBCs) have been created through basinwide
agreements among the respective riparian states. To date, five RBCs have been established
to promote IWRM and development:
  • Cuvelai Watercourse Commission (CUVECOM), established in 2014 between the riparian
    states of Angola and Namibia;
  • Limpopo Watercourse Commission (LIMCOM), established in 2003 between the riparian
    states of Botswana, Mozambique, South Africa, and Zimbabwe;
  • Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM), established in 1994 between the
    riparian states of Angola, Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe;
  • Orange–Senqu River Commission (ORASECOM), established in 2000 between the riparian
    states of Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and South Africa; and
  • Zambezi River Watercourse Commission (ZAMCOM), established in 2011. In 2014,
    ZAMCOM was successfully transitioned to a permanent organization, based in Zimbabwe
    (World Bank 2015g). Its main objective is “to promote the equitable and reasonable
    utilization of the water resources of the Zambezi Watercourse as well as the efficient
    management and sustainable development thereof” (ZAMCOM 2016).
While RBCs have the potential to act as basin-level coordinators, in practice their capacity
to do so is limited. Most RBCs have been established to coordinate pollution control and water
resource information sharing. Two RBCs—ZAMCOM and ORASECOM—are more
sophisticated, but to date lack the institutional capacity to implement cross-sectoral IWRM plans.
ZAMCOM is producing a strategic plan for the development of the basin in accordance with the
provision of the ZAMCOM agreement (with support from a World Bank-administered grant). The

                                                7
high number of riparian states gives rise to complex issues about how to share the river’s
significant water resource.
Since 2015, a series of projects supported by the multidonor trust fund Cooperation in International
Waters in Africa (CIWA) 2 is helping to overcome some of the institutional and financial issues
that have hindered progress in developing the Zambezi basin. These projects are being delivered
through CIWA’s Zambezi Basin Program, which provides an integrating framework to coordinate
World Bank and other development partner programs and achieve the key objectives of
ZAMCOM.
Regional energy development is at the core of SADC’s agenda, which has developed
strategies and established dedicated agencies that together form a consolidated institutional
architecture driving integration in the energy sector. The key actor is the Southern African
Power Pool (SAPP), created by SADC in 1995 through an intergovernmental memorandum of
understanding in August 1995, and guided by the SADC protocol on energy (SADC 1996). The
SAPP’s mandate includes enhancing regional cooperation in power development and trade and
producing nonbinding regional plans to guide the delivery of electricity generation and
transmission infrastructure.
There is still significant room for improvement regarding the SAPP’s regional coordination
capacity. Further integration and market competition in the SAPP critically hinge on increasing
generation and transmission capacity. In 2012–13, 28 bilateral electricity-trading contracts were
in place, but only 15 were active because of generation and transmission constraints. The current
constraints in transmission infrastructure are an obstacle to freely trading power on the spot market.
On average, the short-term energy market accounted for 5–10 percent of the energy traded in the
region, while the day-ahead market currently accounts for around 1 percent.
National demands for energy have also led to various regional treaties and bilateral and
multilateral agreements for the advancement of hydropower projects, such as for Inga 3 (DRC
and South Africa) and Mphanda Nkuwa (ongoing dialogue between Mozambique and South
Africa).
While all these efforts are being made at a regional level, it is clear that the priority of
countries in the region is to develop physical self-sufficiency in generation capacity within
their own national boundaries—and to primarily look at regional trade as an opportunity to
finance larger generation projects (than may be required to meet national demand) based on
demand from export to the region. South Africa is the clear exception: it is explicitly looking to
import power. Its 2013 update to its Integrated Resource Plan for Electricity refers to hydropower
in the region being a source of power for South Africa (RSA/DoE 2013a). South Africa is actively
engaging with DRC and Mozambique, among others, toward this end. The role of South Africa in
backstopping power purchase agreements will be critical in attracting credible investors and
developing bankable projects for financing by the private sector.

2
  The CIWA trust fund is a partnership between the World Bank and the governments of Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom to address constraints to cooperative management and development of
Africa’s international waters.

                                                     8
Looking at planning, there is little evidence of cross-sectoral planning in the current version
of the SAPP regional pool plan. When it comes to decisions about projects, typically the
prioritization criteria do not include broader water issues or water opportunity costs. There
are also no formal links with SADC water institutions when undertaking such work. Since
2015, the SAPP has been developing a new Regional Power Sector Master Plan. 3 The Plan is
taking an approach that identifies not just least-cost—but also robust—solutions, given all the
uncertainties relating to regional power sector development. It is expected that water resources and
climate change will play a role in the uncertainty scenarios.

Conclusions

The interrelationship between water and energy supply, water resources, and climate change
is particularly relevant to decision making in Southern Africa. The region’s water resources
are unevenly distributed both spatially and temporally, leading to significant water scarcity in some
parts of the region and relative abundance in others. There is also limited knowledge about the
region’s overall water resource levels. Climate change is expected to reduce rainfall levels,
increase rainfall variability, and increase ambient temperatures, but there is little certainty about
when and by how much (Bates et al. 2008).
In light of these spatial differences, water and energy sector planning needs to be approached
in tandem at a local, national, river basin, or regional level, depending on the nature of the
issue. Both sectors need to assess the value of the water resources they consume and use this
knowledge to improve overall efficiency in terms of the freshwater they consume or withdraw,
and need to ensure that planning minimizes the overall cost and maximizes the benefits for the two
sectors.
While substantial progress has been made to recognize water–energy links in many
countries’ legislation and plans, there is evidence of significant barriers across the region
with regard to implementing a cross-sectoral approach to planning. These barriers appear to
result from capacity constraints at many levels, including a lack of data (and capacity to collect
and further analyze data), and limited institutional capacity to facilitate data sharing and the
necessary cross-sectoral coordination to implement plans and strategies.
The significant gaps in regional water resource data prevent, for example, the development
of water resource allocation plans (ODI, ECDM, and GDI/DIE 2012). There is a need to
improve knowledge of the amount of water that is being withdrawn and details on streamflow rates
(Miralles-Wilhelm 2013; Droogers, de Boer, and Terink 2014). Data on energy generation
technology water use (withdrawal and consumption) could also be improved to provide data that
are reflective of the local climate, rather than relying on international data (IEA and World Bank
2015). In some instances, these data may exist, so there is a need to coordinate at a regional level
to share this information.
In terms of data analysis, climate change imposes deep uncertainty and with it a need to
analyze investment opportunities from a different perspective, opting instead for climate-
3
    Funded by the World Bank with an International Development Association grant to the SAPP.

                                                         9
resilient strategies that minimize potential losses under a range of scenarios (World Bank
2016a). Again, capacity within the region to undertake this analysis needs to be developed.
Associated with this is the significant need to develop practical integrated energy–water planning
tools, to enable decision makers to quantify power generation investment trade-offs at both the
national and the regional level, and take account of the uncertainties imposed by climate change
(Miralles-Wilhelm 2016). The current work by the World Bank’s Thirsty Energy Initiative to
develop a national South African integrated model provides the first regional example of such a
tool (World Bank 2015b). The Bank’s support to the SAPP with the development of its new
Regional Power Sector Masterplan is expected to incorporate approaches that seek robust options
under the various outcome scenarios (including climate change).
Southern Africa has institutions at the regional level that are well positioned to undertake
integrated, regionwide planning. SADC already recognizes the nexus and the importance of
understanding the scarcity value of water resources through such initiatives as the economic
accounting of water and the SADC Water Information Sharing Hub. An analysis of SADC’s
Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan (SADC 2012a) reveals limited regional
coordination for its proposed water infrastructure projects, with no projects planned involving
three or more countries. RBCs have been established to coordinate information, and in some cases,
integrated planning at the river basin level, but evidence on their performance to date suggests they
are quite limited in their ability to implement cross-sectoral plans, and in most cases their role
remains limited to that of information coordination (CRIDF/DfID 2014a). Also, their geographical
basin-level focus means they are unable to act on issues that extend beyond the basin. The SAPP
provides a basis for regional coordination through power trading, but there appears to be a lack of
political will to rely on neighboring countries: national plans continue to emphasize self-reliance,
despite the clear potential benefits of planning and working at a regional level.
Suggested Next Steps

 A priority for the region is to bring together regional stakeholders in an organized manner to
discuss the nexus and ultimately agree on what the key priorities are for cross-sectoral coordination
in the region and who are the main “champions” to help address each of these priorities. The recent
SADC Energy and Water Joint Ministerial Workshop held on June 20, 2016 has helped create
awareness and context for such a process. This Paper proposes the following next steps:
   •   Convene focused meetings at the SADC level to better inform regional stakeholders on the
       key overarching nexus issues for the region. These meetings would include the main
       findings contained in this background paper. As an output of these meetings, there would
       be a need to pull together an overarching matrix that sets out the key priorities identified
       by the stakeholders, and for each, identify the relevant stakeholders connected with these
       issues and champions for addressing them in the region. A potential convener for these
       meetings would be the SADC Secretariat.
   •   A following step would be to conduct focused workshops at various levels (national,
       regional, sectoral, and cross-sectoral) on key analytical nexus-related issues, such as water
       valuation, robust decision-making techniques and their application to climate-resilient

                                                 10
    investment, and integrated modeling tools. A key output of these workshops would be a
    view on the current data and analytical capacities of individual member states to carry out
    such analyses, to identify significant data gaps and whether in the first instance it is most
    appropriate to develop these capacities at a national and/or regional level.
•   Regional energy and water planning stakeholders would subsequently need to reconvene
    to discuss the identified priorities, gaps and relevant champions and determine how
    implementation will be taken forward.




                                             11
                                   Chapter 1: Setting the Scene

In recognition of the growing international focus on the linkages between the energy and water
sectors, both the 2014 United Nations (UN) World Water Development Report (WWAP 2014)
and the 2015 World Water Week (SIWI 2015) focused on issues surrounding the energy–water
nexus. The thematic focus was a culmination of analytical work and policy experience that have
highlighted the importance of improving integrated policy making in the energy and water sectors
to achieve allocative efficiency by accounting for cross-sector impacts and feedbacks.
With vast hydrological resources, growing population pressures, increasing energy investments,
and the threat of climate change, understanding and harnessing the energy–water nexus are critical
to Southern African countries achieving the socially efficient and sustainable expansion of
electricity and water supply. In addition, because of unequally distributed resources and demand,
cross-sector planning in Southern Africa needs to be coordinated at the regional level.
The objective of this work is to present key existing knowledge on the energy–water nexus, with
a special focus on Southern Africa, to inform policy makers, development partners, and other
sector stakeholders in the region. The study structures the existing knowledge in a way that clearly
focuses on the current state of analytical and policy knowledge along with the key gaps. By
highlighting key analytical work and drawing insights relevant to Southern Africa, this study aims
to support an informed regional dialogue on decision making about the energy–water nexus in the
region.
There are certain clear limitations to the scope of this paper:
•   This is a literature review of existing work and does not conduct any primary analysis. The
    value of this paper is in bringing together critical information, often available only in various
    fragmented forms, as one document to support initial discussions in the region.
•   In referring to the energy–water nexus, the focus of the paper is on the key considerations for
    the two sectors in relation to electricity supply and long-term planning around it, including the
    feedback loop to water. Alternative uses of water, such as for agriculture, are not the focus,
    though alternative uses of water will affect decisions about electricity investments and supply.
•   During the conceptualization of the scope for this paper, it was decided that it would act as a
    background paper for discussions. The paper would not, at this stage and prior to meetings in
    the region, seek to articulate the key challenges facing the region on these issues and the policy
    alternatives that could be considered for addressing them. Such findings would be set out in a
    potential follow-on piece of work after the meetings with stakeholders.




                                                 12
13
                  SECTION A: WHAT IS THE ENERGY–WATER NEXUS?




Photo: © Dana Smillie / World Bank.




                                      14
      Chapter 2: Introducing Energy–Water Interconnectivity and the Nexus Concept

Globally, population growth, urbanization and its associated increase in well-being, and economic
growth are likely to put increasing pressure on water and energy resources.
Water resources are particularly challenging as they form complex natural and artifical systems
over large areas. Activities such as intensification of agriculture, expansion of industrial processes,
and increased supply of tapped water will have a significant impact on the water system, by
affecting groundwater, river flow, or other forms of water storage and transmission.
Energy is needed for water supply. The level of energy needed is a function of many variables,
including water source (surface-water pumping typically requires less energy than groundwater
pumping), type of water treatment needed (high-ambient-quality raw water requires less treatment
than brackish or seawater), the intended end use, distribution (water pumped long distances
requires more energy), amount of water loss in the system through leakage and evaporation, and
level of wastewater treatment (stringency of water quality regulations to meet discharge standards).
Likewise, the intensity of energy use for water supply depends on such characteristics as
topography, climate, seasonal temperature, and rainfall (Copeland 2014).
In the context of major energy investments expected in Southern Africa, the scope of the paper is
focused specifically on the subset of the nexus addressing electricity supply. Electricity generation
often depends on the reliable supply of water—for example, hydropower and cooling processes at
thermal plants. Increased electricity access to underserved populations and greater energy intensity
of the lower-income economies will spur greater demand for energy resources, including
electricity in many parts of the world.
The pressure on energy and water resources from direct demand is supplemented by the feedback
between demand and supply in the two sectors: the increased demand for electricity will spur a
greater demand for water, which in turn will increase the demand for electricity, and so on (Figure
1).




                                                  15
Figure 1: Infographic on Global Energy and Water Sector Situations




Source: World Bank 2015b.

In addition to the direct human pressures, climate change is likely to result in greater uncertainty
and variability in resource availability and also possibly in increased demand for energy and water
in response to extreme weather conditions. The likelihood of greater water and energy stress and
increased vulnerability of existing systems in the future requires planning a response that is well
informed with regard to water and energy that adequately accounts for the long-term impacts on
human well-being.
The clearest examples that show the salience of the case of water and energy being interconnected
is in the case of the impact of droughts on hydropower resources. Countries or regions reliant on
hydropower for their electricity needs are by design directly dependent on the regular availability
of adequate water resources and resilient water systems. In cases where the system breaks down
or is subject to a negative shock, there can be significant impacts on both the energy and the water
sectors. Further, given the degree of linkages of the two sectors to other parts of the economy, the
impacts are often significantly broader. Two relatively recent examples from Uganda and
California illustrate how drought and climate change can bring energy and water interconnectivity
issues to the fore for policy makers (Boxes 1 and 2).




                                                      16
Box 1: Drought and the Energy–Water Nexus in Uganda

    In Uganda, drought conditions during 2004–05 led to a large drop in the level of Lake
    Victoria, which acts as a natural reservoir for the hydropower facility at the Nalubaale
    (formerly Owen Falls) and Kiira dams. The drop of almost one meter in the level of the
    lake led to a reduction in the power generation ability of the dams on which Uganda was
    fully dependent. With demand for electricity already outstripping supply, the further
    reduction in generation forced the government to buy emergency power from expensive
    thermal generators, with widespread impacts on the economy and environment. The extract
    below summarizes the situation:
    “In Uganda, reduced water resources caused by climate change have set off a damaging
    chain reaction. After the extreme and prolonged drought of 2004 and 2005, Lake Victoria’s
    water level dropped by one meter in 2006. This reflected not only evaporation and low
    rainfall but also the fact that so much water had been removed from the lake to fuel
    generation of electric power at the Owen Falls dam. With less water available for Owen
    Falls, Uganda was forced to ration power for both industrial and domestic use. This has
    had a negative impact on the entire economy. To meet electricity demand, the government
    started using expensive thermal power. Electricity tariffs per unit of domestic consumption
    nearly doubled from 216 shillings to 426 shillings ($0.13 to $0.25). Higher electricity
    prices have increased pressure on forest resources. Around 95 percent of Ugandan
    households use wood fuel to meet at least some of their energy needs, and exorbitant power
    tariffs only heightened the population’s dependence on tree and forest products for fuel.
    Even urban households that had tended to use electricity for cooking have reverted to wood
    fuel. Demand for the wood fuel has outstripped supply, and the process of the charcoal
    and wood fuel have [sic] rocketed. The heavy cutting of forest, coupled with the
    unsustainable slash-and-burn practices, has contributed to the degradation of land and
    soil, leading to poor yields on food crops and threatening Uganda’s food security”
    (McKinsey Global Institute 2011).

In the case of California, the ongoing drought over the past few years has put a severe strain on
the water availability and energy supply from hydropower facilities. The drought conditions not
only affect the state of California, but also neighboring states within the United States and Mexico
that share common water resources. The severity of the situation has brought attention to such
issues as allocation of rights to water use, water and energy pricing, and the need for intersectoral
polices and planning to improve efficiency in supply and consumption. Box 2 provides a glimpse
of these energy–water connectivities in the California context. 4



4
 Information drawn from http://www.energy.ca.gov/research/iaw/water.html,
http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/waterrights/water_issues/programs/drought/docs/040115_executive_order.pdf,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/at-hoover-dam-the-drought-is-stealing-clean-energy-along-with-fresh-
water/2015/04/26/8ce2740a-e93d-11e4-9767-6276fc9b0ada_story.html, and Gleick 2015.



                                                      17
Box 2: Energy and Water Interconnectivity Issues Come to the Fore in California

 The recent drought conditions in California brought the linkages between energy and water to the fore
 in the state. In January 2014, the governor of California declared a statewide emergency. As of
 September 2014, 58 percent of the state was classified as under the most intense drought category.
 The prolonged and severe drought conditions led to a significant decline in hydropower generation: on
 average, hydropower accounts for about 20 percent of the in-state generation during the first six months
 of the year; this fell to about 10 percent in the first half of 2014.




 According to a Pacific Institute report published in March 2015 (Gleick 2015), during the three years
 preceding October 2014, the reduction in hydropower generation resulted in an additional $1.4 billion
 in electricity bills and an 8 percent increase in metric tons of carbon dioxide-equivalent as a result of
 the compensating increase in fossil fuel (natural gas) production.
 While the drought is in part a natural weather shock, the severity of the impacts has focused attention
 on issues surrounding the sustainability of resource use and mitigation of extreme weather risks. The
 drought has spurred discussion about ways of improving the sustainability of water and energy use and
 the role of optimal pricing and improvement of efficiency in the water and energy sectors.
 Cross-sectoral planning and response are being undertaken through working groups, such as the
 interagency Drought Task Force, that comprise sector utilities, such as the California Energy
 Commission, Department of Water Resources, State Water Resources Control Board, and California
 Public Utilities Commission.
 The policy response to the drought has been in the form of a mandated 25 percent reduction in urban
 potable water use statewide, standards and rebates for water-efficient household appliances, grants for
 energy- and water-saving research, and monitoring and collection of data on the impact of water scarcity
 on electricity generation to allow decision makers to better evaluate the situation and devise solutions.




                                                      18
2.1     Establishing the Energy–Water Nexus Concept

This section examines the research that has developed the energy–water nexus concept and shows
how climate change significantly interacts with the nexus. It also shows how holistic decision
making about the use of these resources can increase efficiency, reduce trade-offs, build synergies,
and improve governance. This holistic approach to decision making has far-reaching global
implications for how decisions are made, particularly those regarding how to invest in energy and
water supply.
Research on the Water–Energy Nexus Frameworks and the Impact of Climate Change
The link between energy, water, and climate change has been studied for several decades. A study
by Gleick (1993)—a collaboration between the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) and the
Pacific Institute—discussed the possible effects of climate change on water resources and the use
of water for energy and food production. The World Bank (2004) analyzes the water–energy nexus
as the basis for improving regional cooperation in the Syr Darya Basin in Central Asia, and Koch
and Vögele (2009) present dynamic modeling of water demand, water availability, and power
plants’ strategies for adapting to global change.
The energy–water nexus sits within that of the wider water–energy–food (WEF) nexus, for which
the first presentation was made by the World Economic Forum in 2011 (WEF 2011b). This was
followed by work by SEI/Hoff (2011) for the 2011 Bonn Nexus Conference. The WEF nexus was
broadly accepted when it was presented at the Rio+20 Summit (UN Conference on Sustainable
Development, or Earth Summit) in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012.
 Table 1 lists what are widely considered to be the seminal contributions to the nexus literature,
although this list is intended as illustrative and is by no means exhaustive. Annex 1 presents the
SEI/Hoff (2011) and the World Economic Forum (2011a) nexus frameworks, while the climate,
land-use, energy, and water strategies (CLEWs) framework (IAEA 2009; Howells et al. 2013) and
its various applications to integrated modeling are discussed later in Chapter 3: Energy–Water–
Climate Nexus Decision Tools. The International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD)
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) frameworks’ focus on
landscape and food make them less relevant to this particular study, but they are included in Table
1 for completeness.
Table 1: Summary of the Key Water–Energy–Food Nexus Literature

 Organization                                                         Framework          First publication
 FAO, IAEA, IIASA, KTH, SEI, UNDESA, and UNIDO                           CLEWs                  2009
 World Economic Forum                                                    WEF                    2011
 SEI/Hoff                                                                WEF                    2011
 International Institute for Sustainable Development                     WEF                    2013
 FAO                                                                     WEF                    2014
Note: CLEWs = climate, land-use, energy, and water strategies; FAO = Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations; IAEA = International Atomic Energy Agency; IIASA = International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis; KTH = Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden; SEI = Stockholm Environment Institute; UNDESA = United

                                                       19
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs; UNIDO = United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
WEF = water–energy–food.

Considering an Energy–Water Nexus Framework
For electricity generation investment decisions, it is helpful to simplify the framework by focusing
on an energy–water nexus framework, rather than the broader WEF framework. The SEI/Hoff
(2011) WEF framework (see Annex 1) is highly relevant to this and can be adapted as shown in
Figure 2 below. The framework and definitions in Figure 2 illustrate the relationship between
energy supply security and water supply security and how this relationship is challenged by a series
of “global trends”—notably climate change, urbanization, and population growth—and can be
protected by “action fields” that serve as enabling factors or incentives—notably governance,
innovation, and finance.
Figure 2: An Energy–Water Nexus Framework




Source: World Bank (adapted from SEI/Hoff 2011).

                                            Figure 2 Definitions
 Water supply security: Access to safe drinking water and sanitation, and availability of and
 access to water for other human and ecosystem uses.
 Energy security: Access to clean, reliable, and affordable energy services for cooking and
 heating, lighting, communications, and productive uses and uninterrupted physical availability
 of energy at a price that is affordable while respecting environmental concerns.
 Source: SEI/Hoff 2011.

                                                      20
2.2   Key Implications of the Energy–Water Nexus for Electricity Generation
Investments
Given the focus of this paper to assist decision making, particularly regarding investment in
electricity generation and its related water infrastructure, this paper identifies a set of key
implications and fundamental challenges.
Knowledge of water resource availability is central to both energy and water investment decision
making.
The energy–water nexus framework depicted in Figure 2 puts water resources at the center, so that
water determines the current state of the system as represented by the framework, and is also the
key driver of future changes that are affected by human decision making. 5
Water resource availability is characterized by distinguishing between various types of water
resources and use. Water resources exist in various forms: blue water refers to the water available
as surface water and groundwater, whereas green water refers to water present in soil that may be
productively used for agriculture. In terms of the types of use, water may be withdrawn and may
or may not be returned to the original source (water withdrawal), or it may be consumed without
being returned to its source (water consumption). Both of these types of use can have differing and
significant impact on water resources and the energy–water nexus.
Water resource availability dictates both water supply and energy security: insufficient water
resources infer low water and energy security. This directly implies that energy supply decisions
need to take into account water resource availability.
Energy and water supply security is intertwined. This implies a need for coordinated decision
making that accounts for opportunities for synergy and fully internalizes the societal economic
costs of water.
As has been discussed, the interdependencies between water and energy can lead to a supply
shortage in one, when there is a supply shortage in the other. Both resources are critical to meeting
basic human needs, but are finitely available in a given location at a given point in time. This
implies that decision making in each sector must fully account for the resource availability of the
other and weigh the full societal economic costs associated with the resource use against its use
for other competing purposes—the concept of opportunity cost. Water, in particular, has a large
number of competing uses. A clear example is a multipurpose dam, which may need to trade-off
use of water for irrigation versus electricity generation. However, while there is conceptual clarity
regarding the trade-off with multiple uses, the implementation of the allocation decision is subject
to various quantifiable and nonquantifiable constraints. At the heart of the challenge is the
difficulty in estimating the true economic value of water to society from various uses.
Another challenge related to accounting for the full societal costs of resource use is the need for
joint decision making across sectors and, often, political boundaries. This challenge is relatively

5
 In the terminology for dynamic programing, a tool that is often used to optimize intertemporal allocations in such
dynamic systems, under this framework water is both a “state” variable, used to determine the state of the system,
and a “control” variable, the main choice variable used to determine future states of the system.

                                                         21
clear in the case of hydropower investments, where the very direct link between water resource
availability and electricity generation necessitates the joint optimization of water use and
electricity generation, along with possible cross-boundary water use issues and power trading.
Even when not considering hydropower, water supply systems form over large regions, most
clearly demonstrated by large river basins.
The management of rivers whose catchment areas extend into several countries requires diplomacy
as well as technical expertise. The classic example of a river basin under composite management
is the Rhine River, which rises in Switzerland, receives tributaries from France, Germany, and
Luxembourg, and flows through the Netherlands to the North Sea. The management body is the
River Rhine Commission, comprising representatives from all the riverine countries (Shaw 1988).
In these instances, broad decision making, in line with the natural geography of water resources,
is required. Energy security, when based on water supply, is thus also potentially a transboundary
issue.
The impact of climate change is to introduce a fundamental uncertainty regarding future water
and energy scenarios, thereby further exacerbating the challenges of optimal decision making
on the energy–water nexus.

Climate change has a significant impact on the energy–water nexus framework. Under certain
scenarios, climate change may increase the pressure on energy and water systems through greater
scarcity and variability in the resource availability. This may make the trade-offs between energy
and water supply more stark. Higher temperatures and changed rainfall patterns can reduce
available levels of water resources and can decrease hydropower outputs. Low-carbon electricity
generation technologies may require more water than conventional processes (for example,
concentrating solar power (CSP) is highly water intensive).
The water–energy–climate change interrelationship implies a need for joint, long-term planning
accounting for the possible impacts of climate change. The fundamental challenge to such a
decision-making process is how to account for the fundamental uncertainties regarding the future
interaction of key drivers of resource availability, the probability of various scenarios, and the
valuation of each outcome, along with its associated distribution among society. 6 These issues
have implications for how decision making is governed. Significant challenges for decision makers
include investing in climate change adaptation to improve the climate resilience of infrastructure,
and employing decision-making methodologies that accommodate the deep uncertainty that
climate change imposes on many infrastructure investment decisions (discussed in greater detail
below).
Good governance that facilitates cross-sectoral decision making at the local, national, basin,
and regional levels can facilitate nexus decision making.
Another important implication deriving from the nexus model is the issue of governance. Cross-
sectoral linkages, water resources that span political boundaries, and the uneven spatial distribution

6
 This, roughly, is the concept of “deep uncertainty” that is used to characterize the limited knowledge and lack of
consensus among experts on the relative likelihood of the occurrence of future climate change scenarios and
associated impacts.

                                                         22
of resources and demand for them (implying opportunities to improve overall well-being through
trade) mean that, to be optimized, water and energy decision making will also need to be cross-
sectoral, and often transboundary or regional. There is often some transboundary coordination for
river basins, but in many cases this could be more formalized and holistic—and associated energy-
related coordination is in most cases completely lacking.
This issue of governance represents a considerable challenge. Decision makers can promote
optimum decision making through enabling factors and incentives, by using the tools illustrated in
the nexus framework of innovation and finance. Conversely, they have the power to prevent
optimal decision making through poor governance—for example, through uneven bargaining
power between sectors; a lack of communication within and between sectors during key decision
periods; and a preference for sectors to adhere to a silo mentality, making decisions in isolation
from other sectors. Integrated modeling tools are being developed to assist cross-sectoral decision
making (see Chapter 3), but cross-sectoral planning also needs to be in evidence in national and
regional plans and strategies (discussed in the context of Southern Africa in Chapters 4 and 5).
Achieving decision making at the transboundary or regional level is likely to be region specific
(guided by existing institutional frameworks) and is discussed in the context of Southern Africa in
Chapter 5.
2.3    Challenges of Applying the Energy–Water Nexus Framework to Investment
Decisions
The discussion in the previous sub-section highlighted a number of key challenges that face
decision makers with respect to electricity generation investment decisions. This is not an
exhaustive list, but an indicator of some of the main issues that are specific to the water-energy-
climate nexus and so may be overlooked if a nexus approach is not employed. These include cross-
sectoral coordination from the outset of the planning process to identify potential investment
synergies to be identified; ensuring that the economic value of water is included in the investment
appraisal; and ensuring investment options are climate resilient which may imply adopting a
different approach to the investment appraisal process.
From a policy perspective, the energy–water nexus framework does force decision makers to
consider the significant trade-offs in the degree and allocation of resource use, identify co-benefits
or synergies across water and energy investments, and account for the impacts of climate change.
In doing so, they cannot ignore important spatial and intertemporal relationships in resource
availability, and the associated costs and benefits. Moving from an optimization of investment
decisions that is fixed in time, to an intertemporal dynamic optimization requires a greater
understanding of costs and benefits and how they will evolve over time based on both exogenous
and endogenous conditions.
Harnessing Energy–Water Synergies, or Co-benefits

The energy–water nexus presents significant opportunities for investment to harness synergies, or
co-benefits. In this context, co-benefits are the result of decision making that jointly considers the
positive feedback between energy and water supply investments and produces more valuable
outcomes than a situation where the two investments are made independent of each other. As

                                                 23
Benson, Gain, and Rouillard (2015) note, all else being equal, not taking into consideration the co-
benefits would lead to underinvestment in resource development:
“Although definitions vary, one critical normative condition for effective nexus approaches is held
to be identifying cross-sectoral, multi-scale policy interdependencies that reduce mismatches in
policy making, increase synergies and hence promote resource security.”
Therefore, policy making should seek to identify potential synergies and provide the enabling
conditions for investments that maximize aggregate net benefits across interlinked sectors.
Some opportunities exploit the synergies between the energy and water sectors to deliver joint
benefits. They either deliver co-benefits from investments in a particular sector (for example, water
efficiency investments reducing associated power demand) or help spread capital costs over the
joint production of energy and water products (for example, a coastal thermal power plant
providing excess heat for seawater desalination). The following synergy solutions are suggested
in the literature (see references for more detail on any particular solution):
   •   Multiuse reservoirs. Hydropower provides a stable power source, while the reservoir can
       also provide a secure supply of drinking water and irrigation water. The recent EdF/WWC
       research and the “SHARE” concept provide a framework that aims to address related
       issues, including help to avoid or minimize tensions among users, governance issues for
       all stages, and financial and economic models to develop and operate multipurpose
       reservoirs (EdF/WWC 2015)).
   •   Combined heat and power (CHP) production at sewage treatment plants. Anaerobic
       digesters produce methane biogas and fertilizer (which can be sold) from sewerage sludge.
       Further investment in a CHP plant converts the biogas to heat, (which is used by the water
       treatment plant) and electricity (which can be sold) (Rodriguez et al. 2013).
   •   Co-location of thermal power generation and desalination plants. Desalination is a
       potential solution to water scarcity in coastal areas, but is not always viable as a standalone
       investment, given the high electricity intensity of the process. Co-location with thermal
       power generation offers a way of reducing both desalination operating costs and the water
       consumption of thermal power generation. Thermal electricity generation creates waste
       heat in the form of steam. Rather than using additional freshwater to cool the steam, co-
       location with a desalination plant can recycle the steam to reduce the energy required for
       desalination. In this case, energy generation uses less freshwater for cooling, and water
       desalination uses less electricity. The solution becomes less efficient if the demand for
       power in the region is significantly different from the demand for water (this may be the
       case if there is seasonal variation in energy demand (Rodriguez et al. 2013)). Co-locating
       (energy-intensive) desalination plants with (water-intensive) CSP plants takes advantage
       of the fact that areas suffering from water shortages tend to have access to abundant solar
       energy. Co-location produces significant synergy benefits by reducing the otherwise
       significant transmission costs of the water and electricity required by both processes
       (World Bank 2012).
   •   Impact of electricity supply reliability on water supply quality. Urban water
       contamination from lack of pressure in water pipes (or energy-intensive mitigation

                                                 24
       measures, such as private booster pumps, heating up the water, or bringing water in from
       elsewhere) can be avoided through investments in more reliable energy supply (Jägerskog
       et al. 2014).
   •   Household heating water efficiency measures. For example, using water-saving
       showerheads to reduce water consumption will also reduce associated energy consumption
       (Prasad 2012).
The nexus also implies that where there are spatial disparities in relation to water scarcity, there
may be economic gains from both producing hydropower where competition for water resources
is lowest, and trading this power, rather than physically transporting water (avoiding significant
capital costs and operational costs (including power)), to the mutual benefit of both parties
(Entholzner and Reeve 2016). This “invisible synergy” (Allan 2006) is discussed in relation to
Southern Africa in section 5.6.
Valuing Water in Energy Investment Decisions

The optimal allocation of any finite resource should be based on the evaluation of the full set of
societal benefits and costs accrued by alternative investments. For investments in the water sector,
the cost of energy inputs can be established through market prices and can thus be easier to
internalize to the investment decision (although subsidies, which lower the market price, will
distort this—with negative consequences, such as overinvestment in irrigation). As a result, the
economic viability of water investments is easier to assess (and for this reason, potential energy-
intensive water supply projects, such as desalination, or large-scale water transfer schemes are
often considered unviable). Valuing water inputs for energy investment decisions is significantly
more complex, in terms of both knowing how much water will be required by an investment and
knowing what value to place on it and its competing uses.
Estimating water consumption and withdrawal volumes for energy investment decisions

Many energy generation technologies consume or withdraw significant volumes of water.
Knowing how much water will be withdrawn or consumed is relatively well documented at a
global level (for example, Macknick et al. 2011; Mekonnen, Gerbens-Leenes, and Hoekstra 2015).
Figure 3 and Figure 4 illustrate the variation in electricity generation technology withdrawal (water
use that involves a temporary diversion of water from groundwater) and the water consumption
rates (water use that involves a “loss” of water from the immediate system from evaporation,
transpiration, or incorporation into products or crops). The figures also illustrate the influence that
the choice of cooling technology has over any given generation technology’s water consumption
and withdrawal volumes. For example, recirculating cooling consumes the most water, and once-
through cooling systems withdraw the least water. Across cooling technologies, nuclear power
generation is generally the most water-intensive solution, and gas-fired generation is the least
intensive. Generation technologies that do not require cooling (such as photovoltaic and wind
power) are the least water-intensive technologies overall.




                                                  25
Figure 3: Variation in Operational Water Consumption for Different Energy Generation Technologies




Source: Macknick et al. 2011.

Note: Boxes represent the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th percentile. Whiskers present the minimum and
maximum. CCS = carbon capture and storage; CSP = concentrating solar power; IGCC = integrated gasification
combined cycle; MWh = megawatt-hour; PV = solar photovoltaics.




                                                      26
Figure 4: Different Water Withdrawal Needs of Energy-Generation Cooling Technologies




Source: Macknick et al. 2011.

Note: Boxes represent the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th percentile. Whiskers present the minimum and
maximum. CCS = carbon capture and storage; IGCC = integrated gasification combined cycle; MWh = megawatt-
hour.

Water withdrawal and consumption must be taken into account by investment decisions because
of the social costs they impose. Because water that is withdrawn for cooling purposes will be
returned at a higher temperature, the cost of returning it to its original state must be taken into
account by investment decisions. Similarly, because hydropower generation alters downstream
flow rates and silting patterns, these costs are also relevant to investment decisions (IEA 2012).
A key problem with estimating the water intensity of energy technologies relates to water’s
sensitivity to the local climate and time of year (IEA and World Bank 2015). Indeed, water
withdrawal and consumption volumes can vary by as much as 20 percent (Macknick et al. 2011).
Some information is available at the national level, but the data rely on the technology being
operational in that country and on reliable data-gathering practices. For example, in their
estimation of the opportunity cost of water for two of South Africa’s thermal plants, Inglesi-Lotz
and Blignaut (2012) were able to use operational data for the thermal plants but had to rely on
global estimates (such as those provided by Macknick et al. 2011) for alternative generation
technologies, such as CSP.


                                                      27
Therefore, local information and data gathering on energy technology water intensity are
important. Once these withdrawal and consumption volumes are known for the project, they need
to be turned into an opportunity cost, taking into account spatial and intertemporal impacts.
Valuation of water consumption and withdrawal

How to value water—and optimally allocate it—is a major global issue. In the case of most goods,
markets may be well suited to determine scarcity value, and thus market prices act as an optimal
allocation mechanism. This is not the case for allocation of water for different uses, because market
prices may be inadequate in reflecting the societal value of water consumption for various
purposes, including drinking water. Potable water is a basic human necessity, and water is an input
into many processes that produce goods that are fundamental to human well-being and survival,
such as drinking water and food. Further, many people consider access to water a basic human
right, and are thus a fundamental determinant in its allocation. In addition, the public good
characteristics of many water resources (such as groundwater aquifers) and uses (such as water
sanitation) imply that prices reflecting private costs and benefits will not lead to an optimal
allocation of resources.
Public good characteristics are defined either by nonrival or nonexcludable consumption, or by
both (pure public good). Nonrival consumption implies that consumption by one user does not
tangibly reduce the availability for another user, thus implying the marginal cost of supplying an
additional user is zero. Nonexcludable implies that it is impossible (or very costly) to exclude users
from consumption, which implies the ability to free ride without payment. The latter, in particular,
implies that market-based allocation of the resource will not be optimal, and may lead to
underprovision or overexploitation of the resource. Figure 5 shows the dual properties of water as
a private good and a public good, and implies that markets alone will not be able to determine the
price that reflects water’s true economic cost. Water’s nonexcludability in some instances (such as
access to rivers and aquifers) also makes policing any water-pricing scheme challenging.
Figure 5: Defining the Properties of Water




Source: Global Water Forum 2015.


                                                 28
In the absence of a market price for water as a basis to determine its economic value, energy
planners must use alternative methods to estimate the full value and economic cost of water. One
method is to estimate the opportunity cost. The full marginal economic cost of a good is
represented by its opportunity cost or the lost opportunity to derive net benefit from the highest-
value alternative use. The opportunity cost can be calculated as the sum of the marginal direct,
external, and user costs (Turner et al. 2004). Figure 6 defines each of these cost categories.
Figure 6: Defining the Marginal Opportunity Cost of Water




Source: Adapted from Turner et al. 2004.


Ideally, energy investment decisions will take on board all three categories of water costs. In
practice, this is a significant task. The most readily achievable method is to include marginal direct
costs in the investment equation, because they are usually incurred within the boundary of the
project, while external costs (primarily spatial in nature) and user costs (primarily intertemporal in
nature) are usually unknown to decision makers. In practical terms, this could mean estimating
and including the full project infrastructure costs related to supplying water to an energy
investment (for example, the project costs of a dam construction project); the costs associated with
water delivery (for example, the capital, operational and maintenance costs of water
transportation); and/or the costs associated with treating water to be used for power generation.
The Thirsty Energy integrated modeling project for South Africa (described in section 3.1)
provides a practical example of how marginal direct costs have been incorporated into energy
decision making.
External and user costs may also be important, and their omission could result in significant
unintended negative consequences. These costs are particularly relevant to hydropower

                                                     29
investments, which have the potential to impose costs on downstream farmers as the result of
restricted river flows and change downstream silting patterns (see Sousa Júnior and Reid (2010)
for an illustration of how taking on board social costs altered the economic viability of Amazon
hydropower development). But these costs are also relevant to thermal power investments, which
need to take on board the costs of returning withdrawn water back to its original state. The
necessity of including social costs in power sector economic appraisal is widely accepted, but its
implementation is not straightforward.
For hydropower and other renewable power projects, the World Bank published an overarching
set of guidelines for the economic analysis of renewable energy power sector projects at the end
of 2015 (World Bank 2015f). In addition, the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBSCD 2013) illustrates the wide range of approaches that have been used to
incorporate water value into investment decisions, including qualitative and quantitative
assessments based on national water tariffs (see also WBSCD 2012, which presents Électricité de
France’s (EdF) recent water and energy nexus research). The Water for Energy Framework
(W4EF) Action Group, a joint initiative between EdF, the World Energy Council (WEC) and the
World Water Council (WWC) has a mandate to “develop a conceptual framework offering energy
actors a common terminology and calculation framework with which to evaluate and communicate
in a simple, understandable and numerical way, at local and corporate level, on how energy sites
interact with their local water environment…(which) should be usable anywhere in the world for
any energy production process from source to service” (EdF/WEC/WWC 2016). The initiative
recently published its first phase report evaluating the local interactions between energy sites and
water (ibid.). The World Bank’s (2015b) current Thirsty Energy Initiative to provide an integrated
modeling tool for energy planning in South Africa reflects external (social) costs in the decision-
making framework by including waste-discharge mitigation charges (further discussed in section
3.1).
Responding to Climate Change

It is widely agreed that climate change will affect the energy–water nexus, by altering the amount
of available freshwater resources and by increasing demand both for electricity and for low-carbon,
yet water-intensive electricity generation solutions. All of these climate change nexus impacts
must be considered in the context of extreme uncertainty.
As a result, planners must identify risks and vulnerabilities, attempt to quantify them, and learn
the likelihoods of their occurrence where possible. In an ideal world, with full information on all
outcomes, it would be possible to make fully informed decisions by balancing risks with net
benefits. However, drivers and impacts of climate are extremely complex and nearly impossible
to predict with any amount of certainty. Regardless, planners must start by identifying
vulnerabilities and using the best available information to make their decisions.
Figure 7 illustrates the different ways climate change interacts with the energy–water supply and
demand nexus elements.




                                                30
Figure 7: The impact of Climate Change on the Energy–Water Nexus




Source: World Bank using ODI, ECDPM, and GDI/DIE 2012; Bates et al. 2008; IEA-ETSAP and IRENA 2012; IEA 2012.

The impact of climate change on water resource demand
Climate change—in particular, the predicted increases in global temperatures—will increase the
demand for water from a variety of sources, including increased evaporative demand from crops
(FAO 2011). Water withdrawn by Africa’s agriculture sector represents more than 80 percent of
total annual global freshwater withdrawals, so even small increases in water demand from this
sector will have a significant impact on overall freshwater availability (FAO 2015).
Policy making for climate change favors the external costs of carbon emissions being factored into
investment decisions. Thus, such decisions may favor clean energy generation solutions, such as
CSP, solar photovoltaics (PV), or biofuels. Certain technologies, such as CSP, are water intensive
(Figure 3 and Figure 4), so as their costs reduce over time and their take-up will reduce carbon
costs, but their water opportunity costs may increase. IEA (2012), WEF (2011b), Macknick et al.
(2011), and World Bank (2015b) provide further detail on these impacts.
The impact of climate change on water resource supply
Climate change is generally predicted to increase water scarcity through higher evaporation rates
and more variable rainfall patterns (though effects in a particular region will vary by region). As a
result, groundwater reserves will come under increasing pressure; freshwater reservoirs will suffer
from changed recharge patterns and increased irrigation demand; and aquifers, which store around
30 percent of the world’s groundwater, will become increasingly important as a buffer against

                                                     31
climate change-led impacts, such as variable rainfall patterns. These resources will also come
under pressure from increased irrigation demands, and their water quality may decline as a result
of greater groundwater evaporation and rising sea levels that push seawater inland (making the
water that drains into the aquifers more saline). Climate-led initiatives, such as using solar-
powered pumps, while effective as a measure to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions associated with pumping water, need to be carefully considered, as their use in some
water-stressed locations may have the undesirable effect of depleting scarce freshwater reserves
being held in aquifers (FAO 2011; World Bank 2016a).
The impact of climate change on energy demand
Water shortages from reduced rainfall and river flows may lead to greater use of electricity for
water transportation over longer distances, intensive desalination techniques to produce
freshwater, and increased irrigation pumping (ODI, ECDPM, and GDI/DIE 2012; Bates et al.
2008; IEA-ETSAP and IRENA 2012). In addition, hotter climate and extreme temperatures will
increase the demand for energy for cooling and heating (ODI, ECDPM, and GDI/DIE 2012; Bates
et al. 2008).

The impact of climate change on energy supply
An unpredictable climate means unpredictable output levels for many energy generation
technologies. Unpredictable changes in wind patterns will alter the efficiency of wind turbine
electricity generation. Similarly, unpredictable changes in precipitation patterns will alter the
efficiency of hydropower generation and biomass crop growing (Bates et al. 2008; ODI, ECDPM,
and GDI/DIE 2012). These outcomes will affect investment decisions, as investors faced with
higher uncertainty will demand demonstration of a higher expected return.
In such high-temperature regions as Southern Africa, any further temperature increases will reduce
the efficiency of many generating technologies, including thermal power generation and solar
cells, and will cause evaporative losses from hydropower reservoirs (Bates et al. 2008; ODI,
ECDPM, and GDI/DIE 2012; ESMAP 2011; Linnerud, Mideksa, and Eskeland 2011).
Furthermore, climate change may increase the complexity of designing approaches for improving
climate resilience, resulting in higher capital costs. It may also render solutions to water scarcity
(such as desalination technologies) counterproductive, as they have a significant environmental
impact in terms of both brine production and GHG emissions (World Bank 2016a).
Implications for decision makers

The significance of climate change for the nexus sets out a number of implications and challenges
for decision makers, including the need to:
    •   Invest in climate change adaptation; and
    •   Employ decision-making methodologies that accommodate the deep uncertainty brought
        about by climate change.
Invest in climate change adaptation

                                                 32
Climate resilience is an increasingly important aspect of water and energy decision making. The
co-dependence of the water and energy sectors amplifies the need to ensure that both water and
energy sectors invest to ensure they minimize their vulnerability to climate-induced changes,
including extreme weather events. There is evidence that taking action can be economically
beneficial. Economics of Climate Adaptation (ECA) examined a series of case studies from a
selection of global climate-sensitive regions, to understand the overall costs and benefits of
responding to climate change risks (ECA 2009). The analysis concluded that 40–68 percent of the
expected losses under severe climate change scenarios to 2030 could be avoided through adaptive
measures where the economic benefits outweigh the costs.
For the energy sector, climate change adaptation has received considerable attention only recently,
with the mainstay of research being focused on climate change mitigation for the sector (World
Bank 2016a). However, investment in adaptation can avoid significant climate-related costs, such
as decreased generation efficiency, increased maintenance costs, and reduced lifespans.
Identifying these opportunities during the investment planning process is important, especially
where investment lifespans can be significant (generation infrastructure has a typical lifespan of
15–40 years, and transmission infrastructure lifespans can extend to 40–75 years).
The Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP 2011) describes two ways the
energy sector can adapt to climate change:
   •  Technological adaptation—through investments that protect infrastructure from extreme
      weather events; and
    • Behavioral adaptation—for example, by changing the location of an investment to
      minimize exposure to extreme weather events, or improving meteorological forecasting
      (together with emergency strategies), or adapting operation and maintenance of
      infrastructure.
Supply-side examples of these measures include diversifying energy sources, shifting production
to safer areas (for example, siting renewable energy sources locally in safe locations and thus
replacing large centralized energy supply infrastructure), and adapting hydropower operations to
accommodate changed river flow rates. Demand-side measures could include actions to reduce
energy demand (such as coordinating with the water sector, changing thermal generation cooling
technologies, and using energy storage measures), and adapt the operation or maintenance of
infrastructure (such as adapting hydropower operations to changed river flow rates). ESMAP’s
(2011) summary of potential technological and behavioral adaptation measures is shown in Figure
8.




                                                33
Figure 8: Examples of Climate Change Adaptation Measures for the Energy Sector




Source: ESMAP 2011 (adapted from Williamson et al. 2009).

                                                     34
Hydropower investments will be particularly vulnerable where climate change impacts reduce
rainfall or make it more unpredictable. For example, output from the Kariba Dam has been reduced
by more than 50 percent as a result of climate change (see Box 3 in section 4.5), evidencing the
need to adopt a climate-resilient approach to hydropower investment. Increasing reservoir storage
is seen as one solution to climate-led water shortages (FAO 2008, table 5). A coordinated cross-
sectoral response may result in the construction of multipurpose dams, which harnesses important
synergies by spreading the overall investment cost of the dam construction over the dual benefits
of increased water storage and increased (hydro) electricity generation.
Employ decision-making methodologies that accommodate deep uncertainty
Despite general climate change trends being known, there is deep uncertainty concerning the
magnitude and timing of their impacts. Lempert, Popper, and Bankes (2003) define “deep
uncertainty” as situations where decision makers do not know of or cannot agree on one or more
of the following: the models that relate the key forces that shape the future; the probability
distributions of key parameters and variables in these models; and the values of alternative
outcomes. As a result, decision makers need to adapt their decision-making methodologies,
moving away from least-cost optimization models to ones that prioritize solutions that are robust
to a range of potential climate change-led outcomes.
The recent High and Dry World Bank (2016a) publication describes a number of potential
“decision making under uncertainty” techniques, including using a robust decision-making
process, which explores a project’s vulnerabilities and sensitivities to a range of outcomes;
applying a decision-tree approach, which uses judgments and sensitivities to guide the assessment
of a proposed project and its alternatives through a series of decision nodes; selecting measures
that yield a positive benefit, regardless of what happens climate-wise in the future (such as
reducing water pipe leaks); and employing strategies that can be flexed in response to new
information. See also World Bank (2010c) which develops new methodologies and estimates for
climate change adaptation costs, both globally and for seven case study countries: Bangladesh,
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Ghana, Mozambique, Samoa, and Vietnam.
For the water sector, the decision-tree approach was developed by the World Bank’s Water Global
Practice (Ray and Brown 2015; World Bank 2016b). This approach is particularly relevant to high-
value hydropower investment assessments when a wide range of climate risks must be considered.
It sets out a pragmatic four-stage process for assessing the risks of water resource projects that can
serve as a decision-support framework and provides a way of taking climate change into account
in investment decisions without needing to predict the future. The decision tree is different from
other project-level assessments in focusing first on a project’s climate change vulnerabilities,
where it guides project leaders through the decision-making process to understand the strengths
and limitations of projects under a wide range of conditions and helps identify adaptation strategies
for long-term success. The approach should be conducted at both project and basin scales to
provide answers at the individual investment level and to assess potential investment alternatives
- see for example its application to assess the proposed Upper Arun Hydropower Project in eastern
Nepal and at the basin level to assess the overall hydropower portfolio in the Koshi basin (World
Bank 2015j).

                                                 35
For the energy sector, ESMAP (2010) has designed the Hands-on Energy Adaptation Toolkit
(HEAT) to guide energy sector decision makers through an assessment of climate vulnerabilities
and adaptation options. Piloted in Albania and Uzbekistan to help these countries develop climate-
resilient policies and projects, the toolkit can identify key direct risks to energy supply and demand,
and options for adaptation to establish where to focus subsequent in-depth analyses. HEAT also
identifies additional research needed to better understand the implications of extreme climatic
events for the energy sector, as well as potential indirect impacts, such as possible adaptation
actions in the agriculture sector that may affect energy supply.
A minimum-regret, worst-outcome avoidance approach is appropriate in situations where decision
makers do not have a way of assessing the likelihood of different outcomes. This approach attempts
to balance the risk of inaction with the risk of misguided action, taking into account different
possible preferences of decision makers and attitudes toward risks. Cervigni et al. (2015) apply
this approach to the issue of climate change and hydropower expansion plans for Africa’s main
river basins (Volta, Niger, Nile, Zambezi, Senegal, and Congo). The conceptual framework used
in this analysis consisted of two broad stages:
    •   Impact analysis: Assuming no adaptation, what is the range of impacts that will be caused
        by various climate futures? Under a drier climate, this would include lower hydropower
        output levels, and so costs through lower generation revenues. Under a wetter climate, it
        would include lower the possibility of generating more hydropower, and thus the potential
        for the opportunity cost of revenues foregone by not installing the extra hydropower
        capacity.
    •   Adaptation analysis: What is the cost of adapting investments to minimize these impacts
        across as many climate futures as possible (including the risk of overdimensioning projects
        and incurring excess capital costs and underdimensioning projects and incurring the
        opportunity cost of lost revenues)?
Cervigni et al. (2015) present a detailed discussion of the methodology and results, and Box 5 in
section 4.5 summarizes the results for the Zambezi basin.




                                                  36
                   Chapter 3: Energy–Water–Climate Nexus Decision Tools

Decision tools that quantify integrated energy and water systems and climate change impacts are
vital, as they equip national energy and water planners with hard evidence on the available
synergies and trade-offs that are implicit to their investment decisions. To be practical, these tools
need a high degree of temporal and spatial definition and need to be adapted to countries’ capacity
limitations for data collection and processing (Cohen et al. 2014).
The concept of developing a systems analysis approach to analyze the interactions between the
water and energy sectors is not new. The seminal Limits to Growth by Meadows et al. (1972)
provided valuable insights to policy analysis and the WELMM (water, energy, land, materials, and
manpower) concept (Grenon and Lapillonne 1976), which linked these systems to analyze energy
service provision. However, this approach was not developed into a practical software application
that could be used by national analysts.
Despite the early advances, practical integrated energy–water–climate planning tools are not
generally available to today’s policy makers. These tools tend to focus on just one resource, have
oversimplified spatial representations, and tend not to be short-term applied policy decision-
support models and instead analyze impractically long-term scenarios (Miralles-Wilhelm 2016).
As a result, the standard approach to modeling energy and water demand systems reflects the
fragmented sectoral approach that is generally applied to water and energy decision making
(Bazilian et al. 2011). For example, while climate change impacts are often incorporated into water
models, few climate studies integrate hydrologic phenomena with electricity sector models (Cohen
et al. 2014), and studies analyzing the energy–water nexus tend to use decoupled electricity and
water models where water impacts are analyzed off the back of the electricity model results (for
example, Chandel, Pratson, and Jackson 2011).
For developed countries, recent work by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory has been
addressing this gap for energy planning in the United States, by expanding its Regional Energy
Deployment System model to include the cooling-water demands of thermal power plants and
water availability, and integrating the impacts of climate change on water availability (Cohen et
al. 2014). However, there is a need to develop capacity in this area to provide practical integrated
modeling tools that can help bring the nexus agenda into international development investment
decisions (Miralles-Wilhelm 2016).

3.1    Current Integrated Modeling Tools for Developing Countries

While several tools have been developed to model specific issues related to the energy–water nexus
in developing countries, both the modeling and the framework have been developed by the authors
and are specific to the particular case study. As a result, opportunities for methodological transfer
can be limited.
Several accessible planning tools are available to policy makers, including the MESSAGE,
MARKAL (Market Allocation), and LEAP models for energy system analysis and the WEAP,



                                                 37
REsSIM, 7 MIKE HYDRO Basin, 8 SWAT,9 and PODIUM/PODIUMSim 10 models for water (and
PODIUM/PODIUMSim for food and SWAT for land) systems analysis. The choice of modeling
tool, particularly for water resources, is somewhat complicated by the lack of an emerging
standard, and there are probably more than a thousand such tools. A common way of classifying
water resource models is by reference to their spatial scale and the amount of physical detail
required to run the model (see Figure 9 for an illustration of this for some of the models mentioned
above). These characteristics in turn determine, for example, the model’s user friendliness,
accuracy, required expertise, and data needs (see Droogers and Immerzeel 2006 for further
discussion on water resource modeling tools).
Figure 9: Character of Water Resource Modeling Tools




Source: Droogers and Immerzeel 2006.

Work is now underway to develop some of these tools into general, accessible, integrated energy–
water tools, including the WEAP-LEAP and MARKAL-Water models, briefly described below.
See Annex 3 of Rodriguez et al. 2013 for a more in-depth treatment of these and other models, as
well as a review of energy modeling tools.



7
  REsSIM was developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Institute for Water Resources, Hydrologic
Engineering Center. It is used to model reservoir operations at one or more reservoirs for a variety of operational
goals and constraints. See http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/hec-ressim/ for more details.
8
  MIKE HYDRO Basin was developed by the DHI group. It is a multipurpose, map-based, decision-support tool for
integrated water resource analysis, planning, and management of river basins. The tool is designed for analyzing
water-sharing issues at international, national, and local river basin scales. See
https://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-hydro-basin for further details.
9
  SWAT—the Soil and Water Assessment Tool—was developed by the Texas Water Resources Institute. See
http://swat.tamu.edu/documentation/ for further details.
10
   PODIUM/PODIUMSim was developed by the International Water Management Institute to develop scenarios of
water and food supply at river basin, sub national and national level. See
http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/resources/models-and-software/podiumsim/ for further details.

                                                        38
Developed by SEI, the WEAP (Water Evaluation and Planning) system and LEAP (Long-range
Energy Alternatives Planning) system are intended as policy planning tools and can be adapted to
allow policy makers operating in a capacity-constrained environment to explore the impact of
changing policy, investment costs, and demand levels through an (unlimited) set of scenarios. Both
of these widely used tools can also be used to model the impacts of climate change on energy and
water planning by inputting the results of climate change forecasts. For example, the WEAP
system can predict impacts on river basins and national supply by inputting climate change
forecasts (see, for example, the World Bank’s (2015c) work in Lesotho and Box 4 later in this
report). Similarly, the LEAP system can track GHG emissions and be used to analyze climate
change mitigation policies (see, for example, the Climate & Clean Air Coalition’s Supporting
National Planning initiative, which applies LEAP to the issue of short-lived climate pollutants). 11
WEAP and LEAP can be linked together to provide a consideration of the nexus trade-offs (SEI
2012) (see the discussion below on modeling applications of the CLEWs framework).
A MARKAL-Water tool is also being developed to produce a user-friendly integrated decision-
support tool. This has so far been developed by the Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) as a
pilot study to demonstrate the viability of integrated resource modeling for New York City and
has yet to be developed into a general-use model. The TIMES/MARKAL-SATIM was the basis
for the Thirsty Energy energy–water integrated model that is currently being developed for South
Africa (see discussion below).
Applications of Integrated Modeling Tools to the Energy–Water Nexus

Collaborative work by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), SEI, FAO, International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA), United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA), and BNL has
produced the CLEWs framework. CLEWs is an example of a standard nexus framework that can
be adapted to quantitatively evaluate policy decision trade-offs; policy assessments (enabling
policies that address multiple objectives to be analyzed); policy harmonization and integration (by
analyzing policy conflicts, such as electricity use and aquifer depletion); technology comparisons;
and scenario development (enabling identification and analysis of future development
opportunities and their implications) (Bazilian et al. 2011). Unlike the SEI/Hoff (2011) and World
Energy Forum (WEF 2011b) frameworks presented above in section 2.1, CLEWs focuses on both
identifying and quantifying the interactions between the nexus dimensions. This quantification can
be performed by soft-linking sector- or resource-modeling tools. Any resource- or sector-modeling
tool can be used to perform this quantification, provided they can be interlinked.
To date, significant applications of the CLEWS framework (which incorporate land resources in
the analysis, and so represent a wider nexus analysis) include an application of the CLEWs




11
  Led by SEI, the Institute for Governance and Sustainable Development, the International Union of Air Pollution
Prevention and Environmental Protection Associations, Mexico, and the Kingdom of Morocco
(http://www.ccacoalition.org/fr/initiatives/snap).

                                                      39
framework at a national level to energy policy in Mauritius, and also the application of the the
framework at a global scale to support the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 12
An alternative approach to developing an integrated modeling tool is being undertaken by the
World Bank’s Thirsty Energy Initiative. In this case, South Africa’s public domain energy
model—the TIMES/MARKAL-SATIM tool—is being developed to produce an integrated
energy–water–climate change modeling tool for South Africa (World Bank 2015b). This tool is
also presented below.
Also relevant to the discussion of integrated modeling, but not discussed below, is IISD’s ANEMI
model (Simonović 2012), which aims to operationalize the broader climate–land–energy–water
nexus framework (incorporating the biosphere–climate system—climate, carbon cycle, land use,
population, surface water flow, water use, water quality, and the economy). This model requires
more than 600 state variables (NERC 2012), making it generally unsuitable for policy makers in
countries with data limitations.
Applying the CLEWs framework to energy policy in Mauritius

The CLEWs framework was developed for Mauritius by integrating the LEAP (energy), 13 WEAP
(water), 14 agroecological zoning (AEZ—land), and general circulation model (GCM—climate)
models to produce results on GHG emissions and energy, water, and coal balances (Figure 10).




12
   For further applications of the CLEWs framework, see also Hermann et al. (2012), who apply the framework to
understand agricultural intensification and bioenergy production in Burkina Faso.
13
   The long-range energy alternatives planning system is maintained and supported by SEI. No charge is made for its
use by not-for-profit, academic, and governmental organizations based in developing countries.
14
   The water evaluation and planning system is maintained and supported by SEI. No charge is made for its use by
not-for-profit, academic, and governmental organizations based in developing countries.

                                                        40
Figure 10: The CLEWS Framework Is Founded upon the LEAP, WEAP, AEZ, and GCM Models




Source: Welsch et al. 2014.

A case study approach was used to develop the model, looking at the potential impacts of
substituting imported gasoline with domestic ethanol produced from sugarcane for the island of
Mauritius. The modeling parameters and data inputs were developed by analyzing the key climate,
land, energy, and water system interactions for ethanol production (Figure 11).




                                                 41
Figure 11: Simplified CLEWS Representation of Ethanol Production




Source: IAEA 2009.




                                                                   42
Results and next steps
The outcomes of this modeling exercise go beyond simply demonstrating the benefits of
developing such a policy (under various assumptions) to substitute imported gasoline with
domestic ethanol. Not only does this illustrate the advantages of an integrated systems approach
to identify benefits and costs that could not be identified through isolated single resource
analysis, but it also demonstrates a CLEWs resource assessment approach through the linking
of existing single-resource modeling tools.

Looking forward, practical challenges concern adapting the modeling to data type and
availability and the time frames imposed by policy decisions (which may be considerably
shorter than the time required in practice to develop the tool and carry out the necessary checks
on its results) (Howells et al. 2013).

A Global CLEWs model

The global CLEWs model was developed from the CLEWs framework by KTH in cooperation
with the UN’s Division for Sustainable Development to inform Rio+20 discussions
(KTH/UNDESA 2016). The model is now being developed into a tool to inform policy makers
on the linkages (synergies and trade-offs) between climate, land, materials, energy, and water,
and is intended to help make progress toward the UN’s SDGs. The current version enables
policy makers to explore the impact of imposing fossil fuel limits or a carbon tax on water
consumption and materials and energy generation investment on a global scale.
Figure 12 illustrates how the model is structured. It depicts the extraction, use, and
transformation of primary energy into secondary energy carriers and resources and the use of
primary and secondary energy to produce food, materials, and water services. The figure also
incorporates the emissions that are produced from the use of carbon fuels by the energy, land,
and food sectors and water use.
Figure 12: The KTH/UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs Global CLEWS Model




Source: KTH/UNDESA 2016.

Going forward, the model is being developed to enable further policies to be analyzed that are
linked to achieving the SDGs.

                                                 43
SATIM-W model (World Bank Thirsty Energy Initiative)

Current research by the World Bank (2015b) through its Thirsty Energy Initiative is addressing
the need to develop an integrated model for South Africa, but is using an approach different
from the CLEWs approach.
In this case, a pragmatic decision-making tool is being created based on the South African
TIMES model (SATIM)—a public domain energy model developed by the University of Cape
Town. 15 The TIMES model combines engineering and economic data to solve least-cost energy
optimization problems. The three main supply-side input components are technologies
(covering the full energy supply chain from mining technologies through energy conversion
technologies to final use technologies), commodities (these are either produced or consumed
by a technology), and commodity flows (Figure 13). The water sector is currently represented
by aggregate data on power plant water intensity. The model can be run under different policy
scenarios—for example, specifying a minimum share of renewable energy generation.
Figure 13: Simplified Representation of the Power Sector in SATIM




Source: World Bank 2015b.

Note: BLC = building life cycle; BLCC = building life-cycle cost; CoGen = cogeneration; COMBLC = commercial
building life cycle; INDBLC = industrial building life cycle; OCGT = open-cycle gas turbine; RE = renewable energy;
RESBLC = residential building life cycle; U235 = uranium-235.

In their current form, neither the TIMES model nor the South African SATIM model
recognizes the energy–water nexus. The Thirsty Energy Initiative is seeking to address this by
extending the water demand-side consideration of the model and by constructing marginal
water supply cost functions to produce a “water-smart” SATIM model (SATIM-W).
Integrating water demand and supply
The SATIM-W model extends data on water demand beyond power plant water intensity to
include broader water use data—for example, water use during fuel extraction, processing,
plant cleaning, and end-of-pipe technologies to reduce emissions, as well as any treatment
required before returning water to its original source (Figure 14).


15
     The TIMES model generator was developed by IEA’s Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program.

                                                        44
Figure 14: Incorporating Water Supply in the SATIM Model




Source: World Bank 2015b.

SATIM-W also adds marginal water supply costs (MWSCs) by considering different
technological options for meeting regional increases in water demand (for example, dam
construction and water transfer projects). These take into account regional differences in both
the supply cost and the quality of water available. The full specification of the MWSC function
is shown below:

          MWSC = WRMC + WSSIC + WDMC + WSDC + WSEC + PWTC + SWTC
 WRMC—water resource management charges
 WSSIC—water supply scheme infrastructure costs (the full project implementation costs
 associated, for example, with a dam construction project)
 WDMC—waste discharge mitigation charge (associated with discharging water containing
 waste into a water resource or onto land)
 WSDC—water supply delivery costs (capital and operation and maintenance costs of water
 transportation)
 WSEC—water supply energy costs
 PWTC and SWTC—primary and secondary water treatment costs (to achieve a basic water
 quality standard (primary) and to reduce the salinity of a portion of the source water
 (secondary))

Source: World Bank 2015b.

Modeling climate change impacts
SATIM-W addresses climate change impacts and the uncertainty associated with them through
scenario analysis. The model can explore the impact of climate change on the overall cost of
meeting future energy demands by adjusting a number of variables. From an environmental
perspective, the model can specify lower water supply levels and higher nonenergy water
demands. It can also reflect climate change policy response by specifying technological
requirements, such as retrofitting coal power plants with wet flue-gas desulphurization

                                                  45
technology, producing energy from shale gas fracking, and setting limits to overall cumulative
energy sector carbon emissions.
Results and next steps

Initial (unpublished) results from the SATIM-W model provide further practical evidence of
the benefits of integrated modeling as a tool for making energy policy decisions. The model’s
great benefit is its ability to represent the water needs of the energy sector by region and to
understand which water infrastructure will be needed for the energy sector when and where.
This capability is particularly crucial for a country such as South Africa, where all water
resources are fully allocated, so any additional water requirements will need to be integrated in
long-term planning decisions.
In terms of specific results for South Africa, the draft results of the modeling exercise show
that overall, South Africa’s water resources seem to be quite resilient to climate change
impacts, and that water for power is supported by major interbasin transfers, with energy
consuming 40 percent of all water in the Waterberg region. The results also provide “further
economic justification” (World Bank 2015b) for Eskom’s investment in dry cooling (whereas
conventional energy modeling—not taking into account water costs—would opt for wet
cooling in new coal-fired builds and a 60 percent increase in water consumption for power
generation). Regarding climate change, the integration of climate change scenarios shows that,
contrary to expectations, expanding CSP in the arid region served by the Orange River system
is not constrained by water supply, and overall, climate change is shown to bring forward
investment in renewable technologies. The draft results also present the results of a series of
scenario analyses, such as carbon dioxide cap scenarios that affect the cost of water supply
differently in each regional water basin and show the potential to lead to stranded coal assets
and increased use of renewables.
This exercise is seen as work in progress toward developing a fully integrated modeling tool
for South Africa. To produce the model, the World Bank has been working with the University
of Cape Town’s Energy Research Center. Potential future developments include harmonizing
the assumptions about energy and water growth, disaggregating nonenergy water consumption
in the model to examine water reallocation schemes and the impact of water efficiency
measures, and incorporating power production. Ultimately, similar projects may be conducted
in Morocco and China. (See World Bank (2015b) for further details.)
A Nexus Planning Research Agenda

The importance of integrated modeling tools as a way of incorporating nexus synergies and
trade-offs into investment decisions makes this an important area for continued development.
Miralles-Wilhelm (2016) proposes a collaborative international research agenda to support
food–energy–water nexus planning. The agenda is aimed at bringing together the expertise
from a wide range of nexus research agendas (including that of U.S. institutions, such as the
National Science Foundation, U.S. Department of Energy, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Environmental Protection Agency,
and that of international development organizations, such as the World Bank, U.S. Agency for
International Development, and regional development banks) to ultimately produce an
interactive modeling system“…to explore trade-offs, explore potential synergies, and evaluate
alternatives among a broad list of food/energy/water options and objectives” that is “flexible

                                               46
in order to facilitate tailored analyses over different geographical regions and scales (e.g.,
national, state, county, watershed, interconnected regions)” (Miralles-Wilhelm 2016).
The research agenda identifies a wide range of research topics that would support the
development of an integrated model. These include a study and modeling of water systems to
quantify water allocation; an analysis of future water demand, the impact of climate change on
water availability and energy demand, and the costs and benefits of different solutions and
synergies; and a review of integrated system modeling hubs for nexus analysis. 16




16
   There is on-going work at the World Bank on the power and agriculture integration in sub-Saharan Africa
(Banerjee et al., 2016). The study focusses on the synergies between rural electrification and agricultural
electricity demand. The findings from the study show that the main source of demand for electricity from
agriculture in 2030 will be from irrigation.

                                                    47
                      SECTION B: FOCUS ON SOUTHERN AFRICA




The Cahora Bassa Hydropower Generating Plant on the Zambezi River in Mozambique. Photo: © Mustafa Zakir
Hussain / World Bank.




                                                  48
                          Chapter 4: The Southern African Landscape

For the purposes of this study, the Southern African region can be considered to comprise the
15 member states that are a part of SADC. 17 As well as a broad consideration of the region, the
scope for this work sets out the following as focus countries: 18
      •   South Africa
      •   Lesotho
      •   Botswana
      •   Swaziland
      •   Namibia
The SADC region covers an area of 555,000 square kilometers (km2) and is inhabited by a
population of approximately 277 million (SADC n.d.). Southern Africa is characterized by an
uneven distribution of economic well-being, water resources, energy production capacity, and
potential climate change impacts. This unevenness gives rise to geographic areas of resource
stress and resource abundance, making the nexus particularly relevant to decision making. The
Southern African economy grew by 5.1 percent in 2011, and its population grew by 28 percent
over the period 2001–11 (SADC n.d.).
4.1       Regional Distribution of Economic Well-being
There are vast differences in the levels of well-being of economies in the region. In 2013,
Mauritius, Botswana, and South Africa had the highest per capita gross domestic product
(GDP) in the region, whereas Malawi and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) were at
far lower levels of economic well-being (Figure 15). For example, in 2013 the per capita GDP
of Botswana ($7,300) was 16 times that of DRC ($450) and more than 30 times that of Malawi
($220). 19
These differences in economic well-being are also affected by the uneven distribution of
population. In 2011, 60 percent of the population in the region resided in just three countries—
DRC, South Africa, and Tanzania. South Africa accounted for 18 percent of the population and
63 percent of the total regional GDP. In contrast, DRC accounted for 27 percent of the
population and 2.5 percent of the regional GDP. As the largest overall economy in the region,
South Africa also accounted for 49 percent of the exports and 50 percent of the imports of
goods and services in 2011. 20 The debt-to-GDP ratio, which is indicative of the sustainability
of government finances, reduced significantly for many countries over the period 2001–11, so
that all countries had a ratio below 50 percent in 2011, except Zimbabwe, with 142 percent.




17
   Angola, Botswana, DRC, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Madagascar, Namibia, Seychelles, South
Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
18
   This initial phase of countries is the set of countries that were under one World Bank Country Management
Unit at the time that the study was conceived. Future phases may focus on further countries.
19
   All currency is in U.S. dollars unless otherwise specified.
20
   Angola is second.

                                                    49
Figure 15: Southern Africa per Capita Gross Domestic Product




Source: FAO AQUASTAT database (FAO 2015).

The uneven distribution of economic well-being creates uneven demand pressures on raw
materials and natural resources. As a result, demand for water and energy resources is generally
concentrated in the southern parts of the region. In contrast, the northern parts of the region
(for example, the Congo and Zambezi river basins) are endowed with the abundant water
resources that could sustainably deliver these inputs.
4.2     Distribution of Water Resources
The geography of Southern Africa imposes specific characteristics on the nature of the
nexus between the water and energy sectors.
Figure 16 illustrates the uneven distribution of hydrological resources across the region. The
southern countries in the region—such as South Africa, Botswana, and Namibia—receive
much lower levels of rainfall than the northern countries—such as DRC, Angola, Zambia, and
Mozambique. Differences in rainfall across the region range from as great as 2,000 millimeters
(mm) per year in some areas to less than 100 mm per year in others (CRIDF/DfID 2014b).




                                                   50
Figure 16: Mean Annual Rainfall in Southern Africa




The areas receiving greater rainfall also benefit from the endowment of large river basins
draining the region and providing large amounts of freshwater and hydropower potential.

4.3     Southern Africa’s River Basins
More than 70 percent of the SADC region’s freshwater resources is shared between two or
more member states. Figure 17 shows the recognized major transboundary river basins in the
SADC region (also listed in Table 2).




                                                     51
Figure 17: Southern Africa’s River Basins




Source: SADC (http://www.icp-confluence-sadc.org/riverbasin/105).

Table 2: Southern Africa’s River Basins

 River Basin                      Riparian Countries                              Area (km2)
                                  Democratic Republic of Congo, Central African
                                  Republic, Angola, Republic of Congo, Zambia,
 Congo                                                                            3,800,100
                                  Tanzania, Cameroon, Burundi, Rwanda, Gabon,
                                  Malawi
                                  Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique,
 Zambezi                                                                          1,570,000
                                  Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
 Orange-Senqu                     Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa        1,000,000
 Limpopo                          Botswana, Mozambique, South Africa, Zimbabwe    408,000
 Okavango                         Angola, Botswana, Namibia, Zimbabwe             323,192
 Cuvelai                          Angola, Namibia                                 167,000
 Ruvuma                           Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania                    152,000
 Save/Sabi                        Mozambique, Zimbabwe                            115,700
 Kunene                           Angola, Namibia                                 106,560
 Incomati                         Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland             46,740
 Pungwe                           Mozambique, Zimbabwe                            31,000
 Maputo-Usutu-Pongola             Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland             29,970
 Buzi                             Mozambique, Zimbabwe                            27,000
 Umbeluzi                         Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland             10,900
Source: SADC (http://www.icp-confluence-sadc.org/riverbasin/105).


                                                    52
Three of the river basins in Figure 17 and Table 2—Orange, Limpopo, and Incomati—can be
considered pivotal because water resources have been nearly or fully allocated, leading them
to be considered “closed.” Riparian states with a level of economic development (Namibia,
Botswana, South Africa, and Zimbabwe) are highly dependent on these basins.

The three largest river basins—Congo, Zambezi, and Orange–Senqu—are particularly relevant
to this study because of their potential to generate significant regional benefits through water
transfer and hydropower generation.

The Congo River Basin
The Congo River Basin is the largest of SADC’s recognized transboundary basins, covering
an area of 3.7 million km2 (around 12 percent of the continent) and spanning nine political
boundaries (Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, DRC, Cameroon, Republic of Congo,
Rwanda, Tanzania, and Zambia) (World Bank 2014a). Inga Falls, on the Congo River, houses
two hydropower generation plants that were commissioned more than 30 years ago, with
combined installed capacity of 1,775 megawatts (MW), 21 and has significant untapped power
generation potential that is being targeted by the Grand Inga project—a scheme that could
produce as much as 40,000 MW (more than a third of the total electricity currently being
produced in Africa and an amount equivalent to the total installed generating capacity of Sub-
Saharan Africa, excluding South Africa). (See the discussion later in this report and also
Taliotis et al. (2014).)
The Zambezi River Basin
The Zambezi River Basin (ZRB) is the second-largest river basin in the region, and is one of
the most diverse and valuable natural resources in Africa (World Bank 2010b). In addition to
meeting the basic needs of some 30 million people and sustaining a rich and diverse natural
environment, the river plays a central role in the economics of the eight riparian countries in
Southern Africa—Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe. The ZRB covers 1.37 million km2. Its source is in Zambia, which is 1,450 meters
above sea level. The main stem then flows southwest into Angola, south into Zambia again,
through Namibia and northern Botswana, then through the Victoria Falls shared by both
Zambia and Zimbabwe, before massing in Lake Kariba. The Kariba Dam was built here in
1958. After being joined by the Kafue River, the Zambezi pools behind Cahora Bassa Dam
(built in 1974) in northwestern Mozambique. It is then joined by the Shire River flowing from
Malawi, and finally flows down into the Indian Ocean. As can be seen in Figure 18, the
hydrology of the ZRB varies, with generally high rainfall in the north (up to 1,400 mm/year)
and lower rainfall in the south (as little as 500 mm/year) (World Bank 2010b).
Figure 18 presents information on the ZRB’s current and projected hydropower capacity and
irrigation opportunities. Of the approximately 33,000 gigawatt-hours (GWh) of hydropower
produced per year in the ZRB, 5 percent is in Malawi, 45 percent is in Mozambique, 36 percent
is in Zambia, and 14 percent is in Zimbabwe. The Kariba and Cahora Bassa dams dominate.
Other hydropower plants include the Upper Kafue (including Itezhi-Tezhi) and the Nkula,
Tedzani, and Kapichira plants on the Shire River in Malawi.


21
     https://www.internationalrivers.org/resources/inga-1-and-inga-2-dams-3616.

                                                       53
Figure 18: Details of the Zambezi River Basin




Source: World Bank 2010b.

                                                54
The Orange–Senqu River Basin

The third-largest river basin in the region, the Orange–Senqu, spans a total area of 1 million km2
and is shared by the riparian states of Namibia, Botswana, South Africa, and Lesotho. The Orange-
Senqu is considered a pivotal basin for the region, as almost all of its resources have been allocated
to productive uses and it is depended upon by the pivotal (high-growth) riparian states of Namibia,
Botswana, and South Africa for a significant proportion of their economic activity. Therefore,
water quality is an issue for the basin (as it is for all basins whose resources are fully, or close to
being fully, allocated).
Lesotho is the upper riparian state and relies heavily on the basin for its income through the
Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP), which transfers water to the Gauteng region of South
Africa. As a result, South Africa’s economy depends on interbasin water transfers from this basin.
Namibia is a downstream riparian state with a high reliance on the Orange River for its economic
activity. Although Botswana neither contributes to the LHWP’s streamflow nor uses its surface
water, the country’s legal status is allowing it to consider a future water supply from the LHWP.
(See Turton 2010 for further details.)
Six strategic issues face the river basin (Turton 2010):
      •   High economic reliance on the basin by South Africa and Namibia
      •   Water allocation away from agriculture to industry and services
      •   Deteriorating water quality owing to the basin being closed and suffering from effluent
          flows and acid mining drainage
      •   Balancing resource protection with resource use
      •   Interbasin transfers
      •   The location of the river relative to the border between Namibia and South Africa
4.4       Distribution of Energy Resources

Electricity generation capacity and demand for electricity are unevenly distributed across the
region. Most of the region’s generating plants are located in the eastern and northeastern areas of
South Africa (where coal resources are plentiful), and most of the region’s hydropower potential
is located to the north of Southern Africa. Demand for electricity in the region is mostly from the
major cities and industries of South Africa, which are around Johannesburg and Gauteng in the
northeast, but also around the major cities along the coast. Figure 19 illustrates the spatial
distribution of electricity generation capacity in the region. Historically, South Africa’s generation
capacity has met significant proportions of neighboring countries’ peak demand.




                                                  55
Figure 19: Distribution of Electricity Generation Infrastructure across Southern Africa




                                                        56
Generation investment needs are expected to grow rapidly in the region, and significant long-term
infrastructure investment will take place in the coming years. SADC forecasts that peak loads will
be 77 gigawatts (GW) by 2020 and 115 GW by 2030, compared with total installed capacity of
57.1 GW in January 2013 (SADC 2012a). Figure 20 illustrates the electricity supply and peak
demand situation for the region as of May 2015. As of the end of 2015, the SAPP reports that the
region had a total installed capacity of 61,859 MW and an operating capacity of 46,910 MW to
meet a normal peak demand of 48,216 MW. In practice, the regional capacity gap is significantly
greater: 8,247 MW when taking into account normal generating capacity reserve margins, and
16,536 MW when also taking into account estimated suppressed demand (SAPP 2015).
While coal is currently the source of most generation capacity in the region, and further coal-fired
generation capacity is under construction (two giant coal-fired generation plants in South Africa—
Medupi and Kusile—will each have a generating capacity of 4,800 MW), the expectation for the
region as a whole is for greater diversification. In addition to development of hydropower
(potential generating capacity at the Inga site in DRC is estimated at 40,000 MW and on the
Zambezi in Mozambique at 18,000 MW), there have been significant findings of gas off the coasts
of Mozambique and Tanzania. While nearshore gas from both countries has been available for
some time—Mozambique’s Pande and Temane nearshore fields, which have been supplying the
region since 2004, have reserves (3P 22) of 3.5 trillion cubic feet (tcf)—the major resources are
expected to take some time to develop. In 2010, gas discoveries in the Rovuma gas field off the
northern coast of Mozambique put reserves (3P) at 128 tcf. Further renewable energy, such as solar
and to a lesser extent wind, is expected to make up a small but steadily growing source of electricity
in the region.
Different forms of electricity generation in the region (thermal, hydropower, and CSP) will have
different water requirements. Within given technologies, water use will also vary by type of plant
and type of thermal cooling technology. For hydropower, water storage and use will be very
specific to the river in question, the design of the plant, and the profile for water discharge followed
by the operators of the plant. 23 Rules of thumb are that CSP technologies need to withdraw as
much as 3,500 liters per megawatt-hour (MWh) generated, compared with 2,000 liters/MWh for
new coal-fired power plants and 1,000 liters/MWh for more efficient natural gas combined-cycle
power plants.
Figure 20 shows the region’s existing and planned power transmission lines. Of the SADC
countries, only Angola, Malawi, and Tanzania are not interconnected.




22
   The total amount of reserves that a company estimates having access to, calculated as the sum of all proved and
unproved reserves. Unproved reserves are broken into two segments: those based on geological and engineering
estimates from proved sources (probable) and those that are less likely to be extracted due to financial or technical
difficulties (possible). Therefore, 3P refers to proved plus probable plus possible reserves.
23
   The region’s investment program in hydropower generation alone amounts to $17.8 billion during 2011–20 and
$50.2 billion during 2020–30.

                                                         57
Figure 20: Regional Power Transmission Interconnectors (Existing and Planned)




Source: SAPP 2015.




                                                     58
4.5     Impact of Climate Change on the Region
Climate change is expected to have a significant impact on the region in terms of both higher
temperatures and increasingly unpredictable rainfall patterns (Bates et al. 2008). By the end of the
21st century, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPPC’s) high emissions scenario
suggests summer temperatures are likely to increase by 3.1 degrees centigrade (ºC) and by 3.4–4.2
ºC with rapid warming in semi-arid southwestern parts of Southern Africa—northwestern South
Africa, Botswana, and Namibia (CDKN 2014). This warming will increase rainfall intensities,
decrease frequencies of low-intensity rainfall, and cause longer dry periods between events (Prasad
2012). As a result, it is widely agreed that climate change will exacerbate water scarcity in
Southern Africa. By 2025, annual water availability in South Africa is predicted to be less than
1,000 cubic meters (m3) per person, and less than 1,700 m3/person in Lesotho, Zimbabwe, and
Mozambique (Bates et al. 2008). Furthermore, climate change is likely to increase water demand,
which is forecast to increase, for example, by 0.6 percent per year in the Cape metropolitan region
of South Africa (New 2002).
These predictions mask a layer of considerable complexity in understanding the impacts of climate
change. In practice, there is little consensus among various climate change forecasting models. For
example, the GCM datasets that were examined to predict Lesotho’s climate for the period 2030–
50 (World Bank 2015c and Box 4) projected air temperature increases of 0.8–2.9 ºC and had little
consensus on future precipitation, with results ranging from increases and decreases of 160 mm
(20 percent) (see Figure 21). There is also significant spatial variation (as shown in Figure 16) and
intertemporal variation (Lesotho’s rainfall averages 12 mm in June and 120 mm in January24
(World Bank 2015c), both of which need to be taken into account by climate forecasts.




24
 Based on historical data for 1950-–99 provided by the Terrestrial
Hydrology Research Group at Princeton University (http://hydrology.princeton.edu/data.pgf.php; Princeton NJ,
USA). See page 19 of World Bank (2015c) for further details.

                                                    59
Figure 21: Lesotho Climate Change Projections for 2030–50




Source: World Bank 2015c.

These impacts and their unpredictability pose significant challenges for and risks to regional
energy and water planning (IEA 2007), particularly given the region’s current water scarcity,
reliance on hydropower (World Bank 2015a), transmission limitations, and predicted growth in
demand. Regarding demand, electricity generation is projected to be seven times higher in 40 years
than it is today (IEA 2012), and water demand is projected to triple (World Energy Council 2010).
Southern Africa’s climate vulnerability is well illustrated by the current drought being experienced
in some parts of the region as a result of El Niño (Box 3).




                                                     60
Box 3: The impact of El Niño on Kariba Dam Hydropower Output in 2015–16

     The Kariba Dam is situated on the Zambezi River and straddles the border between Zambia
     and Zimbabwe. It is the largest constructed reservoir in the world, by water storage capacity,
     and has been a key source of regional energy security since its commissioning in 1960. The
     Kariba Reservoir supplies water to two underground hydropower stations, with a total
     capacity of 1,830 MW generating more than 10,035 GWh of electricity annually.
     Power output potential at Kariba is directly related to the overall reservoir water level, which
     is a function of Zambezi River inflow. Lower than expected rainfall levels in late 2014/early
     2015, as a result of El Niño, led to the reservoir being reported at just 11 percent full on
     January 27, 2016 (compared with being more than 50 percent full at the same time the
     previous year). As a result, potential annual power generation has been reduced by more than
     50 percent to 4,060 GWh (see graph below), strongly highlighting the need for regional
     investment in climate-resilient projects.
     Figure 22: Impact of Climate Change on Kariba Dam Hydropower Generation in 2015




Source: World Bank 2015i; SADC 2016.

The need for increased institutional capacity to develop an informed climate strategy poses a
significant challenge for these countries. Adapting the available practical and flexible modeling
tools, such as the LEAP, WEAP, MARKAL, Energy Flow Optimisation, and Aquarius 25 models
and the Soil and Water Assessment Tool, 26 can help Southern African countries understand the
potential impacts of climate change on future energy and water supply and demand. 27 Based on
this information, these countries can start to develop a range of policy solutions to address these
impacts and test them for their robustness against the range of potential climate-related outcomes.
This approach was adopted by the World Bank to help Lesotho both assess the vulnerability of its
water management systems to climate change and start to address its lack of climate strategy (Box
4).

25
   http://www.pwsc.co.uk/moreaquarius.php.
26
   http://swat.tamu.edu/.
27
   See also Bhattacharyya and Timilsina (2010) for a review of energy system models for developing countries.

                                                       61
Box 4: Assessing the Vulnerability of Lesotho’s Water Management Systems to Climate Change

 The World Bank’s Lesotho Water Security and Climate Change Assessment project is the first
 systematic analysis of the vulnerabilities of Lesotho’s water management system to climate
 change. The project has developed a Lesotho WEAP model to explore how a set of potential
 climate adaptation strategies will perform under varying future climate and economic
 conditions.
 To obtain the data required for the modeling and to construct a series of adaptation strategies,
 the project conducted an iterative information-gathering process with government stakeholders
 to understand such issues as rainfall and runoff routines, historical streamflow rates, current
 and planned water management infrastructure, climate change forecasts, domestic and
 industrial water demand, agricultural production, changes in water transfer opportunities,
 potential adaptation strategies (including new infrastructure, such as the Lowlands Bulk Water
 Supply Scheme and future phases of the LHWP), and the key management metrics for water
 supply to evaluate the performance of these strategies.
 To understand the potential vulnerabilities of water management systems, the project used
 historical and forecast climate data to generate a large number of scenario outcomes, and
 analyzed and interpreted the results within a robust decision-making framework that assessed
 which of Lesotho’s proposed water management strategies demonstrate a positive performance
 over a broad range of circumstances.
 The modeling identified key vulnerabilities within the system, including water supply for
 domestic and industrial purposes, irrigation, and water transfers to South Africa. It found that
 delays in implementing the water transfer and hydropower components of the LHWP could
 undermine water security in South Africa and economic growth in Lesotho. The modeling also
 identified adaptation strategies, such as building the proposed Polihali Dam and other
 infrastructure for the LHWP, increasing system reliability, eliminating the risk of a water
 deficit in all but the driest of futures, and boosting the economy.

Source: World Bank 2015c.


Another study by the World Bank (Cervigni et al. 2015), which modeled the impact of climate
change on the performance of the region’s hydropower capacity in the Congo and Zambezi river
basins, found potentially large impacts of climate change on infrastructure in the region (Box 5).




                                                    62
Box 5: The Impacts of Climate Change on Hydropower Assets in the Zambezi River Basin

 A study by Cervigni et al. (2015) used IPCC climate change predictions to forecast changes
 in the physical performance of hydropower in the Congo and Zambezi river basins. The study
 found that, in the driest scenarios, failure to integrate climate change in the planning and
 design of power and water infrastructure could entail significant losses of hydropower
 revenues and increases in consumer expenditures for energy. For the period 2015–50, for the
 Congo River Basin, these forecasts could imply a $16.6 billion loss or $0.9 billion gain, while
 for the ZRB, they could imply a $42.1 billion loss or $15.4 billion gain.
 Focusing on the ZRB results, the study found that the effects of climate change on river flow
 and evaporation rates could have a significant impact on future hydropower output. The worst-
 case scenario could see a loss of baseline revenues of up to 18 percent, while the best-case
 scenario could see gains of 6 percent (+$15.4 billion) on baseline revenues. However, the best-
 case scenario is unlikely to be fully realizable with current power-trading agreements and
 transmission infrastructure.
 Given the impossibility of predicting actual climate outcomes, the study advocates investment
 in “worst-outcome avoidance” through changes in generation capacity and water-use
 efficiencies. Practically, this could involve a mix of responses across the two basins, including
 investing in additional generation capacity, increasing water-use efficiency, and downsizing
 facilities to avoid underutilization in dry climates. For the ZRB, avoiding the worst-case
 outcome could reduce baseline revenue losses from 18 percent to 10 percent.


The need for integrated nexus planning for future investment is particularly relevant in the
Southern Africa region. Prasad (2012) concludes that there is a strong need for integrated water–
energy planning in the context of climate change, including detailed regional modeling for defined
regions in Southern Africa. Current research by the World Bank’s (2015b) Thirsty Energy
Initiative is responding to this need by developing the first energy–water–climate change nexus
modeling tool for the region using South Africa as a case study (see Section 3.1.)
As well as the information challenges, implementing climate-resilient infrastructure projects can
be challenging because of their size and long delivery time scales (often spanning more than one
political cycle), generating a need to de-politicize approval, planning, and financial models as far
as possible (SADC 2016).
4.6     Water and Energy Resource Planning at the National Level

The region’s water and energy resources, and the institutions that manage them, exhibit significant
spatial variation. This section looks at the study’s five focus countries (Botswana, Lesotho,
Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland) and sets out a national analysis of their water and energy
resources, a commentary on each country’s planning priorities, and also evidence of a recognition
of the link between water and energy in the respective national planning documents and their
implementation. The information is summarized in a series of four tables for ease of reference.

                                                    63
These tables provide a comparative summary of the following issues for each of the study’s focus
countries:
     •   Table 3 provides an overview of national water resources;
     •   Table 4 summarizes national water resource knowledge and planning priorities;
     •   Table 5 summarizes evidence of national cross-sector planning by the water sector; and
     •   Table 6 provides an overview of national energy sector priorities and evidence of cross-
         sector planning in the study’s focus countries.
For further detail, a more in-depth treatment for each country is provided in Annex 2.
Each country faces a different set of challenges with respect to its water and energy resources.
These challenges are driven by past levels of investment in water supply and electricity, current
national natural resource endowments and how these are affected by climate change, anticipated
levels of demand for water and electricity, and the current economic situation. These challenges
lay down the national priorities for water and energy policy, which are reflected in national
legislation and planning.
For planning processes to be efficient, there needs to be cross-sector coordination, and in
particular, the (social and economic) value of water needs to be accounted for. While
pronouncements suggest that most SADC countries recognize the importance of water as a driver
of economic and social development, and are ready at an institutional level to start constructing
national economic water accounts, the capacity to implement such accounts varies considerably
from one country to the next (see EBI 2010 for further details). Failure of one sector to consult
another sector leads to inefficiencies, such as overinvestment in interbasin transfers or extensive
groundwater pumping (when water planning does not take into account energy costs). Similarly,
from an energy supply perspective, the economic costs of water may not be adequately recognized
in the choice of location and technology while investing in electricity generation, leading to
overinvestment in certain technologies, such as once-through cooling systems.
Despite the differences between the five study countries, a few common themes emerge from this
analysis. For water, all countries face significant challenges, either (as in the case of South Africa
and at present, Swaziland) because of a general lack of available water resources throughout these
countries, or because of an uneven distribution of water resources, as is the case for Namibia,
Botswana, and Lesotho. Because these three countries’ economic centers are located far from their
river basins, policy is focusing on both water storage and significant water transfer schemes
(implying a need to integrate water and energy investment decisions). Water allocation is a
challenge for all countries. Although countries recognize the need to implement an integrated
approach to managing their water resources and indeed most have published an integrated water
resource management (IWRM) plan, doing so is a complex, data- and resource-intensive task,
which many countries (particularly Namibia and Swaziland) are struggling to develop and
implement.
For energy, the majority of the countries in this study have recently experienced load shedding
(the deliberate shutdown of electric power in a part or parts of a power-distribution system,
generally to prevent the failure of the entire system when the level of demand strains its capacity)

                                                 64
as a result of their dependence on Eskom for their electricity supply. This inability to rely on Eskom
has pushed all the focus countries to prioritize self-sufficiency (and in the case of South Africa, to
target additional generation capacity). There is significant interest in developing hydropower and
renewable energy generation. South Africa, which needs to significantly expand its capacity, is
considering investing in gas-fired generation using imported natural gas, and is also in discussions
with DRC with regard to a power purchase agreement (PPA) for Inga 3. In terms of joint planning
between the water and energy sectors, only South Africa appears to be actively incorporating water
resource availability into its planning. However, there is still room for improvement. The current
World Bank Thirsty Energy modeling initiative (World Bank 2015b) to develop a joint energy–
water–climate change planning tool for South Africa notes that the previous approach was
relatively crude, with no consideration of regional disparities in water supply and costs; auxiliary
water use, for example, by coal mining; or water treatment requirements.




                                                 65
Table 3: An Overview of National Water Resources for the Study’s Focus Countries

      Resources                  Botswana                              Lesotho                                 Namibia                         South Africa             Swaziland
 Rainfall 28          400 mm (low)                        760 mm (average)                     254 mm (very low) (annual evaporation       497 mm (low)           788 mm (average)
                                                                                               3,400 mm 29
 River basins         Zambezi, Orange–Senqu,              Orange–Senqu,                        Zambezi, Okavango, Cuvelai, Kunene          Orange–Senqu,          Incomati, Maput–
                      Limpopo, Okavango                                                                                                    Limpopo, Incomati,     Usatu–Pongola
                                                                                                                                           Maputo–Usatu–
                                                                                                                                           Pongola
 Freshwater           1.6%                                1.4%                                 1.6%                                        24%                    23%
 withdrawal (%) 30
 Water availability   Low—no surface water in             Captures 50% of Southern Africa’s    Low. Main economic center is far from       Good for the region,   Currently
 near the main        western regions, endemic            total catchment runoff. But access   surface freshwater sources (closest         but development is     experiencing severe
 economic centers     drought, varied rainfall            is low, especially in lowlands       river to Windhoek is 750 km).               constrained by lack    drought due to
                                                          where 2/3 of the population lives    Investment in desalination in coastal       of water resources.    highly variable
                                                          and light industry and               areas for mining, investment in water                              weather patterns.
                                                          manufacturing are located 31.        recycling for urban centers. 32
 Main water supply    Groundwater (49%), reservoirs       Metalong Dam (opened                 Groundwater, desalination (8,000            Dams and water         Dams (total storage
 source               (42%), international rivers (1%),   December 2015, serving 2/3           liters/day), recycling, aquifers.oreholes   transfer from the      585 m3) 36
                      dams (8%), recycled (49%), water    population) 34.                      (4.6%), surface water (74%), reclaimed      LHWP scheme.
                      transfer (North–South Carrier—                                           (15%), irrigation (5.8%) 35
                      Gabarone 50%), Moletedi Dam
                      (Gabarone and Mochudi) 33.
 Water                Agriculture (41%), industry         Agriculture (8%), Industry (46%),    Agriculture (70%), industry (5%),           Agriculture (63%),     Agriculture (96.5%),
 consumption 37       (including mining, 18%),            municipal (46%)                      municipal (25%)                             Industry (6%),         industry (1.2%),
                      municipal (41%)                                                                                                      municipal (31%)        municipal (2.3%)




28
   Source: Figure 16. Assessment of rainfall level is intended only as a guide and is based on 860-mm world average annual rainfall.
29
   Du Pisani (n.d.).
30
   Conway et al. 2015.
31
   GoL 2012.
32
   Du Pisani (n.d.).
33
   WAVES (2014).
34
   Source : http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/18/water-for-lesothos-lowlands-unveiling-the-metolong-dam
35
   Du Pisani (n.d.).
36
   http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries_regions/swz/index.stm
37
   FAO AQUASTAT database (accessed June 2016).

                                                                                         66
Table 4: An Overview of Water Resource Knowledge, and Planning Priorities for the Study’s Focus Countries

     Categories                Botswana                          Lesotho                    Namibia                          South Africa                          Swaziland
 Water resource     Low level of knowledge. Water       Some knowledge (see         Some knowledge—e.g.,         Some knowledge due to water             Low level of knowledge—
 knowledge/data     sector reform based on IWRM         discussion of WR2012 in     aquifer vulnerability        resource appraisals by the Water        e.g., groundwater resource
                    will drive data improvements.       South Africa column.        study carried out in         Resources of Africa, 2005               levels are unknown, but see
                    Water accounting framework in       WR2012 also describes       1998. 40                     (WR2005) and 2012 (WR2012)              also WR2012 which brings
                    place . No or little knowledge on   the water resources of                                   projects(see WR2012). 41 Still a lack   together knowledge on
                    rural, irrigation abstraction or    Lesotho). 39 But limited                                 of understanding of some                Swaziland’s water
                    self-providers (half of national    data, capacity, and tools                                hydrological processes and lack of      resources. 42 Limited data,
                    water consumption), regional        to predict climate change                                data on land-use changes, water         capacity, and tools to predict
                    mapping. 38                         impacts.                                                 use, and streamflow (Miralles-          climate change impacts.
                                                                                                                 Wilhelm 2013).
 Water priorities   Develop a water pricing policy      Increase water access to    Increase water access in     Continue to seek access to              Develop IWRM and the
                    and a Water Resources Board         urban and rural             main economic centers,       international water resources—          country’s hydropower
                    and water regulator. Invest in      populations.                improve sector               e.g., from the Zambezi and              potential.
                    surface-water catchment and                                     coordination, develop an     Orange–Senqu river basins.
                    transfer. Improve water                                         equitable tariff policy,     Improve water use efficiency and
                    efficiency.                                                     and establish a water        limit water use by coal-fired plants.
                                                                                    regulator. 43
 Current major      Dams: Dikgatlhong, Lotsane,         Lesotho Highlands Water     Under consideration:         Construction or expansion of six        Feasibility study underway
 investments        Thune, Mosetse.                     Project Phase II and        Abstraction from the         dams 46                                 for a multipurpose dam on a
                    Water transfer schemes:             Lesotho Lowlands Water      Okavango River (from 25                                              tributary of the Lusushwana
                    Expanding the North–South           Supply Programme,           m3 rising to 105 m3in                                                River 47
                    Carrier (NSC-2 and NSC-3) 44        including Metalong Dam      2023); desalination of
                                                                                    seawater from coastal
                                                                                    regions (17 m3 in 2023) 45


38
   WAVES (2014) for all.
39
   Water Resources of South Africa, 2012 Study (WR2012), http://waterresourceswr2012.co.za/.
40
   Du Pisani (n.d.).
41
   Water Resources of South Africa, 2012 Study (WR2012), http://waterresourceswr2012.co.za/.
42
   Ibid.
43
   GoN 2008.
44
   Setlhogile and Harvey 2015.
45
   Desalination requires significant investment in energy production to transport water. Source: http://www.namibiansun.com/local-news/govt-considers-okavango-river-
and-desalination-seawater.81182.
46
   Including the dam at the Mzimvubu River in the Eastern Cape, the expansion of the Clanwilliam Dam in the Western Cape, the Nwamitwa Dam and Tzaneen Dam in
Limpopo, the Hazelmere Dam in KwaZulu-Natal, and the Polihali Dam in Lesotho, which will provide water to Gauteng.
47
   http://www.businesscoverage.ceo/latest-news/african-water-facility-to-invest-in-swaziland-water-dam.

                                                                                       67
Table 5: Evidence of cross-sector planning for the study’s focus countries

  Planning activities            Botswana                          Lesotho                          Namibia                 South Africa                      Swaziland
 Evidence of cross-     Integrated Water          Limited to Water Commission’s             Water Resources          Only 2 out of 19 water      The National Water Policy aspires
 sectoral planning      Resources and Water       involvement in developing the Lesotho     Management Act           management                  to implementing IWRM principles
 coordination and       Efficiency (IWRWE) plan   Energy Policy (GoL n.d.).                 (GoN 2013) yet to be     institutions established.   but is hampered by capacity
 implementation of      approved in 2013,                                                   implemented because      Revisions now               constraints (Manyatsi and Brown
 IWRM                   including water for                                                 of lack of funding and   underway.                   (2009). 49 The National Water Act
                        energy plans.                                                       policy                   Implementation of           (GoS 2003) states the need to
                        Implementation will be                                              implementation           IWRM is an open             integrate power generation and
                        challenging because of                                              capacity.                question in the country     water infrastructure planning, and
                        limited knowledge of                                                                         (Mehta et al. 2014).        the National Water Policy (GoS
                        IWRM and data. 48                                                                                                        2009) contains several policy
                                                                                                                                                 statements concerning
                                                                                                                                                 international and regional
                                                                                                                                                 coordination (GoS, 2009, 2014).
 Key national           GoB 2012, 2013            http://www.lesothoreview.com/water-       GoN 1998, 2000,          RSA/DoE 2013a, 2013b        GoS 2003, 2009, 2014
 planning                                         energy-2015.php; GoL n.d., 2004, 2007,    2013
 documents                                        2012




48
  GoB 2013.
49
  Manyatsi and Brown (2009) comment that much of the technical capacity to collect, collate, and develop strategies is limited to a few individuals. Similarly, the human
capacity may not be available to introduce economic water accounts (see p. 30).

                                                                                       68
Table 6: An Overview of Energy Sector Priorities and Evidence of Cross-sector Planning for the Study’s Focus Countries

     Categories                Botswana                      Lesotho                            Namibia                           South Africa                       Swaziland
 Installed           352 MW (58%)                  72 MW (52%)                     393 MW (62%)                          44,170 MW (104%)                 70 MW (27%)
 capacity (%
 suppressed and
 forecast
 demand ) 50
 Load                Current                       2008                            2015                                  2008, 2014, 2015                 2008, 2014, 2015
 shedding 51
 Generation          22% domestic supply           100% hydropower from the        Hydropower (67%), coal fired          Coal fired (93%); nuclear        Hydropower (100%) (the
 mix 52              (coal)                        Muelta hydroelectricity         (25%), diesel (8%)                    (5.7%), pumped storage (1.2%),   country’s two diesel engines
                     66% imported from South       generation plant. Heavily                                             hydropower (0.5%), gas turbine   are no longer viable) 53
                     Africa, 22% imported          dependent on imports                                                  (0.1%)
                     from Mozambique.              from South Africa and
                                                   Mozambique.
 Energy              Address current power         Increase clean energy           To be published in Namibia’s          Eliminate load shedding. South   Achieve security of supply and
 generation          shortfalls and become a       production, attain self-        forthcoming first Integrated          Africa needs 40,000 MW of        self-sufficiency and improve
 sector priorities   net exporter of electricity   sufficiency, and export         Resource Plan. Expected to include    new capacity by 2025. 55         rural electrification. Develop
                     to the region using coal      energy. Additional power        development and diversification of    RSA/DoE (2013a) focuses on       hydroelectricity capacity using
                     and solar resources.          expected to come from           power sources, demand                 regional hydropower (e.g.,       multipurpose water structures
                     Implement off-grid rural      hydro, wind, pumped             management, and promoting             Mozambique), additional coal     and the country’s renewable
                     photovoltaic                  storage, and solar power.       regional integration. Potential new   and gas (including               energy potential. Improve
                     electrification.              Increase domestic               power generation sources include      Mozambique gas), and the         overall energy efficiency.
                                                   electricity access (currently   Kudu power project (currently         possibility of nuclear power.
                                                   25%) to at least 35% by         shelved); Baynes hydropower           The REIPPP aims to increase
                                                   2020, potentially through       project; and coal-fired, gas, and     renewable energy mix to 19
                                                   solar power proliferation in    renewable energy sources. 54          GW of installed capacity by
                                                   sparsely inhabited                                                    2030. 56
                                                   mountainous regions.


50
   Source: SAPP 2014 (installed capacity statistics as at March 2013).
51
   Load shedding is the deliberate shutdown of electric power in a part or parts of a power-distribution system, generally to prevent the failure of the entire system when the
demand strains the capacity of the system.
52
   Source: REEP Policy Data Base (accessed via REEGLE site). Source years as follows: Botswana (2012), Lesotho (2012), Namibia (2014), South Africa (2014), Swaziland
(2012)
53
   www.sec.co.sz/electricity/.
54
   https://economist.com.na/14615/mining-energy/integrated-resource-plan-reviewed/.
55
   https://www.usea.org/sites/default/files/event-file/497/South_Africa_Country_Presentation.pdf.
56
   Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement (REIPPP) programme. See http://www.energy.gov.za/files/events_overview%20IPP.html.

                                                                                              69
 Current          Morupule B power plant       1,200-MW Kobong               Kudu 885-MW gas-to-power            Commitment to build 18,576-        Independent power producer
 projects         completion. Potential        pumped storage project, 57    project decision expected mid-      MW new power generation            solar farm 21.5-MW project
                  100-MW Jwaneng               wind mapping project, 58      2016; 59 Baynes 600-MW              capacity by 2012 (World Bank       following launch of pilot
                  concentrating solar          Maluti–Drakensberg wind       hydropower project in feasibility   2015b)                             projects 61
                  power project                power project (42 turbines)   phase 60

 Evidence of      Integrated Water             The Water Commission          Namibia recently developed an       Power generation planning          Developing Swaziland’s
 coordination     Resources and Efficiency     was involved in developing    energy planning tool that takes     makes reference to water           hydropower potential will
 with the water   (IRWRE) plan approved in     the Lesotho Energy Policy     into account consumption across     resource availability, but fully   require joint working between
 sector during    2013 supports cross-         (GoL n.d.). Moderate          sectors, but does not integrate     dynamic two-way coordination       the energy and water sectors.
 planning         sectoral coordination, but   degree of practical           water resource availability (Rämä   is not in evidence. National       Energy planning documents do
                  implementation is            coordination, with            et al. 2013)                        policies and laws do not           not explicitly refer to
                  hindered by limited          institutional arrangements    Namibia’s two solar desalination    reference the nexus. Water         coordination with water sector
                  institutional capacity and   appearing to provide for      plants provide some evidence of     and energy connection made         planning. The government (GoS
                  data.                        joint planning at project     cross-sector planning to realize    for Cape Town and                  2014) calls for the development
                                               level.                        synergy benefits (Prasad 2012).     Johannesburg, but not at the       of an integrated resource plan.
                                                                                                                 local rural level (Prasad 2012).
 Key planning     GoB 2013                     GoL n.d., 2004, 2012          GoN 1998                            RSA/DoE 2013a, 2013b               GoS 2009, 2012, 2014
 documents




57
   http://www.hydroworld.com/articles/2015/01/lesotho-seeks-bids-to-develop-polihali-dam-hydro-project-studied.html.
58
   https://www.esmap.org/re_mapping_lesotho.
59
   http://www.reuters.com/article/africa-oil-namibia-idUSL8N12T3D620151029.
60
   http://www.nampower.com.na/Page.aspx?p=222.
61
   http://www.energymatters.com.au/renewable-news/swaziland-solar-power-em5382/.

                                                                                        70
               Chapter 5: A Regional Approach to Addressing National Priorities

The shared water resources through the region’s large transboundary river basins and significant
history of electricity trade create the potential for a strong regional dimension to addressing
national water and energy priorities.

5.1       Southern African Development Community

The key institution focusing on regional integration in the region is SADC, which owes its origins
to the nine-member 62 Southern African Development Coordinating Conference (SADCC), formed
in 1980 as a means of overcoming economic dependence on apartheid South Africa. As South
Africa approached its political and social transformation in the late 1980s, the relevance of
SADCC’s primary objective diminished. This coincided with a desire among the membership for
streamlining SADCC’s project portfolio, which had grown significantly and comprised numerous
projects that were more national than regional. In addition, it was recognized that global “changes
in the organization of production and trade” demanded far greater integration across the region
and an entity that could spearhead this integration.
The SADC treaty was signed in 1992 in Windhoek, Namibia. The objectives of SADC are to:
      •   Achieve development and economic growth, alleviate poverty, enhance the standard and
          quality of life of the people of Southern Africa, and support the socially disadvantaged
          through regional integration;
      •   Evolve common political values, systems, and institutions;
      •   Promote and defend peace and security;
      •   Promote self-sustaining development on the basis of collective self-reliance, and the
          interdependence of member states;
      •   Achieve complementarity between national and regional strategies and programs;
      •   Promote and maximize productive employment and use of the region’s resources;
      •   Achieve sustainable use of natural resources and effective protection of the environment;
          and
      •   Strengthen and consolidate the long-standing historical, social, and cultural affinities and
          links among the people of the region.
Since the establishment of SADC, regional integration within Southern Africa has increased,
including in both the water and the energy sectors. This integration has occurred despite the
perennial need to enhance “institutional and human capacity to design, prepare, sequence,
coordinate implementation, and monitor regional operations” at the secretariat. In addition,
member states have tended to jealously guard their sovereignty, with consensus at the head-of-
state level being the means for resolving contentious matters. An attempt to formalize the
resolution of disputes related to the SADC treaty, through the establishment of a tribunal in 2003,
did not succeed and the body was disbanded in 2012.

62
  The founding members of SADCC were Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

                                                   71
The SADC treaty provides that member states should develop a set of legal and institutional
instruments—referred to as protocols—that have clearly stated objectives, scope, and institutional
mechanisms to facilitate cooperation and integration on key issues for the region. A protocol is a
legally binding document that commits all member states to its objectives and procedures. For a
protocol to be valid, it needs to be signed by at least two-thirds of SADC member states. SADC
currently has 26 protocols, 63 including the Revised Protocol on Shared Watercourses (SADC
2000) and the Protocol on Energy (SADC 1996). These documents provide the SADC community
with a foundation for regional cooperation and integration in water and energy.

5.2        Regional Water Resources

The disparities between individual countries’ water resource endowments and their overall demand
for water (discussed in the previous chapter) suggest that operating at a regional level can increase
benefits and reduce risks. A coordinated approach with benefit-sharing mechanisms to manage the
region’s shared waters could minimize social costs and improve allocative efficiency. There are
also challenges to regional coordination on water, including difficulties with resource mobilization
and allocation and the perception that regional processes extend project timelines (World Bank
2015g). 64
Institutional Arrangements for Managing the Region’s Shared Water Resources

Water resource management in the region is governed by the Revised Protocol on Shared
Watercourses in the Southern African Development Community (SADC 2000). The objectives of
the protocol are to:
       •   Promote and facilitate the establishment of shared watercourse agreements and shared
           watercourse institutions for the management of shared watercourses;
       •   Advance the sustainable, equitable, and reasonable use of the shared watercourses;
       •   Promote coordinated and integrated environmentally sound development and management
           of shared watercourses;
       •   Promote the harmonization and monitoring of legislation and policies for planning,
           developing, conserving, and protecting shared resources, and for allocating their resources;
           and
       •   Promote research and technology development, information exchange, capacity building,
           and the application of appropriate technologies in shared watercourse management.
The protocol also lays out an institutional framework for its implementation comprising the
Committee of Ministers, Committee of Water Senior Officials, Water Sector Coordinating Unit

63
     Including those not yet entered into force (http://www.sadc.int/about-sadc/overview/sa-protocols/).
64
     A multidonor trust fund representing a partnership between the World Bank and the governments of Denmark,
Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. Source:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/cooperation-in-international-waters-in-africa.



                                                           72
(based at the SADC secretariat), Water Resources Technical Committee, and shared watercourse
institutions (Figure 23).
Figure 23: SADC Water Sector Legislation, Policies, and Strategies




Source: SADC 2016.
Note: RBOs = river basin organizations; RISDP = Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan; RSAP = Regional
Strategic Development Plan; SADC = Southern African Development Community.


Water planning at the regional level takes place at the transboundary level and has not yet moved
to the level of full regional integrated development (Schreiner and Baleta 2015). Furthermore, the
shared watercourse protocol does not allocate the regional planning responsibility to any
institution, though the SADC Water Sector Coordinating Unit appears to be the natural candidate
for such a role and may already be carrying out ad hoc planning assignments.
Based on the provisions of the protocol, several entities manage the affairs of Southern Africa’s
river basins. These include the Cunene River Basin Commission, Limpopo Watercourse
Commission, Lesotho Highlands Water Commission, Lesotho Highlands Development Authority,
Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority, Orange–Senqu River Commission, Zambezi River Watercourse
Commission (ZAMCOM), and Zambezi River Authority (ZRA). The protocol does not prescribe

                                                       73
the role of these institutions, but states that “the responsibilities of such institutions shall be
determined by the nature of their objectives which must be in conformity with the principles set
out … in the protocol” (SADC 2000).
Information Sharing—The SADC Water Information Sharing Hub (SWISH)

Through 2012 and 2013, with support from the German Agency for International Cooperation
(GIZ) Transboundary Water Management in SADC Programme, the SADC Water Division
embarked on a project to develop a system to support the sharing of vital water-related information
across the Southern African region. The SWISH is an exchange hub that acts as a conduit for
water-related news, events, and documents and also provides access to a unified water glossary.
To engage with the SWISH, partners simply need to add RSS capabilities to the news, calendar,
and document libraries of their websites. These information feeds are then integrated into the
SWISH and made available to anyone wishing to either view them or integrate the information
into a website. In turn, partners are then able to display SWISH information on their websites.
Feeds from the SWISH can be filtered to enable partners to display the thematic or geographic
information that is relevant to their stakeholders. 65

Infrastructure Planning

There is considerable potential for coordinated infrastructure investment to improve overall use of
the region’s water resources. For example, just 14 percent of the SADC region’s actual renewable
water resources (ARWRs) are currently stored, and just 8 percent of its hydropower potential is
being realized.
The SADC Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan (RIDMP) (SADC 2012a) sets out
the region’s infrastructure development. The RIDMP Water Sector Plan is structured around a
series of “Vision 2027” targets, which include developing storage for 25 percent of ARWRs
(eventually to reach 75 percent) and increasing installed hydropower generation capacity from 12
GW to 75 GW (50 percent of potential) (SADC 2012c).
The RIDMP sets out an ambitious goal of a series of investments with a total expected value of
$200 billion in three phases (the total cost includes studies, facilitation projects, and capacity
building projects). Implementation of Phase 1 is currently underway to deliver 34 projects,
between 2013 and 2021, with an estimated total project cost of $16 billion.
These projects show little regional integration. Of the 34 identified Phase 1 investment projects,
only 4 are between two countries, and 1 (irrigation efficiency project) stretches across the entire
region. There are no projects between three or more countries (Schreiner and Baleta 2015) (Table
7).




65
  http://www.sadc.int/sadc-secretariat/directorates/office-deputy-executive-secretary-regional-
integration/infrastructure-services/sadc-water-sector/.

                                                         74
Table 7: The SADC RIDMP Water Plan Investment Projects—Phase 1

                                                                                     Project cost (US$ in
                       Project                              Lead agency
                                                                                          millions)
 Inga III hydropower                               Ministry of Energy, DRC                   8,000
 Lesotho Highlands—Phase 1                         LHDA and LHWC, Lesotho                    1,001
 Batoka Gorge hydropower scheme                    ZRA/ZESA/ZESCO                            4,000
 Songwe River Basin development project            Malawi and Tanzania                        328
 Vaal-Garnagara water supply                       DWA Botswana                               175
 Ressano Garcia Weir                               DNA Mozambique                              6
 Lomahasha/Namaacha water supply                   Mozambique and Swaziland                   31
 Water supply and sanitation at 12 locations       Zambia                                     165
 Water supply and sanitation—Lubango Phase 2       Angola                                     120
 Water supply and sanitation—Kinshasa              Ministry of Energy DRC                     220
 Lesotho lowlands water supply scheme—Zone 1       LHWC Lesotho                               78
 Mombezi multipurpose dam                          Blantyre Water Board Malawi                210
 Water supply and sanitation—13 housing estates    Mauritius                                  11
 Movene Dam                                        DNA Mozambique                             11
 Artificial recharge of Windhoek aquifer—Phases
                                                   NamWater                                   55
 2B and 3

 Reducing nonrevenue water and increasing use
                                                   Seychelles                                 26
 efficiency

 Nondvo multipurpose dam                           DWA Swaziland                              150

 Ruhuhu Valley irrigation scheme                   Tanzania                                   13
 Climate change adaptation to drought—agro
                                                   Zambia                                     80
 region 1

 Bulawayo–Zambezi water supply scheme              Zimbabwe                                   600
 Improved agricultural water application
                                                   SADC Water Division                       11.5
 efficiencies

Source: SADC RIDMP Water Plan (Table 4.2) (SADC 2012a).
Note: DNA = National Directorate of Water; DWA = Department of Water Affairs; LHDA = Lesotho Highlands
Development Authority; LHWC = Lesotho Highlands Water Commission; RIDMP = Regional Infrastructure
Development Master Plan; ZESA = Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority; ZESCO = Zambia Electricity Supply
Corporation; ZRA = Zambezi River Authority.




                                                      75
In addition, a prefeasibility study is being developed by Botswana to transfer water from Lesotho
via South Africa. However, in practice very little infrastructure is actually being developed
(Schreiner and Baleta 2015).
Large hydropower investment projects in the region present significant potential environmental,
social, and technical risks. These risks are recognized by the International Hydropower
Association’s Hydropower Sustainability Assessment Protocol—a framework to enable
hydropower developers to assess the sustainability of their projects (IHA 2016). The protocol
covers cross-cutting issues, such as climate change, IWRM, and transboundary issues. However,
since its launch in 2011, no assessments have been conducted in the region. 66 The World Bank is
addressing this through its Zambezi Hydropower Sustainability Assessment Protocol, which aims
to “assist the riparian states of the Zambezi River to develop and utilize the Zambezi hydropower
potential in a sustainable and responsible way…” (World Bank 2015h). The Bank will provide
support to the technical Committee of Zambezi Dam Operators and other key associations to
implement the protocol, and in doing so will help mitigate the risks associated with hydropower
development within the basin. Project inception consultations were held in April 2016, and the
project is expected to be completed by October 2017.
Bilateral Water-Sharing Projects

Bilateral water transfer agreements are in place between SADC member states both to address the
problem of uneven water resource distribution in the region through interbasin transfers, and to
coordinate on large infrastructure projects, such as the Kariba Dam on the Zambezi River.
Interbasin transfers

Figure 24 illustrates current and planned interbasin transfers in the SADC region. The most
significant of these transfers is between Lesotho and South Africa. The LHWP aims to address
South Africa’s water scarcity through the transfer of some of Lesotho’s abundant water resources
to the Gauteng region. The revenues from this project are enabling Lesotho to develop its
hydropower capacity and improve water distribution within the country.




66
     http://www.hydrosustainability.org/Protocol/Presentations.aspx.

                                                          76
Figure 24: Current and Planned Transboundary Interbasin Transfers in the SADC Region




Source: Turton, Ashton, and Jacobs 2008.

Note: Red lines indicate current transfers; purple lines indicate planned transfers.




                                                          77
Lesotho Highlands Water Project
The LHWP is an example of transboundary nexus benefit sharing that takes advantage of
significant synergy benefits. The project has the dual aims of providing water to the Gauteng region
of South Africa and generating hydroelectricity for Lesotho. It was established by the 1986 treaty
signed by the governments of Lesotho and South Africa. The LHWP harnesses the waters of the
Senqu–Orange River Basin in the Lesotho Highlands through the construction of a series of dams
for the mutual benefit of the two countries.
At its inception, the LHWP was designed to include five phases implemented over 30 years and is
expected to transfer about 70 m3 of water to Gauteng Province in South Africa. Phases 1A and 1B
have been completed. The main physical features of Phase 1A are the Katse Dam, the transfer
tunnel from Katse to the Muela Hydropower station, the Muela Hydropower station and
appurtenances, and the delivery tunnel to the border with South Africa. Phase 1B involved the
construction of the Mohale Dam and the diversion tunnel to the Katse Dam. Both phases also
involved the construction of infrastructure, such as tarred roads, feeder roads, bridges, camps, and
health facilities, as well as environmental and social programs. 67
Phase II is now underway and is expected to be largely complete by the end of 2024. It consists of
two separate but related components: water transfer and hydropower generation. The water-
transfer component of Phase II comprises an approximately 165-m-high Concrete Faced Rockfill
Dam at Polihali downstream of the confluence of the Khubelu and Senqu (Orange) rivers, and an
approximately 38-km-long concrete-lined gravity tunnel connecting the Polihali Reservoir to the
Katse Reservoir. Other Phase II activities include advance infrastructure (such as roads,
accommodation, power lines, and telecommunications) and the implementation of environmental
and social mitigating measures. The hydropower component of Phase II, which is currently
undergoing further feasibility studies, may include a pumped storage scheme and conventional
hydropower, such as the expansion of the ‘Muela infrastructure or new greenfield sites. Its exact
form will be determined on completion of further feasibility studies. 68
The governance structure of the LHWP is shown in Figure 25. Lesotho’s and South Africa’s “good
practice” water treaty was noted to have features that may be relevant for other transboundary
organizations, in particular, (1) clarity and detail in the treaty document, including procedures for
adjusting to changing circumstances; (2) appropriate institutions—a bridging institution has
worked well in coordinating actions between the two countries; (3) focused objectives; and (4)
independent dispute resolution mechanisms within the institutions themselves (World Bank
2010a).




67
     http://www.lhda.org.ls/Phase1/.
68
     http://www.lhda.org.ls/phase2/projectoverview.php.

                                                          78
Figure 25: Governance Structure of the Lesotho Highlands Project




Source: Lesotho Highlands Development Agency.

International dams—the Zambezi River

The Zambezi River has significant hydropower potential. The river’s main dam, the Kariba Dam,
is managed by a bilateral agreement between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The ZRA agreement was
signed in 1987 to manage the part of the Zambezi River that forms the border between Zambia and
Zimbabwe “to obtain, for the economic, industrial and social development of the two countries,
the greatest possible benefit from the natural advantages offered by the waters of the Zambezi
River.” The main responsibilities of the ZRA today are to operate and maintain the Kariba Dam,
investigate the development of new dam sites on the Zambezi River, and analyze and disseminate
hydrological and environmental information pertaining to the Zambezi River and Lake Kariba.

5.3     Multilateral Water Planning and the River Basin Commissions

Most of the region’s 21 transboundary river basins 69 are covered by international agreements (or
regimes), and have established a river basin organization (RBO). River basins that are fully within
SADC territory are under the jurisdiction of the SADC shared watercourse protocol (SADC 2000).
Basins that are covered by an international agreement or regime and that have established an RBO
are shaded in green in the map in Figure 26. The Rovuma basin, shaded in orange, has an
69
  This is a broader definition of regional transboundary river basins than used above, to include those not
recognized as major SADC transboundary basins but that lie geographically within the Southern African region.

                                                       79
established treaty, but not an RBO, whereas the Cuvelai basin, also in orange, established its river
basin commission (RBC) in 2014. The basins shaded in red have neither. For many basins without
an RBO or a treaty, further cooperation is not justified, either on the basis of their hydrological
regime, because the vast majority of resources resides in one member state, or because the river
basin is shared with non-SADC member state(s). Only the Rovuma (treaty, but no RBO) and Save–
Runde (no treaty or RBO) river basins stand to benefit from (increased) cooperation. (See Turton
(2010) for a more detailed discussion on river basin cooperation, relevant treaties, and RBOs.)




                                                80
Figure 26: International Agreements Relating to SADC Transboundary River Basins




Source: Turton, Ashton, and Jacobs 2008 in Turton 2010.


                                                          81
RBCs are created by establishing basinwide agreements between the respective riparian states. To
date, five RBCs have been established in the region to promote IWRM and development: 70
     •       Cuvelai Watercourse Commission (CUVECOM), established in 2014 between the
             riparian states of Angola and Namibia;
     •       Limpopo Watercourse Commission (LIMCOM), established in 2003 between the
             riparian states of Botswana, Mozambique, South Africa, and Zimbabwe;
     •       Okavango River Basin Water Commission (OKACOM), established in 1994 between
             the riparian states of Angola, Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe;
     •       Orange–Senqu River Commission (ORASECOM), established in 2000 between the
             riparian states of Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and South Africa; and
     •       ZAMCOM, established in 2011.
These RBCs vary in terms of the complexity of their activities. They range from simple activities,
such as pollution control and information sharing, to drawing up resource allocation agreements
and executing integrated river basin management. 71 From a technical point of view, the RBCs are
reasonably well equipped—though political constraints limit the extent of their power. It is felt
that national interests mean that few if any RBCs are intended to satisfy a well-thought-out regional
agenda. ZAMCOM and ORASECOM are discussed in more detail below.

ZAMCOM
ZAMCOM was established in 2011 as an interim secretariat by the eight countries that share the
Zambezi River Basin 72 and in accordance with the revised SADC Revised Protocol on Shared
Watercourses (SADC 2000). In 2014 ZAMCOM was successfully transitioned to a permanent
organization, based in Zimbabwe (World Bank 2015g). Its main objective is “to promote the
equitable and reasonable utilization of the water resources of the Zambezi Watercourse as well as
the efficient management and sustainable development thereof” (ZAMCOM 2016).
ZAMCOM is developing a strategic plan for the development of the basin in accordance with the
provision of the ZAMCOM agreement (with support from a World Bank-administered grant). The
high number of riparian states gives rise to complex issues concerning how to share the rivers’
significant water resource. In 2012, there were seven actors 73 and seven projects focusing on
transboundary issues throughout the basin (SIWI 2012). The Climate Resilient Infrastructure
Development Facility’s 2014 analysis of Zambian water policy commented: “The ZAMCOM is
still in its infancy and various principles such as ERU [equitable and reasonable utilization] will



70
   Sources: http://www.sadc.int/themes/natural-resources/water/ and
http://www.sadc.int/files/3114/4042/5971/35th_SADC_Summit_final_brochure.pdf.
71
   These RBCs establish development scenarios and carry out impact assessments, which in turn may lead to basin-
level and sector-level strategies.
72
   The riparian states of the Zambezi River Basin are Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania,
Zambia, and Zimbabwe (ZAMCOM 2016).
73
   Actors are defined by SIWI as any regional or international organization, institution, or network working with
transboundary water management.

                                                       82
need to be developed into operational technical policies, particularly with respect to national
plans that may affect the other riparian States” (CRIDF/DfID 2014a).
Since 2015, a series of projects supported by the multidonor trust fund Cooperation in International
Waters in Africa (CIWA) 74 is helping to overcome some of the institutional and financial issues
that have hindered progress in developing the Zambezi basin. These projects are being delivered
through CIWA’s Zambezi River Basin Program, which provides an integrating framework to
coordinate World Bank and other development partner programs and achieve the key objectives
of ZAMCOM (see box below).
Box 6: The Zambezi River Basin Program

     CIWA is working with ZAMCOM to strengthen its ability to facilitate collaborative action and
     to make it more financially sustainable and efficient. The potential gains are significant. For
     example, it is estimated that coordinated operation of the river basin’s hydropower facilities
     could increase energy production by 23 percent without additional investment. Water supplies
     could be secured for the drylands of Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe and further afield, and
     cooperation on strategic disaster management could reduce flood and drought risks, potentially
     averting water-shock losses of up to $1 billion per year.
     One project, the Zambezi River Basin Management Project, is being implemented by
     ZAMCOM and is supported through a $4 million CIWA grant. This project will develop the
     strategic plan for the river basin, conduct an equivalence assessment of national water laws
     among riparian states, and carry out Component 3 of the Zambezi Water Resources Information
     System Enhancement: Hydro-Met Database and Decision Support System.
     Another project, the Zambezi River Basin Development Project, is being implemented by ZRA
     and financed through a $7.5 million grant from CIWA. This includes several activities to
     improve the Bakota Gorge Hydro-Electric Scheme investment to address the prevailing power
     supply shortages within the SAPP.
Source: World Bank 2015g.

ORASECOM

Established in 2000, ORASECOM represents the first multilateral agreement between all the
riparian states of the river basin: South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, and Namibia. Key challenges
for the basin include managing its 30 dams and inter- and intrabasin transfers, and addressing
increasing unsustainable water resource demands and pollution and land degradation. In 2012,
there were 11 actors and 10 projects focusing on transboundary issues throughout the basin (SIWI
2012).
A key ORASECOM achievement with assistance from the United Nations Development
Programme and Global Environment Facility was the establishment of the Orange–Senqu Water
74
  The CIWA multidonor trust fund is a partnership between the World Bank and the governments of Denmark,
Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom to address constraints to cooperative management and
development of Africa’s international waters.

                                                     83
Information System. This web-based portal provides access to spatial and time-series data, as well
as scientific research relating to the basin, and is expected to be replicated by other RBCs in
Southern Africa. While ORASECOM can be considered to be an effective coordinator of
information and an advisor on regulatory issues and beneficial and harmful practices within the
river basin, it is less effective as a regional coordinator of investment planning and joint
investments. This may in part relate to a lack of clarity on its mandate in relation to these areas.

5.4       Regional Priorities for Water Resources and Supply

In 2012, SADC launched its Regional Water Supply and Sanitation Programme, an integral part
of the 2011–15 SADC Regional Strategic Action Plan (RSAP) on Integrated Water Resources
Development and Management (SADC 2011). The program’s priorities reflect the key challenges
faced by SADC countries in achieving their sustainability and development goals and visions. The
priorities were identified as a result of past SADC projects and investigations, and reflect the
national priorities discussed in the previous chapter, which are presented under five pillars: 75
      1. Financing—improving the financial efficiency of the water supply and sanitation (WSS)
         sector in SADC member states;
      2. Institutional capacity—institutional arrangements, rationalization, and strengthening;
      3. Infrastructure development—WSS infrastructure development support;
      4. Monitoring and reporting—development and implementation of a WSS monitoring and
         reporting program; and
      5. Knowledge management and information sharing—structured around the basic WSS
         services needed to meet the Millennium Development Goals.
The SADC water sector is currently coordinating implementation of the third phase of the 2011–
15 RSAP, which focuses on three strategic areas (SADC 2011):
      •   Water governance;
      •   Infrastructure development; and
      •   Water management.

5.5       SADC Protocol on Energy and the SAPP

The SADC Protocol on Energy (PoE) (SADC 1996) defines the guidelines for regional energy
cooperation, which include
      •   Promoting electricity trading and power pooling, such as that described in the SAPP
          intergovernmental memorandum of understanding and the SAPP Agreement between
          Operating Members, all as adopted by the member states;



75
  http://www.sadc.int/sadc-secretariat/directorates/office-deputy-executive-secretary-regional-
integration/infrastructure-services/sadc-regional-water-supply/.

                                                         84
   •   Promoting integrated resource planning in the electricity subsector to take advantage of
       economies of scale and optimization of investment and sharing of benefits; and
   •   Coordinating the development and regular updating of a regional electricity master plan.
Regional energy development is at the core of SADC’s agenda, which has developed strategies
and established dedicated agencies that together form a consolidated institutional architecture
driving integration in the energy sector. The key actor is the SAPP, created by SADC in 1995
through an intergovernmental memorandum of understanding in August 1995, and guided by the
SADC PoE. The SAPP’s mandate includes enhancing regional cooperation in power development
and trade and producing nonbinding regional plans to guide the delivery of infrastructure for
generating and transmitting electricity. Individual member states are not bound to these plans and
have the right to implement national plans without regard to regional plans (Schreiner and Baleta
2015).
The SAPP has a sound governance structure, with its key establishing agreements and operating
guidelines signed by both members’ governments and utilities. In 2002, a SAPP Coordination
Centre was established in Harare, Zimbabwe, as an arm of the Operating Subcommittee to monitor
operations and transactions within the SAPP, including controlling dispatching operations and
serving as a trading center for electricity auctions. The Coordination Centre is the first body with
responsibility for regional power market oversight and operation established in Africa.
Power trading

Currently the most advanced and organized of all power pools in Africa, the SAPP coordinates
trade between 12 SADC countries (Angola, Botswana, DRC, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique,
Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe), of which 9 are operating
members—namely, via the interconnected grid that carries around 97 percent of the energy
produced in the SAPP (see Figure 20 and
Figure 27). The nonoperating members—which are yet to construct transmission links to the
regional grid—are Angola, Malawi, and Tanzania.
The SAPP is also the power pool with the largest volume of power traded and the only one with
some form of competitive power market in Africa. Unlike the other African power pools, the SAPP
has active power trading. A short-term energy market (STEM) was introduced in 2001, which was
replaced in 2009 by the day-ahead market (DAM), a fully competitive auction market open to
utilities, independent power producers, transmitters, and distributors. Although STEM and DAM
constitute notable innovations, the majority of energy sales and purchases continues to take place
through negotiated bilateral agreements. As of today, 28 contracts for bilateral trading of power
are registered in the region, 18 of which entail long-term provision of firm capacity, with an overall
volume of power traded that is the largest among all Africa’s regions. Power trade is driven by
South Africa, because of its relatively large power needs within the region and more creditworthy
status as a power offtaker. The 2013 update to the 2010 South African Integrated Resource Plan
(IRP) 2010–30 includes significant emphasis on sourcing power from regional sources (RSA/DoE
2013a). Overall, power trade in the region is poised to increase. It is estimated that by 2025, exports

                                                  85
could reach 62 terawatt-hours—a four-time increase over 2010—accommodating 11–13 percent
of total demand in the region (Nexant 2009).


Figure 27: SAPP Power Utilities and Interconnections 2015




Source: SAPP 2015.

Regional coordination issues

There is still significant room for improvement regarding the SAPP’s regional coordination
capacity. Further integration and market competition in the SAPP critically hinge on increasing
generation and transmission capacity and are restrained by most sellers and buyers wanting to have
long-term PPAs. Of the 28 bilateral electricity-trading contracts in place in 2012–13, only 15 were
active because of generation and transmission constraints (Schreiner and Baleta 2015). The current
constraints in transmission infrastructure are an obstacle to freely trading power on the spot market.
As a result, on average, STEM accounted for 5–10 percent of the energy traded in the region in
2012–13, while DAM currently accounts for around 1 percent.


                                                     86
In reality, full integration of multiple national electricity systems and a competitive regional power
market with multiple buyers and sellers takes significant political and institutional will,
coordination, and time to materialize. So far, it has only been achieved in a few industrialized
regions (Nord Pool in Scandinavia is probably the closest to this model). In Southern Africa,
concerns about security of supply and counterparty creditworthiness constitute key reasons for
countries opting to trade bilaterally based on long-term PPAs (see the discussion of the Inga 3
project and the treaty between the DRC and South Africa in the Regional Energy Priorities section,
below). Going forward, generation projects will be developed with private-sector financing. Thus,
certainty in power sale and credit worthiness of offtakers will be critical, and PPAs will continue
to be the standard for the majority of the power being sold.
The benefits attached to power trade—whether through bilateral contracts or through a more
competitive market—and the prospects for trade in the near future make a strong case for regional
generation and transmission projects. The focus of the SAPP has thus shifted more and more to
the preparation and implementation of priority regional energy projects that further such regional
integration.
Accordingly, the SAPP set up a Projects Advisory Unit in Johannesburg during 2015. The office
includes staff members who are specialists in project preparation and structuring for financing.
The unit is funded by a World Bank $20 million grant, 76 with funds from this grant also available
for regional analytical work and for direct support in preparation of regional priority energy
projects. The Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency and other donors are also
moving to support this new unit and its work.
Regional Energy Priorities

The SADC region faces a number of challenges in relation to energy availability, facing a
capacity gap of between 8,247 MW 77 and 16,536 MW 78 ; delivery; access (36 percent overall
and less than 10 percent in rural areas of most member states; and affordability (SADC 2016).
.
The SAPP Regional Generation and Transmission Expansion Plan, commissioned by the SAPP in
2001 and updated in 2009, 79 has identified a detailed list of priority generation and transmission
projects that allow accommodating rapidly increasing electricity demand in the region at the least
cost over the period 2006–25. The SAPP selects priority projects on the basis of the selection
criteria shown in Table 8). Project costs and size are given the highest weight in deciding which
projects to select, and the number of coordinating countries is given the lowest weight. A standard
project is regarded as one that delivers benefits (employment and GDP) mainly at the national
level.



76
   See the following link for further details: http://www.worldbank.org/projects/P126661?lang=en.
77
   Refers to difference between normal peak demand and operating capacity taking into account generation
capacity reserve margins.
78
   Refers to the difference between suppressed demand and operating capacity taking into account generating
capacity reserve margins.
79
   A new Regional Power Sector Masterplan is currently being developed, funded by the World Bank.

                                                      87
Table 8: SAPP Priority Project Selection

                                                                                       Weighting      Definition of
          Criteria                                       Measure
                                                                                          (%)         “Standard”
 1. Size of project                   Expected output in MW                            15           200–500 MW
 2. Levelized costs                   Discounted operations and maintenance,           25           71–100
                                      variable, environmental mitigation, and                       US¢/MWh
                                      transmission integration costs
 3. Availability of associated        Transmission infrastructure needed to            10           50–100 km
   transmission infrastructure        evacuate power from the plant
 4. Economic impact                   Economic benefits accruing to the                10           Mainly national
                                      participating countries and to the region as a                benefit (jobs,
                                      whole                                                         GDP increase),
                                                                                                    some regional
                                                                                                    benefit
 5. Commissioning date                Date construction will be completed and the      10           2017
                                      plant will be ready for operation
 6. Share of capacity already         The amount of power that has been                10           36–50%
   committed                          committed for sale through PPAs, etc.
 7. Share of capacity available for   The amount of capacity that will be available    15           36–50%
   regional power trade after         for exports after project commissioning
   commissioning
 8. Number of participating           Number of countries involved in the project      5            3 countries
   countries
Source: World Bank 2014c.

Note: Projects are scored using the following scoring system with reference to the definition of standard set out in
the fourth column of the table above: weak (1), below standard (2), standard (3), above standard (4), and best (5).
Outcomes that are less than standard will achieve a lower score and outcomes that are better than standard, a higher
score.

SAPP’s key transmission projects include (SAPP 2015 80)
     •   Zambia–Tanzania–Kenya interconnector
     •   Mozambique Transmission Backbone Project (STE)
     •   Central Transmission Corridor in Zimbabwe
     •   Botswana North West Transmission Grid Connection Project Phase 1 and 2 (completion
         2018/19)
     •   Mozambique–Malawi Interconnector
     •   Namibia–Angola–Interconnector
     •   Zimbabwe–Zambia–Botswana–Namibia Interconnector
     •   Mozambique–Zimbabwe–South Africa Interconnector (MOZISA) Transmission Project
     •   Grand Inga Phase 1 Transmission Integration
National demands for energy have also led to various regional treaties and bilateral and multilateral
agreements for the advancement of hydropower projects, such as for Inga 3 (DRC and South
Africa) and Mphanda Nkuwa (ongoing dialogue between Mozambique and South Africa).


80
  The Second DRC–Zambia 220-kilovolt Interconnector project listed in the SAPP 2015 annual report has since
been completed (SAPP 2015).

                                                         88
While all these efforts are being made at a regional level, it is clear that the priority of countries in
the region is to develop physical self-sufficiency in generation capacity within their own national
boundaries—and to primarily look at regional trade as an opportunity to finance larger generation
projects (than may be required to meet national demand) and to export power to the region. South
Africa is the clear exception—looking to import power. Its 2013 update to its IRP refers to
hydropower in the region being a source of power for South Africa, and the country is actively
engaging with DRC and Mozambique, among others (RSA/DoE 2013a). The role of South Africa
in backstopping PPAs will be critical in attracting credible investors and developing bankable
projects.

5.6     Cross-sectoral Activity at the Regional Level

In recognition of the energy–water nexus and driven by a need to respond to the region’s current
drought crisis, SADC has produced a draft energy–water nexus action plan, as shown in Figure 28
(SADC 2016).
Figure 28: The SADC Energy–Water Nexus Action Plan Conceptual Framework




Source: SADC 2016.


                                                   89
Despite the plan’s energy-water nexus focus, very few of its activities are directly cross-sectoral
in nature. The majority of them on individual sector efficiencies, such as household and industrial
reuse and recycling of water and solar-powered street lighting. The only exception is to “Implement
a SADC Regional policy to reduce the consumption of energy for water heating by banning the
use of electric geysers, boilers and other electric water heating equipment regionally in all new
building and industrial developments” (SADC 2016).
Energy

There is little evidence of cross-sectoral planning in the current version of the SAPP regional pool
plan. As stated in the energy protocol’s guidelines for regional cooperation in electricity, the SAPP
is the custodian of regional planning. Considerations regarding water resource availability are part
of the generation planning process for hydroelectric schemes. However, when it comes to decisions
about projects, typically there are no prioritization criteria that are linked to broader water issues
or water opportunity costs. There are also no formal links with SADC water institutions when
undertaking such work. Since 2015, the SAPP has been developing a new Regional Power Sector
Master Plan. 81 The work is being driven by the Planning Subcommittee of the SAPP, which
consists of representatives of all the member utilities. This master plan is taking an approach that
identifies not just least-cost but also robust solutions, given all the uncertainties relating to regional
power sector development. It is expected that water and climate change will play a role in the
uncertainty scenarios.

Water

There is significant potential for regional benefit sharing across Southern Africa’s watercourses.
For example, water-stressed countries in the southern basins of the region (such as South Africa)
would benefit from developing the hydropower resource potential elsewhere in the region, such as
in DRC (Congo Basin) and Mozambique (Zambezi Basin) to source cost-effective and reliable
electricity supply to meet its fast-growing electricity resource needs. In turn, countries with
hydropower potential, such as DRC, can benefit from the revenues derived from the sale of power
to South Africa.

Figure 29 illustrates the current situation for Southern Africa. The northern river basins have large
water resources, low energy demands, and relatively low incomes. In contrast, the southern basins
have relatively poor water resources, high energy demand, and relatively high incomes. Adopting
a regional approach to benefits could result in the northern basins investing in additional
hydroelectric generation to meet the high electricity demands of the southern river basins and, in
so doing, could generate much-needed income for the northern basins (MRC 2012).




81
     Funded by the World Bank with an International Development Association grant to the SAPP.

                                                        90
Figure 29: A Model for Regional Benefit Sharing in Southern Africa




Source: Adapted from MRC 2012.

The Grand Inga scheme in the Congo basin presents an opportunity to put benefit sharing into
practice in the region. The rapids on the Congo River at Inga in the province of Bas Congo have
an estimated hydropower potential of 40,000 MW, and have long attracted the imagination of
power developers (World Bank 2014b). The Inga 1 hydropower plant was commissioned in 1972,
and Inga 2 was added in 1982. Inga 1 and Inga 2 have a combined installed generation capacity of
1,800 MW. However, the available operational capacity of both plants has dropped below 900
MW, and both plants are currently undergoing rehabilitation with World Bank financing. A Grand
Inga scheme was first studied in the 1970s, and would require the construction of a large dam
across the Congo. A new approach of a series of smaller hydropower developments was adopted
in 2011. The staged development of the Inga site is considered more in step with local and regional
energy demand growth, limits the needed upfront investment, and significantly reduces risks.
The next stage of the Inga site development would be Inga 3 Bass Chute (BC). Figure 30 illustrates
the project, which will include a diversion of part of the water of the Congo River into the Bundi
tributary, a dam across the Bundi valley, a hydropower station equipped with 11 units for a total
installed capacity of 4,755 MW, and transmission lines connecting the power station to Kinshasa
and to DRC’s border via Kolwezi (Katanga region) (World Bank 2014e). South Africa has shown
strong interest in the low-cost clean energy that could be produced at Inga. On November 2011,
presidents Joseph Kabila and Jacob Zuma signed a memorandum of understanding on the phased
development of Inga. During the October 2013 state visit of President Zuma to Kinshasa, the
governments of South Africa and DRC signed a treaty on Inga governing the electricity trade
between the two countries. The treaty provides the framework for the facilitation of power
generation from the Grand Inga project and its delivery to the border between DRC and Zambia,
including the agreement that DRC will purchase 2,300 MW and South Africa will purchase 2,500
MW from the first phase of the Inga 3 BC development (see DRC&RSA 2013 for more details.)


                                                      91
Given the extremely high cost of this scheme and the many countries that will need to be passed
through to deliver power to South Africa, the Inga 3 project will be extremely complex to structure
and finance. A smaller and less politically complex project (at least on the face of it), the 1,500-
MW Mphanda Nkuwa hydropower project on the Zambezi River downstream of Cahora Bassa
has taken many years to advance. It is hoped that the new SAPP Project Advisory Unit—with more
skilled staff in project preparation and funding from donors—will be able to advance these
complex regional programs.




                                                92
Figure 30: Development of the Inga Site on the Congo River




Source: World Bank 2014e.




                                                             93
Evidence on cross-sector planning

The Revised Protocol on Shared Watercourses in the Southern African Development
Community (SADC 2000) makes no mention of the energy sector, which contrasts with the
earlier 1995 version that included monitoring the establishment of hydroelectric power
installations and monitoring the generation of hydroelectric power in the functions of river
basin management institutions.
Box 7: The 2013 SADC Multi-Stakeholder Water Dialogue

 In 2013, the SADC Multi-Stakeholder Water Dialogue focusing on the WEF nexus was
 held in Lusaka. The key outcomes of the meeting were as follows:
      •    The nexus approach must be tailored to the context of SADC countries and enable
           growth and development of the economies. As such, the approach to the nexus
           should concentrate on infrastructure development and institutional capacity
           building based on the nexus approach that helps deliver these development goals.
      •    The SADC Regional Indicative Development Plan, the SADC Regional Water
           Policy, and the SADC Regional Infrastructure Plan all recognize the need for
           more integrated planning across sectors and countries.
      •    Both policy and economic instruments (such as pricing) are important to achieving
           desired outcomes under a nexus approach.
      •    Champions of the approach at different levels need to be identified to drive the
           process in their respective constituencies and sectors.
      •    Integrated platforms need to be created to plan, manage, and implement cross-
           sector solutions and to build deeper understanding.
      •    For sustainable and effective solutions, consideration must be given to actively
           engaging the private sector; expanding the mandate of regional institutions, such
           as the river basin organizations; promoting opportunities and capacities for
           integrated research; and drawing attention to the role of ecosystems.
      •    In the SADC region, about half of the member states have the water and energy
           sectors situated in one ministry, thereby improving possibilities of intersectoral
           linkages.

Source: SADC 2013.

5.7       Information Gaps

Implementing a cross-sectoral approach to power and water planning that takes into account
climate change can be restrained by a lack of information and capacity to apply information
through water and planning tools:
    • Cross-sectoral power sector investment planning requires knowledge of the water
       intensity of potential investment technologies and how climate change may affect
       power supply.
    • Water sector planning and how to allocate water among users require knowledge of
       current levels of available resources and future weather patterns, taking into account
       climate change. This information is complex, and there is a need to develop tools that
       integrate sector supply and demand and climate change impacts.


                                                 94
Overall statistical capacity for most of the countries is relatively low compared with the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) country average of 74.8
(Figure 31), and there is significant disparity among the region’s countries in terms of available
data. While data and research are relatively well advanced for South Africa, far less data are
available—for example, on water resources and climate impacts—for many other countries in
the region.
Figure 31: Statistical Capacity Indicators for Selected Southern African Countries (2015)




Source: World Bank Statistical Capacity Indicator Dashboard.
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/statisticalcapacity/SCIdashboard.aspx.



Water Intensity Data on Regional Energy Generation Technologies

Currently, data on energy technologies’ water demands (consumption and withdrawal) are
global and are often depicted as a range, indicating the difficulty of providing a definitive figure
for energy technology consumption. IEA and World Bank (2015) disputes the usefulness of
such global data to help planning or operations in developing countries, as there is no single
factor for a specific energy process (see also Madani and Khatani 2015).
There is evidence that South Africa is using data on the estimated water intensity of its power
plants (World Bank 2015b), but it is not clear whether the data can be applied to other locations.

Regional Water Resource Data

Water resource scarcity is the central point of the water–energy nexus. Knowledge of water
resources and how they will vary in the future is therefore fundamental to any energy–water
nexus decision. There is evidence of significant underinvestment in water information as an
input to decision making in Africa and a critical lack of adequate hydrological data to estimate
current and future water resource availability (SIWI 2010; Miralles-Wilhelm 2013).
Hydrological data availability across the region

                                                      95
Although significant research has been conducted privately by riparian states, very little
information in the public domain is available on river volumes and flows. This presents a
significant challenge that needs to be addressed (Turton 2010). A study for the SADC
secretariat (EBI 2010) reviewed the level of data available by member state for the purposes of
economic accounting of water. 82 The results, presented in Figure 32, show that data availability
by country is variable. Whereas water use and supply data are generally available, information
on water quality is generally not. In fact, no reliable data are available at the regional level to
provide an indication of water quality trends (Turton 2010). This is a concern, given the general
trend in the SADC region toward deteriorating water quality (Turton, Ashton, and Jacobs
2008).
Figure 32: Data Availability by Member State




Source: EBI 2010.

The EBI study concludes that data availability is a major constraint in SADC countries, noting
that although data exist, the information tends to be scattered among institutions and not in a
usable format. Remedying this problem could take at least a full year of intensive data
collection and processing (EBI 2010).

5.8     Parallel Work in Other Regions

The need to strengthen the capacity of regional and national institutions to facilitate an
integrated, climate-resilient approach to water and energy planning at the national and regional
levels is not peculiar to Southern Africa. Information and institutional capacity shortfalls are a
global issue to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the region. This report has already
referenced the global effort on developing integrated resource modeling (Chapter 3) and work


82
   The purpose of economic accounting is to provide a consistent framework for analyzing the impact of the
economy on water resources and the contribution of water resources to the economy.

                                                   96
carried out in Europe by Électricité de France and the World Water Council to integrate water
valuation into energy planning (Bellet and Spurgeon 2012; EdF/WWC 2015).
The World Bank is currently delivering a number of projects in Central Asia to improve the
region’s capacity to reflect the role of water in its economy, and improve energy and water
sector investment in climate resilience. These projects are listed in Annex 3 as an illustration
of support that is being offered by the Bank in relation to nexus capacity issues.




                                              97
                                   Chapter 6: Conclusions

The term energy–water nexus is used to describe the intertwining of energy and water supply
and demand. Energy is used to produce and distribute water that is needed, in many cases, to
produce energy. Water resource availability lies at the heart of the nexus, in part because of the
dependence of energy and water supply upon this availability, and because water resources
tend to be undervalued, leading to their unsustainable use. The effects of climate change—
namely, changes in ambient temperatures and rainfall patterns—interact with the nexus,
changing water resource availability and the performance of energy technology (to name a few
of its potential impacts). Most importantly, climate change imposes deep uncertainty on
decision-making processes, since only the general trend and not the timing and magnitude of
its impacts are known.
The energy–water nexus is widely recognized at the international level, and a number of
frameworks have been developed to assist policy makers with developing their understanding
(for example, SEI/Hoff 2011). Also, substantial international data relate to the nexus. For
example international research provides information on how climate change may affect
individual countries and there are datasets on power generation’s water requirements. Research
is ongoing to develop robust decision-making approaches that ensure that investments are
climate resilient. A recent development is integrated energy–water planning tools that enable
policy makers to quantify the trade-offs to inform investment decisions.

6.1    Relevance of the Energy–Water Nexus for Regional Planning

The interrelationship between water and energy supply, water resources, and climate change is
particularly relevant to decision making in Southern Africa. Its regional water resources are
unevenly distributed both spatially and temporally, leading to significant water scarcity in some
parts of the region and relative abundance in others. There is also limited knowledge on the
region’s overall water resource levels. Climate change is expected to reduce rainfall levels,
increase rainfall variability, and increase ambient temperatures, but there is little certainty
about when and by how much (Bates et al. 2008).
In light of these spatial differences, water and energy sector planning needs to be approached
in tandem at a local, national, river basin, or regional level, depending upon the nature of the
issue. Both sectors need to assess the value of the water resources they consume and use this
information to improve overall efficiency in terms of the freshwater they consume or withdraw.
They also need to ensure that planning minimizes overall costs and maximizes benefits.
Examples of some of the key issues relating to water and energy planning are highlighted as
follows.
Climate change may result in increased water scarcity for the region. One response to this could
be to construct additional reservoirs. In doing so, by using a nexus approach, planners should
be considering opportunities for synergy benefits, such as investment in multipurpose
reservoirs (such as for storing water and producing hydropower). The region has a number of
large-scale, energy-intensive (sometimes transboundary) water-transfer schemes underway or
under consideration. While water trading has the potential to generate mutual benefits, the
nexus between energy and water suggests that where water is being transferred for the purposes
of energy production, it may be more efficient to invest in hydropower generation in areas of
abundant water and to import power (Entholzner and Reeve 2016; Allan 2006). For coastal

                                               98
countries, such as Namibia, desalination offers another solution, but is again energy intensive;
therefore, these countries should look to co-locate thermal or renewable energy production with
desalination technologies to exploit synergies.
Hydropower generation is an important and increasing contributor to regional power supply.
Its obvious connection with regional water resources makes a direct link to the nexus. The
recent drought and its impact on hydropower output (power output from the Kariba Dam has
been reduced by 50 percent, for example) illustrate hydropower’s vulnerability to climate
change and implies a different approach to investment decisions that accommodates deep
uncertainty by employing robust decision-making techniques to ensure that future hydropower
investments are resilient to climate. Another significant challenge is the need to take into
account the full economic costs of the water that is withdrawn for hydropower generation,
including downstream impacts, such as changes to river flow rates, and silting patterns, and to
consider synergy solutions, such as multipurpose reservoirs.
Significant coal reserves mean the region continues to be heavily reliant upon coal-fired power
generation. Cooling technologies vary significantly in terms of the amount of freshwater they
withdraw, and despite lowering the overall efficiency of power generation, dry-cooled
solutions may be the most effective solution when water costs are fully accounted (as the recent
Thirsty Energy research proved for South Africa power generation investment (World Bank
2015b)). Because power generation and cooling technologies perform differently under
different ambient conditions, international data on power generation and its water consumption
and withdrawal decisions should be supplemented by local performance data, wherever
possible.

6.2    Key Areas to Be Addressed

While substantial progress has been made to recognize water–energy links in many countries’
legislation and plans, there is evidence of significant barriers across the region with regard to
implementing a cross-sectoral approach to planning. These result from capacity constraints at
many levels, including a lack of data (and capacity to collect and further analyze data), and
limited institutional capacity to facilitate data sharing and the necessary cross-sectoral
coordination to implement plans and strategies.
There are significant gaps in regional water resource data, preventing for example, the
development of water resource allocation plans (ODI, ECDM, and GDI/DIE 2012). There is a
need to improve knowledge of the amount of water that is being withdrawn and detail on
streamflow rates (Miralles-Wilhelm 2013; Droogers, de Boer, and Terink 2014). Data on
energy generation technology water use (withdrawal and consumption) could also be improved
to provide data that are reflective of the local climate, rather than relying on international data
(IEA and World Bank, 2015). Because these data may exist in some instances, there is a need
to coordinate at a regional level to share this information.
In terms of data analysis, climate change imposes deep uncertainty, and with it a need to
analyze investment opportunities from a different perspective, opting instead for climate-
resilient strategies that minimize potential losses under a range of scenarios (World Bank
2016a). Again, capacity within the region to undertake this analysis needs to be developed.
Associated with this is the significant need to develop practical integrated energy–water
planning tools, to enable decision makers to quantify power generation investment trade-offs

                                                99
at the national and regional levels and take account of the uncertainties imposed by climate
change (Miralles-Wilhelm 2016). The current work by the World Bank’s Thirsty Energy
Initiative to develop a national South African integrated model provides the first regional
example of such a tool (World Bank 2015b). The Bank is also supporting the SAPP with the
development of its new Regional Power Sector Masterplan, which is expected to incorporate
approaches that seek robust options under the various outcome scenarios (including climate
change).
Southern Africa has institutions at the regional level that are well positioned to undertake
integrated, regionwide planning. SADC already recognizes the nexus and the importance of
understanding the scarcity value of water resources through such initiatives as the economic
accounting of water and the SADC Water Information Sharing Hub. An analysis of SADC’s
RIDMP reveals limited regional coordination for its proposed water infrastructure projects,
with no projects planned involving three or more countries (SADC 2012a). While RBCs have
been established to coordinate information, and in some cases, integrated planning at the river
basin level, evidence on their performance to date suggests they are quite limited in their ability
to implement cross-sectoral plans, and in most cases their role remains limited to that of
information coordination (CRIDF/DfID 2014a). Also, their geographic basin-level focus
means they are unable to act on issues that extend beyond the basin. The SAPP provides a basis
for regional coordination through power trading, but there appears to be a lack of political will
to rely on neighboring countries: national plans continue to emphasize self-reliance, despite the
clear potential benefits of planning and working at a regional level.

6.3       Suggested Next Steps

 A priority for the region is to bring together regional stakeholders in an organized manner to
discuss the nexus and ultimately agree on what the key priorities are for cross-sectoral
coordination in the region and who are the main “champions” to help address each of these
priorities. The recent SADC Energy and Water Joint Ministerial Workshop held on June 20,
2016 has helped create awareness and context for such a process. This Paper proposes the
following next steps:
      •   Convene focused meetings at the SADC level to better inform regional stakeholders on
          the key overarching nexus issues for the region. These meetings would include the main
          findings contained in this background paper. As an output of these meetings, there
          would be a need to pull together an overarching matrix that sets out the key priorities
          identified by the stakeholders, and for each, identify the relevant stakeholders
          connected with these issues and champions for addressing them in the region. A
          potential convener for these meetings would be the SADC Secretariat.
      •   A following step would be to conduct focused workshops at various levels (national,
          regional, sectoral, and cross-sectoral) on key analytical nexus-related issues, such as
          water valuation, robust decision-making techniques and their application to climate-
          resilient investment, and integrated modeling tools. A key output of these workshops
          would be a view on the current data and analytical capacities of individual member
          states to carry out such analyses, to identify significant data gaps and whether in the
          first instance it is most appropriate to develop these capacities at a national and/or
          regional level.


                                               100
•   Regional energy and water planning stakeholders would subsequently need to
    reconvene to discuss the identified priorities, gaps and relevant champions and
    determine how implementation will be taken forward.




                                      101
        Annex 1: A Summary of the Key Water–Energy–Food Nexus Frameworks

Since the Bonn 2011 conference on the WEF nexus, several nexus frameworks have been
published. These frameworks demonstrate sector interdependency and the exogenous impacts
of population growth and climate change, which will impose significant pressures on the nexus.
This annex presents the framework developed by SEI/Hoff (2011) and the World Economic
Forum (WEF 2011b) and the Forum’s discussion of the WEF interlinkages (WEF 2011a).

A1.1    Stockholm Environment Institute/Hoff WEF Nexus Framework

The SEI/Hoff (2011) nexus framework focuses on resource security (Figure A1.1). It illustrates
(1) the links between the water, food, and energy sectors and their reliance on limited water
resources; and (2) the pressure that external factors, such as urbanization, population growth,
and climate change, impose on resource security. The purpose of the framework is to help
policy makers address the current issue of unsustainable patterns of growth under resource
constraints through a better understanding of WEF relationships. Solutions are to be found in
terms of innovation and finance and better governance where transaction costs are outweighed
by the benefits of reorganization.

Figure A1.1: Stockholm Environment Institute/Hoff WEF Nexus Framework




Source: SEI/Hoff 2011.




                                             102
A1.2    World Economic Forum WEF Nexus Framework: Global Risks

The World Economic Forum defines the WEF nexus as a risk cluster that acts as a chronic
impediment to economic growth and social stability (WEF 2011b). Economic growth and
population growth are defined as risk drivers that lead to resource-intensive consumption
patterns, and climate change further drives resource insecurity through changed rainfall
patterns. Governance failures in terms of shared resource management generate tension that
can lead to conflict. Economic disparity exacerbates all three risks as governments seek short-
term unsustainable solutions, such as importing water-intensive crops to address food
insecurity (Figure A1.2).
Figure A1.2: System Diagram for Global Risks Associated with the WEF Nexus




Source: WEF 2011b.

The World Economic Forum describes the implications of the WEF nexus risk cluster in terms
of risks that may subsequently affect governments, society, and business as a direct
consequence of the WEF nexus. These implications are summarized in Figure A1.3.
Figure A1.3: Impacts of Risks Related to the WEF Nexus (Nonexhaustive)




Source: WEF 2011b.


                                                  103
Proposed risk response strategies include recognizing the trade-offs in the WEF nexus,
integrated and multistakeholder resource planning, regionally focused infrastructure
development, market-led resource planning, innovation, regionally focused infrastructure
development, and community-level empowerment (WEF 2011b).

A1.3   World Economic Forum: Water Security

The significant relationship between the energy and water sectors was given special attention
by the World Economic Forum, in conjunction with Cambridge Energy Research Associates,
in the 2009 report Thirsty Energy: Water and Energy in the 21st Century (WEF and IHS/CERA
2009; WEF 2011a). The research highlights the dichotomy that producing (most types of)
energy requires water and that producing water (usually) requires energy, both in varying
degrees, depending on the technology, processes, and type of energy or water being produced.

The 2011 research proposes addressing the energy–water nexus from a technological
perspective, for example, by:
   •   Changing electricity generation technology from water cooling to air cooling or to
       integrated gasification combined-cycle generation plants;
   •   Investing in clean energy and clean water synergy solutions, such as renewable energy-
       powered desalination plants;
   •   Marketing wind as a low-water and low-carbon power alternative; and
   •   Combining water and energy efficiency measures to improve provision of both
       services.

Further, the report highlights an absence of “joined-up” thinking at either the technological or
the political decision level between the energy and water sectors—something that one
contributor to World Economic Forum (2011a) describes as a “choke point.” This is
particularly poignant for climate change policy. The Thirsty Energy book notes the high water
intensity of clean energy solutions, such shale gas and biofuels, and asks: “Are energy policies
promoting low carbon and low water use really possible?” (IHS/CERA 2009).

The research sets out questions for the energy sector and the broader decision-making
community, which today in 2016 remain relevant:
   •   How will the energy sector’s share of water use change in the future?
   •   How can energy companies measure and monitor their water use, given the local nature
       of water resources and the differing values of water from place to place?
   •   What role will water markets play in allocating future resources? How might water
       markets change the economics of various energy technologies?
   •   How can the energy industry best engage with other stakeholders, including agriculture,
       other industries, and government, to shape future water policy?
   •   What technologies can improve the water efficiency of the energy industry? How can
       the energy industry become better integrated with other industries, agriculture, and
       municipal and wastewater operations to optimize water use and reuse?



                                              104
       Annex 2: Understanding National Planning and Cross-sector Coordination
A continuing theme across all the national country analyses that follow is the need for
additional water infrastructure investment to improve access. Thus, looking forward, a priority
for cross-sectoral policy making is to ensure the policy attracts water infrastructure investment
(CRIDF/DfID 2014c).
On cross-sectoral coordination, although some countries allude to this in their national plans
(for example, many national water plans refer to an IWRM approach), most countries have yet
to fully develop and implement plans. There is even less evidence of cross-sectoral
coordination in energy planning. While some countries’ planning documents (such as South
Africa, for example) may explicitly refer to the water requirements of power generation, it is
not clear that these references are evidence of full two-way coordination between the two
sectors. Countries, such as Lesotho, that are principally reliant on hydropower as their national
power source have an automatic link between the water and energy sectors for the purposes of
power planning because of the power sector’s reliance on water resources. However, again this
relationship often works in one direction, with the power sector investing considerable
resources in researching water requirements and availability, and obtaining the needed water,
and investing less in considering the sector’s impact on water resources. There is also the
feeling that despite the plethora of individual national strategic plans and projects, not enough
effort and resources are being channeled into ensuring that their many objectives are met within
the allocated timescales (SADC 2016).
A2.1   South Africa
Water Priorities
South Africa is a riparian state to five of the region’s major river basins: the Orange–Senqu,
Limpopo, Incomati, Maputo–Usutu–Pongola, and Umbeluzi basins (see Table 2 and Figure
17). While water resource management is overseen by the Department of Water and Sanitation,
administration has been decentralized to the level of 19 water management areas (soon to be
reduced to nine) (World Bank 2015b).
Table 3 shows that South Africa withdraws the highest proportion of available renewable water
resources of the key study countries (24 percent). This is the result of both high levels of
demand for water as well as relatively low levels of mean annual rainfall (Figure 16). Another
complication arises from the location of key economic centers in areas of low rainfall. To
manage this demand, the country has constructed a large number of dams and is reliant on
water imports through transfer schemes, such as the LHWP (discussed below).
Continuing to seek access to water resources beyond its national boundaries is a key priority
for South Africa. Current activity includes seeking regional solutions through the creation of
joint committees (for example, with Zimbabwe) to secure water from the Zambezi basin (see
discussion on ZAMCOM) and the Orange–Senqu basin (see discussion of the RBCs in section
5.2     Regional Water Resources).
Given the constraints on water resources, another key priority is to reprioritize water use, limit
the use of water in the country’s coal-fired plants, and promote water-efficient technologies
(World Bank 2011). The water sector is also seeking to improve its:


                                               105
       •   Institutional framework;
       •   Value for money;
       •   Monitoring and evaluation;
       •   Rural water supply—understanding how to address sustainability issues; and
       •   Urban water supply—improving supply quality and pricing.

In 2015, South Africa announced that it would build or expand six dams over the next decade
to address the long-term water and sanitation needs of the country. These include the dam at
the Mzimvubu River in the Eastern Cape, the expansion of the Clanwilliam Dam in the Western
Cape, the Nwamitwa Dam and Tzaneen Dam in Limpopo, the Hazelmere Dam in KwaZulu-
Natal, and the Polihali Dam in Lesotho, which will provide water to Gauteng. In announcing
these investments, the Presidential Infrastructure Coordinating Commission stated a need to
improve coordination with local water distribution services to avoid delaying the operation of
these projects. 83
As background for the World Bank’s Thirsty Energy Initiative to create an integrated energy–
water–climate model for South Africa, Miralles-Wilhelm (2013) analyzed South Africa’s water
data resources and identified a number of challenges for policy makers:
       •       High degree of spatial and temporal variation in hydrometeorological variables and
               resulting streamflow;
       •       Lack of adequately long or continuous records of rainfall (and other
               hydrometeorological variables) and streamflow;
       •       Lack of information on land-use changes and both spatial and temporal variations
               in water use; and
       •       Lack of quantitative understanding of the mechanisms of some critical hydrological
               process, notably channel transmission loss and surface water and groundwater
               interactions.
To address hydrological data gaps, the SADC secretariat, with the support of the World Bank,
has launched a regional project to build sustainable groundwater management in the region.
One component of the project is to operationalize the SADC Groundwater Management
Institute as a regional center of excellence. Another component focuses on improving the
availability of and access to knowledge, scientific research, and data on groundwater. 84
Energy Priorities

South Africa’s electricity supply is provided by the state-owned utility, Eskom, which also
owns transmission and distribution networks. Eskom generates approximately 95% of South
Africa’s electricity and supplies about half of electricity generated, with the other half
distributed through a large number of municipalities. Eskom operates 23 power stations, with
a total installed generating capacity of 42.1 GW, of which 85 percent is coal fired. Although
installed capacity exceeds demand, the plant availability of the generation fleet, most of which

83
     http://www.infrastructurene.ws/2015/05/04/government-to-accelerate-construction-of-dams/.
84
  http://www.sadc.int/files/3813/9100/4398/Sustainable_Groundwater_Management_in_SADC_Member_
States.pdf.

                                                      106
was constructed in the 1970s and 1980s, has declined. This has resulted in a low reserve margin,
to the extent that Eskom imposed rolling blackouts (load shedding) in 2008, 2014, and 2015 in
order to preserve the integrity of the national grid. Figure A2.1 shows that Eskom’s capacity
factor and reserve margin have dropped significantly in the last decade. An investment program
is underway: in 2015, South Africa commissioned 1,479 MW of new generating capacity and
decommissioned 90 MW from its coal-fired plants (SADC 2016), and has committed to
building a total of 18,576 MW new power generation capacity by 2021 (World Bank 2015b).
Figure A2.1: Eskom’s Capacity Factor and Reserve Margin (2003–14)




Source: World Bank, based on sector dialogue.

South Africa’s energy priorities are set out in a combination of documents, including the 2013
update of the 2010 IRP (RSA/DoE 2013a). More recently, Eskom’s actions in 2015 were driven
by priority actions aimed at eliminating the need for load shedding. The longer-term priorities
relate to development of further generation capacity. The update to the IRP focuses on regional
hydropower, additional coal, and gas and includes the possibility of nuclear power. Figure A2.2
shows that hydropower from Mozambique (Mphanda Nkuwa is a planned 1,500-MW
generating plant on the Zambezi River) is the least-cost source of energy, followed by coal and
assorted gas-based generation. The short-term focus is on repairs to existing plants, increased
demand-side management, and a more focused attempt to exploit gas-fired generation (both
through global liquefied natural gas and through purchase of currently available and future
potential gas from Mozambique).




                                                  107
Figure A2.2: Baseload Generation Cost Benchmarks—South Africa




Source: World Bank 2014d.

South Africa’s Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme aims
to increase the proportion of renewable energy in the generation mix to up to 19GW installed
capacity by 2030. As a result there has been significant private sector renewable energy activity
including four successful tenders for wind and solar Independent Power Producers totaling 3.9
GW and private sector investment amounting to US$14bn (World Bank 2014d, sector
dialogue).
Legislation, Planning, and Evidence on Cross-sectoral Coordination
South Africa’s energy planning is guided by its 2008 National Energy Act, the IRP for
electricity, and the draft 2013 Integrated Energy Planning Report (RSA/DoE 2008, 2013a,
2013b). A review of these documents suggests that energy planning takes into account water
availability to some extent by explicitly referring to the water requirements of power
generation. Access to water resource is limited by overall national water constraints and policy
measures to reduce overall water consumption by the energy sector. A fully dynamic, two-way
approach to planning between water and energy is not in evidence.
Prasad’s 2012 analysis of the energy–water nexus in South Africa states that the nexus is not
sufficiently recognized in its policies, regulations, and laws, and that although the connection
has been made by the mining industry, Eskom, and the banking sector, there are still many
important aspects of the economy that have not. At a national level, policies and laws do not
yet mention the energy–water nexus. Institutional barriers pose a serious challenge, and
information dissemination, stakeholder involvement, and a culture of consultation and
participation need to be created. At a local level, the study finds that the local governments of
Johannesburg and Cape Town make the connection between water and energy in their
respective spatial development frameworks and plans; however, this is not the case for local
rural governments (based on an analysis of the rural municipality of Elundini and its Spatial


                                                108
Development Framework). Overall, Prasad (2012) describes the general level of awareness of
the nexus in local, rural government as “concerning.”
South Africa’s water planning is guided by the National Water Act of 1998 (RSA 1998) and
the first and second national water resource strategies (RSA 2004, 2012). As Table A2.1 shows,
practical application of these laws and plans is proving to be difficult, and implementation
progress is slow.
Table A2.1: Implementation analysis of South Africa's First National Water Resource Strategy

                Achievements                                     Outstanding challenges
 Water reconciliation strategies in major          Achievement of water conservation and water
 urban areas and improved insights into            demand management targets
 reliable future water demands and
 supplies
 Improved sector collaboration and                 Streamlined water allocation reform to redress
 participation                                     past racial and gender imbalances in access to
                                                   water for productive uses and to address
                                                   poverty and inequality
 Water-sharing agreements and                      Implementation of environmental flow
 institutional arrangements in place in all        monitoring
 transboundary basins
 A significant proportion of reserve     Establishment of water management
 determinations have been conducted with institutions and the decentralization of water
 different levels of confidence          resource management
 Development of new water resources and Strengthening of regulation of water resources
 water supply infrastructure and an     and water quality
 investment in improved dam safety for
 state dams
 Incentive based regulation through Blue           Improvement of technical and management
 and Green Drop assessments                        skills to implement developmental water
                                                   management
 A learning academy to improve skills              Improvement in the integration of monitoring
 and capacity within the sector                    and information management
 Two catchment management agencies                 Reduction in the backlog of infrastructure
 established                                       maintenance
Source: World Bank

The country is having difficulty establishing new water management institutions. Only two
catchment management agencies (CMAs) are fully functional out of the 19 that were envisaged
(Mehta et al. 2014). Although RBOs were a key concept, the political emphasis of improving
water supply means that water resources continue to be managed in a centralized fashion
(Muller 2014), and converting the irrigation boards into multisectoral user organizations has

                                                   109
been fraught with problems. An institutional realignment is underway advocating the
establishment of nine CMAs, rather than 19. Overall, implementation of an IWRM approach
is an open question in the country (Mehta et al. 2014).

A2.2       Lesotho

Water Priorities
Water is Lesotho’s most important natural resource. The country is a riparian state to the
Orange–Senqu River Basin (Table 2) and located in the wetter areas of Southern Africa,
including the headwaters of three main river systems—the Senqu, Mohokare–Caledon, and
Makhaleng. Lesotho’s abundant water resources enable it to generate 3 percent of its overall
GDP (World Bank 2015c). The main source of water revenue comes from the LHWP
(discussed in Section 5.2    Regional Water Resources).
Despite Lesotho’s abundant water (around 1.4 percent of its available renewable resources are
withdrawn (Table 3)) and significant investment (World Bank 2015d), water access is low.
Around 64 percent and 57 percent of rural and urban households, respectively, have access to
water (GoL 2012). Severe water access problems are experienced in the lowlands, where about
two-thirds of the population lives and where the country’s key industries of textiles and light
manufacturing are based (particularly Maseru and its surrounding areas). It follows that key
priorities for the country are water supply services for industries, commercial centers,
households, and other institutions (GoL 2012).
The Lesotho National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) identifies strategically investing in
water infrastructure as one of the top national priorities (GoL 2012)—namely, the LHWP Phase
II and Lesotho Lowlands Water Supply Programme. The first phase of the latter—the Metolong
Dam and Water Supply Programme—was launched in 2008 and was inaugurated in November
2015 (major areas complete). This $31.8 million project is being financed by the World Bank
and other development partners to provide two-thirds of the population living in the country’s
lowlands with clean and abundant water. The project is expected to meet domestic and
industrial requirements for at least the next 40 years (GoL 2012). 85 To date, the project has
increased security of supply to Maseru, Teyateyanang, Rom, Morija, and other surrounding
towns. A further phase is recommended to mitigate potential climate change and current
variability (World Bank 2015c).
A lack of data, capacity, and tools is hindering Lesotho’s understanding of how its water
resources will be affected by climate change. World Bank (2015c) identifies the following
issues and actions:
       •   Currently, data limitations undermine the country’s ability to monitor climate
           predictions and respond to changes. This problem could be addressed by designing
           and implementing an optimized hydrometeorological network;
       •   The country does not have information on the economic use or value of water;




85
     Also see http://www.metolong.org.ls/inauguration.html.

                                                       110
   •    The sophistication of the tools required to monitor and respond to climate necessitates
        sustained capacity development are an issue and capacity building should be
        incorporated into the government planning process; and
   •    The WEAP tool developed to undertake analysis could be improved to create one-day
        steps to analyze competing water uses, and could expand the geographic scope of the
        model to include the demand areas of South Africa that rely on Lesotho’s exports to
        improve analysis of potential vulnerabilities and trade-offs.

Energy Priorities
The key national energy priorities for Lesotho are to:
    •   Increase clean energy production capacity to attain self-sufficiency;
    •   Export energy and have a greener economy; and
    •   Have at least 40 percent of the population connected to electricity by 2020.

Lesotho’s energy and water priorities are strongly linked because of its abundant water
reserves. Royalties from the completion of Phase 1 of the LHWP enabled the country to
construct the Muelta hydroelectric generation plant with a generation capacity of 72 MW,
meeting 52 percent of the country’s overall electricity needs. Overall demand is 138 MW
(Table 6), and the country’s overall power requirement is around 140 MW in peak periods
(winter 2011). Therefore, Lesotho imports approximately 68 MW (40 MW from Mozambique
and 28 MW from South Africa). A key national energy priority set out by Lesotho is energy
supply self-sufficiency and the potential to use its natural resources to export electricity (as
well as water) to the region (GoL 2012). Additional electricity generation capacity is expected
to come from wind, pumped storage, conventional hydropower, and solar power.
Despite Lesotho’s potential to generate significant power from its water sources, it faces a
significant challenge in terms of connecting its population to the grid because of its sparsely
inhabited mountainous terrain (59 percent of total land space and a further 15 percent in the
foothills (World Bank 2015d)) and the current low level of electrification, even for rural
villages that are well connected to the urban centers of both Lesotho and South Africa (GoL
2012). According to Lesotho’s NSDP, in 2011, an estimated 25 percent of households had
access to electricity, and only 5 percent of these are in rural areas (GoL 2012). The aim is to
have at least 40 percent of the population connected to electricity by 2020 (GoL 2004). About
70 percent of Basotho’s households use biomass as the main source of energy for cooking and
space heating. The cost of increasing access to a dispersed population is a significant barrier.
However, the use of solar panels is proliferating in the country and could help overcome this
challenge (World Bank 2015d).

Legislation, Planning, and Evidence on Cross-sectoral Coordination
Lesotho’s water planning is guided by the Lesotho Water Act 2008 (GoL 2008) and the
Electricity and Water Authority Strategic Plan 2014/15–2018/19 (LEWA 2014). Lesotho’s
energy planning is guided by the Lesotho Energy Policy 2015–25 (GoL n.d.) and the Electricity
and Water Authority Strategic Plan (2014/15–2018/19) (LEWA 2014). The institutions have
been created, but full implementation of the Water Act and associated plans is limited by human
capacity and financial constraints.


                                              111
Aside from the Lesotho Water Commission’s involvement in developing Lesotho’s energy
policy (GoL n.d.), neither sector’s documents suggest significant cross-sectoral coordination.
In practical terms, there is a moderate degree of coordination between the two sectors.
Institutional arrangements seem to provide for joint planning, at least at the project level, and
water resources agencies are deeply involved in water-related energy development initiatives.
A2.3   Botswana

Water Priorities
Botswana is a riparian state to three of the region’s major river basins: the Zambezi, Orange–
Senqu and Okavango (see Table 2, above). Despite these sources, western Botswana has no
surface water and is entirely reliant on groundwater sources (Figure A2.3). Overall, the country
is considered water scarce, with endemic drought and varied rainfall (Setlhogile and Harvey
2015).




                                              112
Figure A2.3: Botswana Groundwater Depth and Population




Source: World Bank 2015e.

Note: Groundwater depth is indicated by blue shading on the map; population concentration is indicated by the
colored dots.

Priorities for Botswana are to improve its demand management through developing a water
pricing policy (water is currently heavily subsidized) and establishing the Water Resources
Board and Water Regulator; and to continue to invest in surface water catchment and transfer
infrastructure. The country’s water policy framework emphasizes conservation and demand
management but implementation is limited and there is limited awareness of the state of water
resources in the country, compounded by shortages of data and ineffective monitoring (Rahm,
Swatuk, and Matheny 2006). Groundwater withdrawal limits are set but often exceeded. There
are also distributional problems with system water losses estimated at 19-26 percent per annum.
(Setlhogile and Harvey 2015). Increasing water resource efficiency is listed as a priority in the
National Water Master Plan (World Bank 2015e).
Another priority is to shift water supply from ground water to surface water. The government
is investing in dams (the Dikgatlhong, Lotsane, Thune, and Mosetse dams) to increase overall
dam capacity from 400m3 to 948 m3, ( and water transfer schemes (for example, expanding
the North–South Carrier and investing in a second carrier the NSC-2 (transferring water to

                                                    113
Southern Botswana) and a further carrier (the NSC-3) to withdraw water from the Chobe–
Zambezi River, which will supply irrigation and augment water supply in southeastern
Botswana (Setlhogile and Harvey 2015).
Energy Priorities
A key priority for Botswana is to address current power supply shortfalls and become a net
exporter of energy to the region. Peak power demand is set to increase by 56 percent from 578
MW to 902 MW between 2012 and 2020. 86 Botswana’s power sector has been historically
highly dependent on South Africa, but recent supply cuts from Eskom 87 have increased the
need to develop indigenous generation options. In 2011, the Botswana Power Corporation
(BPC) had installed capacity to supply approximately 12 percent of national demand, leaving
66 percent to be sourced from South Africa. Botswana also sources power from other providers,
including Mozambique’s Cahora Bassa hydropower plant and Electricidade de Moçambique88
(Ofetotse and Essah 2012). These other providers accounted for 22 percent of total supply in
2011.
Botswana’s significant coal and solar resources are being used to develop self-sufficiency. Coal
reserves are estimated at around 200 billion tons and an additional 600 MW of coal-fired power
generation has been developed with the commissioning of the Morupule B plant (World Bank
2015e). The impact of Morapule B is already being felt. Imports were 2,813 GWh in 2013,
falling to 1,623 GWh in 2015, coinciding with increased operation of the first four units.
However, Botswana will continue to be dependent on imports until at least 2020, when the rest
of Morupule B’s 900-MW total capacity should be operational (BPC, sector dialogue).
Solar power is seen as a natural solution for addressing Botswana’s power shortages. It has
Direct Normal Irradiation (DNI) of 3000 kwh/m2/year, which is among the highest in the world
(SE4All 2015). The government commissioned its first PV plant in 2012 (the 1.3-MW
Phakalene plant). The 100-MW Jwaneng concentrating solar thermal power station project is
being discussed. 89 It is envisaged that further PV power will be developed.
Rural access to electricity is another priority for Botswana. At 15 percent, it remains very low
by global standards. The cost of rolling out access to dispersed rural populations is a significant
barrier, and the use of distributed technologies (such as solar panels) to overcome these
challenges has been limited (World Bank 2015e). The government continues its nongrid rural
electrification scheme using PV power, which was started in 2006 by the government and the
UN. A subsidiary of BPC, BPC Lesedi, is offering solar home systems to rural consumers, as
well as other off-grid and renewable energy solutions, such as solar power PV products,
rechargeable lanterns, and improved financial support.
Legislation, Planning, and Evidence on Cross-sectoral Coordination
Botswana is implementing a reform of its water sector. While water planning is still guided by
the Water Act of 1968 and the National Water Master Plan Review (SMEC and EHES 2006),

86
   http://www.reegle.info/policy-and-regulatory-overviews/BW.
87
   In 2009, Eskom supplied 350 MW of electricity, but by 2012 this was cut back to 150 MW.
www.finance.gov.bw.
88
   www.mmewr.gov.bw.
89
   http://www.wsp-pb.com/en/WSP-Africa/What-we-do/Project-Case-Studies/Solar-Energy-Study--Jwaneng-
Botswana/.

                                                 114
a new national water policy has been drafted but has not yet been approved by Parliament, and
an Integrated Water Resources and Water Efficiency (IWRWE) Plan was approved in 2013.
The latter contains a detailed action plan and the following policy statement regarding water
for energy (GoB 2013):
   •   “Water must be applied efficiently and at a cost that permits the attainment of energy
       supply security for all sectors of the economy to support the foundations for sustainable
       economic development and diversification.”

This policy statement is supported by a number of strategy statements:
   • “Incorporate water development guidelines into the energy equation and promote the
       application of technologies to ensure efficient use of water resources.
   • Develop comprehensive water accounts and spatial demand forecasts to enable the
       timely development of water supply solutions integrated within the national water
       resources planning framework.
   • Encourage the adoption of technologies that are more efficient and allow minimal use
       of water for the cooling of industrial processes and for electric power generation
       stations in pursuit of energy self-sufficiency and export targets.
   • Identify and implement alternative energy solutions, such as development of renewable
       and bio-energies, that can be integrated into the national energy mix to reduce the
       carbon contributions through increased water use and energy efficiency.”

Implementation of Botswana’s IWRWE plan will be challenging. The document itself states
that knowledge of IWRM is limited, particularly at district level. Also, data collection is
expensive, and analysis and interpretation of the data are often forgotten (GoB 2013).
Energy planning in Botswana is guided by the Energy Master Plan (GoB 1996 (reviewed
2003)) whilst the National Energy Policy is still being drafted. There is no IRP and no evidence
on cross-sectoral coordination. Planning decisions for coal plants are guided by the location of
the country’s coal mines, not by the availability of water resources.
Overall, implementation of the new plans is slow, and while the importance of cross-sectoral
planning is acknowledged by the government (for example, through publishing the IWRWE
plan), water management is still centralized and stakeholder participation is often nonexistent.
There is also a pressing need to revise and expand the water sector’s legal instruments to be
more in line with governance arrangements in other sectors (Selthogile and Harvey 2015).
A2.4   Swaziland

Water Priorities
Swaziland is a riparian state to three of the region’s major river basins: the Incomati, Maputo–
Usutu–Pongolo, and Umbeluzi. Swaziland’s relatively high average levels of annual rainfall in
the western part of the country suggest that it should have abundant water reserves (Figure 16).
Yet the country withdraws 23 percent of its available renewable freshwater resources (almost
as high as South Africa) (Table 3), and in 2016 it faced countrywide water rationing and




                                              115
declared a state of national emergency. 90 The discrepancy is driven by highly variable weather
patterns: since 2014, Swaziland has been in drought as a result of the El Niño weather event. 91

Swaziland’s total renewable water resources are 4.51 km3/year, with 42 percent originating
from South Africa. The level of groundwater resources is unknown. The country has nine major
dams with a total storage capacity of around 585 million m3—seven are used for irrigation, one
for hydroelectric power, and one for water supply (95 percent of withdrawals is used for
irrigation) (FAO 2015). In February 2016, the Hawane Dam, which feeds the capital Mbabane,
was at 17 percent capacity (one to three weeks’ supply). 92
Priorities for the water sector focus on developing water allocation based on IWRM principles
and using water resources to develop the country’s hydropower potential. The National
Development Strategy (GoS 2012) sets out the following water resource development strategy
goals for 2022:
     •   Develop an overall policy to cover all water use;
     •   Establish a water sector committee and initiate the statutory adoption of the draft water
         act;
     • Enter into negotiations for shared waters guided by a national water master plan; and
     • Promote catchment management plans for major river systems, dams, and irrigation
         works.
However historically, strategy implementation in the country has been slow, and stakeholders
are concerned that implementation of the 2003 Water Act with its modern foundation on
internationally recognized principles, water management institutions, and governance and
decentralization of responsibility, is taking too long (GoS 2003). The slow pace of developing
important regulations on allocation, pricing, water use efficiencies (particularly for irrigated
agriculture), recreational use of water bodies and others while the resource supply dwindles in
the face of changing environmental and land-use patterns, is threatening the ability of
stakeholders to eventually manage the resource. The formulation of the revised IWRM plan is
still a work in progress, and such progress has been hampered by the capacity constraints of
water professionals in the country. Much of the technical capacity to collect, collate, and
develop strategies is limited to a few individuals. Similarly, the human capacity may not be
available to introduce economic water accounts, and IWRM capacity may also be limited in
the country (Manyatsi and Brown 2009).
With regard to developing national hydropower generation capacity, the 2009 National Water
Policy (GoS 2009) states: “Swaziland shall promote and prioritize the generation of hydro-
electric power at mega and micro generation levels to enhance energy security.”




90
    http://www.times.co.sz/news/106245-water-rationing-goes-countrywide.html.
91
      http://reliefweb.int/report/swaziland/swaziland-drought-office-resident-coordinator-situation-report-no-1-24-
feb-2016.
92
   http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Swaziland%20Drought_RC%20Situation%20Report_Feb
%202016%20-RC%20Final%20%20.pdf.

                                                       116
Energy Priorities
Swaziland has the capacity to generate around 70 MW from four hydropower stations (60 MW)
and two diesel engines (9 MW), though the latter are no longer economically viable, 93 meeting
27 percent of its total 255-MW suppressed and forecast demand (Table 6).
A key priority for the country is to achieve energy security by developing hydroelectric power
generation capacity, where possible using multipurpose water structures. Many of Swaziland’s
watercourses are not suitable for the development of hydroelectric power generation, and the
country is dependent on relatively expensive power imports. In addition, reliance on wood fuel
is driving unsustainable levels of deforestation (GoS 2014).
Legislation, Planning, and Evidence on Cross-sectoral Coordination
Swaziland’s water resource planning is guided by its 2003 National Water Act (GoS 2003), the
2009 National Water Policy (GoS 2009), and the National Development Strategy for 2022
(GoS 2012). The National Water Act states the need to integrate power generation and water
infrastructure planning, and the National Water Policy contains several policy statements
concerning international and regional coordination (GoS 2009, 2014):
       •    “Planning, development and management of water resources in Swaziland shall be
            based on the principles of IWRM;
      •    Swaziland shall adopt a river basin approach in the planning, development and
           management of water resources; and
      •    Integrated planning, development and management of dams will be promoted to
           optimize the use of water resources, maximize derived benefits (such as hydropower,
           tourism, flood control, irrigation and water supply) and take both positive and negative
           externalities into account.”

Swaziland’s energy planning is led by the Energy Department of the Ministry of Natural
Resources & Energy and the Electricity Company Act of 2007. A National Energy Policy
Implementation Strategy project was completed in 2009. This project aimed to guide the
realistic fulfillment of the energy policy statements and elaboration of strategies, as well as a
time frame for implementing the policies during the short and medium/long terms. 94 In addition
the Sustainable Energy for All—Country Action Plan was published in 2014 (GoS 2014).
A2.5       Namibia

Water Priorities
Namibia has low levels of average annual rainfall (Figure 16), but withdraws just 1.6 percent
of its available renewable freshwater resources (Table 3). Namibia’s population and water-
intensive industries (mining) are located in the coastal regions. This prompted the country to
invest in a seawater desalination plant despite hosting the Orange, Zambezi, and Okavango
rivers. The plant was intended to produce freshwater for the uranium mining industry, but has
been mothballed because of low uranium prices. In addition, two solar desalination plants
provide 8,000 liters of drinking water a day (Prasad 2012). There are also plans to revive a


93
     http://www.sec.co.sz/electricity/.
94
     http://www.gov.sz/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=283&Itemid=361.

                                                  117
scheme to transfer water from the Cubango–Okavango river system to the country’s main
centers of demand (Bybee 2014).
Namibia’s water policy priorities (GoN 2008) are to:
     •   Improve sector coordination;
     •   Develop an equitable tariff policy; and
     •   Establish a water regulator.

Energy Priorities

Namibia is a net importer of electricity. Its current installed electricity generation capacity (393
MW) is equivalent to 62 percent of its suppressed and forecast demand (Table 6).
Priorities for the country are to be revealed in the country’s first IRP, which was under review
in late 2015, 95 but are expected to include:
•    Developing and diversifying Namibia’s energy sources (including the recently shelved
     Kudu power project, the Baynes hydropower project, a series of coal-fired power stations,
     and gas power stations, as well as a range of renewable power options); 96
•    Implementing demand management; 97 and
•    Promoting regional integration in the electricity sector (improve transmission structure to
     play a full role in the SAPP). 98

Legislation, Planning, and Evidence on Cross-sectoral Coordination
Namibia’s Water Resources Management is currently guided by its National Water Policy
(GoN 2000) and its Water Supply and Sanitation Policy (GoN 2008), both of which are
implemented. The National Water Policy calls for an integrated (cross-sectoral) approach to
water management, but there is no evidence of this approach in practice. The Water Resources
Management Act (GoN 2013) has not yet been implemented because of a lack of funding and
policy implementation capacity.
Namibia’s energy policy is guided by its 1998 Energy Policy White Paper (GoN 1998). The
country recently developed a Namibian-specific energy planning tool based on the TIMES
modeling system. This modeling tool takes into account other sectors’ energy consumption
(primarily the mining industry), but does not integrate water resource availability (see Rämä et
al. 2013 for further details).
Namibia’s two solar desalination plants in the Omusati region, which produce 8,000 liters of
drinking water per day, provide one of the region’s few examples of cross-sector working to
realize significant synergy benefits between the water and energy sectors (Prasad 2012).


95
   https://economist.com.na/14615/mining-energy/integrated-resource-plan-reviewed/.
96
   Ibid.
97
   Ibid.
98
   http://www.afd.fr/lang/en/home/pays/afrique/geo-afr/afrique-du-sud/projets-afrique-du-sud/projets-region-
afdusud/assurer-approvisionnement-electricite-Namibie.



                                                     118
                   Annex 3: World Bank Nexus Projects in Central Asia

Central Asia Water Resources Management (P152346)
This project is developing a long-term framework to increase the accessibility and reliability
of water resource information and the analytical capacity to use this information for improved
water resource planning, monitoring, and management in selected Central Asian water
institutions. The project is acting in three areas: information gaps, such as information and
planning tools for water resource management; capacity strengthening of the institutional and
policy framework; and investment in monitoring systems and related infrastructure.
Central Asia Knowledge Network of Water–Energy–Climate Change CoPs and
Institutions (P147959)

There is a strong need to improve the region’s knowledge of climate change impacts and
thereafter the resilience of its energy sector to climate change to enable informed investment
decisions. Numerous studies are being undertaken to highlight the vulnerabilities of and
identify adaptation responses for the regional energy sector at the national and regional levels,
through the development of coordinated adaptation policies. The completed Tajikistan study
makes the following recommendations: (1) mainstream robust decision making on climate
change and plans for the energy sector; (2) build institutional capacity and knowledge
networks; (3) improve the use of monitoring, forecasting, and modeling; (4) support climate
change-resilient engineering, design, and operation of hydropower plants and transmission and
distribution networks; (5) diversify sources of energy supply; and (6) establish measures to
improve energy efficiency and water efficiency with win-win climate-resilience benefits.

Central Asia Water and Energy Portal (P147696)

Access to quality information in the public domain is very limited in the region, despite a
number of attempts to improve the region’s portals and databases. The World Bank has been
working to improve public-domain online access to water- and energy-related spatial
information through a number of initiatives. One such initiative is to develop an online portal—
a platform that integrates global and local multisector data and raises awareness of the Central
Asian water and energy spatial context.

Capacity Building for Improving the Water Sector Professional Development System in
Central Asian States (P152685)

This project is designed to improve IWRM capacity through training and curriculum
development and to enhance regional knowledge sharing and cooperation through regional
training centers.
Capacity Strengthening for IWRM Modeling (P148326)

This project aims to strengthen knowledge and modeling skills, leading to a more effective
base on which to identify modeling architecture options and priorities for IWRM in Central
Asia. The clients will include a range of the national and regional stakeholders—sector
specialists, educators and institutions, and decision makers. The approach supports broader
engagement of countries in regional analysis of IWRM, allowing national stakeholders to adapt


                                              119
or create a system of models and modules that assist in regional analysis, while contributing to
more effective understanding of national implications and trade-offs.

Central Asia Energy–Water Development Program (CAEWDP) Trust Fund (P120142,
P155607, P155943)

The CAEWDP is a multidonor trust-funded initiative supported by the Switzerland’s State
Secretariat for Economic Affairs, the United Kingdom’s Department for International
Development, the European Union, and the United States Agency for International
Development. The goal of the CAEWDP is to help build energy and water security for Central
Asia through enhanced regional cooperation among the five Central Asian countries, including
Afghanistan, when appropriate.
The CAEWDP has the following main sectoral components:
   •   Energy development to promote highest-value energy investments and management.
       Areas of focus include infrastructure planning, winter energy security, energy trade,
       energy accountability, and institutional development.
   •   Water productivity to enhance the productivity and efficiency of water use in the
       agriculture and energy sectors. Areas of focus include capacity strengthening, the Third
       Aral Sea Basin Management Program, national action plans for water productivity, and
       rehabilitation of infrastructure.
   •   Energy–water linkages to strengthen the analytical tools for IWRM to improve the
       understanding of linkages between water and energy at the national and regional levels.
       Areas of focus include energy–water modeling, regional hydrometeorology, climate
       vulnerability, and energy–water dialogue in support of IWRM.




                                              120
                                          References

1.    Allan, J. A. 2006. “Virtual Water: Part of an Invisible Synergy That Ameliorates Water
      Scarcity. In Water Crisis: Myth or Reality? Edited by P. Rogers, M. R. Llamas, and L.
      Martinez-Cortina. London: Taylor and Francis,
2.    Banerjee, S, K. Malik, J. Besnard, A. Tipping, J. Nash, 2016. Double Dividend: Power
      and Agriculture Nexus in sub-Saharan Africa. Washington DC, World Bank.
      Forthcoming.
3.    Bates, B. C., Z. W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu, and J. P. Palutikof, eds. 2008. Climate Change
      and Water. IPCC Technical Paper VI. Executive Summary and Chapter 6. Geneva:
      Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Secretariat. http://www.ipcc.ch/
      publications_and_data/publications_and_data_technical_papers.shtml.
4.    Bazilian, M., H. Rogner, M. Howells, S. Hermann, D. Arent, D. Gielen, et al. 2011.
      “Considering the Energy, Water and Food Nexus: Towards an Integrated Modelling
      Approach.” Energy Policy 39 (12): 7896–7906.
5.    Bellet, L., and J. Spurgeon. 2012b. Economic Optimisation of Water Uses—Water (for
      Food) and Energy Nexus. Électricité de France Water Valuation Case Study. World
      Business Council for Sustainable Development and EdF. http://www.wbcsd.org/
      Pages/EDocument/EDocumentDetails.aspx?ID=15808.
6.    Benson, D., A. K. Gain, and J. J. Rouillard. 2015. “Water Governance in a Comparative
      Perspective: From IWRM to a ‘Nexus’ Approach?” Water Alternatives 8 (1): 756–773.
7.    Bhattacharyya, S. C., and G. R. Timilsina. 2010. “A Review of Energy System Models.”
      International Journal of Energy Sector Management 4 (4).
8.    Bybee, B. 2014. Water Governance and International Co-operation: Lessons from the
      Cubango-Okavango River System. SAIIA Policy Briefing No. 121. Johannesburg: South
      African Institute of International Affairs. http://www.saiia.org.za/policy-briefings/water-
      governance-and-international-co-operation-lessons-from-the-cubango-okavango-river-
      system.
9.    CDKN (Climate and Development Knowledge Network). 2014. The IPCC’s Fifth
      Assessment Report—What’s in It for Africa? London: Overseas Development Institute
      and         CDKN.           http://cdkn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/AR5_IPCC_
      Whats_in_it_for_Africa.pdf.
10.   Cervigni, C., R. Liden, J. Neumann, and K. Strzepek, eds. 2015. Enhancing the Climate
      Resilience of Africa’s Infrastructure. Conference Edition. Washington, DC: World Bank;
      Paris: Agence Française de Développement.
11.   Chandel, M. K., L. F. Pratson, and R. B. Jackson. 2011. “The Potential Impacts of Climate
      Change Policy on Freshwater Use in Thermoelectric Power Generation.” Energy Policy
      39: 6234–6242.
12.   Cohen, S. M., J. Macknick, K. Averyt, and J. Meldrum. 2014. “Modeling Climate-Water
      Impacts on Electricity Sector Capacity Expansion.” Conference paper NREL/CP-6A20-

                                              121
      61435.     Golden,     CO:      National     Renewable     Energy          Laborarory.
      http://www.ourenergypolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/61435.pdf.
13.   Conway, D., E. Archer van Garderen, D. Deryng, S. Dorling, T. Kreuger, W. Landman,
      B. Lankford, et al. 2015. “Climate and Southern Africa’s Water–Energy–Food Nexus.”
      Nature Climate Change 5: 837–846.
14.   Copeland, C. 2014. Energy-Water Nexus: The Water Sector’s Energy Use. Congressional
      Research Service R43200. Washington, DC.
15.   CRIDF/DfID (Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development Facility/Department for
      International Development). 2014a. Identification of Gaps in Zambian Policies with
      Regard to the Water, Food, and Energy Nexus. London.
16.   ———. 2014b. “Support to Infrastructure Development in SADC.” London.
      http://www.slideshare.net/wle_cgiar_media/day-1-05-reevecridf.
17.   DRC&RSA (Democratic Republic of Congo and Republic of South Africa). 2013. Traite
      relatif au projet hydroelectrique Grand Inga entre la Republique Democratique du
      Congo et la Republique d’Afrique du Sud.
18.   Droogers, P., F. de Boer, and W. Terink. 2014. Water Allocation Models for the Umbeluzi
      River Basin, Mozambique. Report 132. Wangeningen, The Netherlands: FutureWater.
19.   Droogers, P., and W. W. Immerzeel. 2006. Calibration Methodologies in Hydrological
      Modeling: State of the Art. Report 56. Wangeningen, The Netherlands: FutureWater.
20.   Du Pisani, P. n.d. Windhoek Namibia: A Case Study in Water Supply in an Arid
      Environment.        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTWAT/Resources/4602122-
      1215104787836/10.CC_Water_Supply_Arid_Environment_Windhoeki.pdf.
21.   EBI (Egis Bceom International). 2010. Economic Accounting for Water Project Report.
      Gaborone, Botswana: Southern African Development Community. http://www.
      sadcwateraccounting.org/_system/writable/DMSStorage/891en/SADC-
      EAW%20Project%20Report.pdf.
22.   ECA (Economics of Climate Adaptation). 2009. Shaping Climate-Resilient
      Development—A Framework for Decision Making. A Report of the Economics of
      Climate Adaptation Working Group. http://mckinseyonsociety.com/downloads/
      reports/EconomicDevelopment/ECA%20%20%20Shaping%20Climate%20Resilent%2
      0Development%20%20%20Report%20Only.pdf.
23.   EdF/WWC (Électricité de France/World Water Council). 2015. Sharing the Water Uses
      of     Multipurpose   Hydropower         Reservoirs:      The    SHARE   Concept.
      http://www.hydropower.org/sites/default/files/publications-docs/Multi-
      purpose%20water%20uses%20of%20hydropower%20reservoirs%20executive%20sum
      mary%20%E2%80%93%20the%20SHARE%20concept.pdf.
24.   EdF/WEC/WWC (Electricité de France/World Energy Council/World Water Council).
      2016. Water for Energy Framework: Evaluation of the local interactions between energy


                                             122
      sites and water.   http://www.eip-water.eu/sites/default/files/W4EF%            20-%20
      Vol%201%20-%20General%20report%20-%20October%202015_0.pdf
25.   Entholzner, A., and C. Reeve, eds. 2016. Building Climate Resilience through Virtual
      Water and Nexus Thinking in the Southern African Development Community. Cham,
      Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
26.   ESMAP (Energy Sector Management Assistance Program). 2010. Hands on Energy
      Adaptation Toolkit (HEAT). Energy Sector Management Assistance Program.
      Washington DC: The World Bank Group,
27.   ———. 2011. Climate Impacts on Energy Systems: Key Issues for Energy Sector
      Adaptation. Washington, DC.
28.   FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2008. Coping with
      Water Scarcity—An Action Framework for Agriculture and Food Security. Rome.
29.   ———. 2011. Climate Change, Water and Food Security. FAO Water Reports No. 36.
      Rome.
30.   FAO, 2014. The Water-Energy-Food Nexus - A new approach in support of food security
      and sustainable agriculture. Rome.
31.   ———. 2015. AQUASTAT database. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/
      index.stm.
32.   Gleick, P. H. 1993. Water in Crisis: A Guide to the World’s Freshwater Resources.
      Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment, and Security, and Stockholm
      Environment Institute. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
33.   ———. 2015. Impacts of California’s Ongoing Drought: Hydroelectricity Generation.
      Oakland,     CA:      Pacific   Institute.    http://pacinst.org/publication/impacts-of-
      californiasongoing-drought-hydroelectricity-generation/.
34.   Global Water Forum. 2015. Understanding Water Markets: Public vs. Private Goods.
      http://www.globalwaterforum.org/2015/04/27/understanding-water-markets-public-vs-
      private-goods/.
35.   GoB (Government of Botswana). 1996 . Botswana Energy Master Plan (Reviewed
      2003).
36.   GoB (Government of Botswana). 2012. Botswana National Water Policy. October 2012.
      Gaborone:    Ministry    of    Minerals,  Energy     and    Water      Resources.
      http://www.water.gov.bw/images/Water%20Pitso/Water_Policy__November_2012.pdf.
37.   ———. 2013. Botswana Integrated Water Resources Management & Water Efficiency
      Plan. Gaborone: Ministry of Minerals, Energy and Water Resources.
      http://www.gwp.org/Global/Activities/Impact%20Stories/Further%20reading/IWRM%
      20WE%20Plan.pdf.
38.   GoL (Government of Lesotho). 2004. Lesotho Vision 2020. http://www.gov.ls/
      documents/National_Vision_Document_Final.pdf.

                                             123
39.   ———. 2008. “Act No. 15 of 2008: Water Act, 2008.” Lesotho Government Gazette LIII
      (88).
40.   ———. 2012. National Strategic Development Plan 2012/13–2016/17: Growth and
      Development     Strategic      Framework.       http://www.gov.ls/documents/
      NSDP%20FINAL%20PRINT%20VERSION%2013%2001%202013[1].pdf.
41.   ———. n.d. Lesotho Energy Policy 2015–2025. http://www.lewa.org.ls/legislation/
      Policy/ENERGY%20POLICY%20.pdf.
42.   GoN (Government of Namibia). 1998. Energy Policy White Paper. May 1998. Ministry
      of Mines and Energy, Energy Policy Committee. http://www.mme.gov.na/
      files/publications/1e3_energy_policy_whitepaper.pdf Accessed May 2016.
43.   ———. 2000. National Water Policy White Paper.                         August    2000.
      http://www.environment-namibia.net/tl_files/pdf_documents/policy/
      Water%20Policy.pdf.
44.   ———. 2008. Namibia Water Supply and Sanitation Policy.
45.   ———. 2013. Water Resources Management Act.
46.   GoS (Government of Swaziland). 2003. Swaziland: National Water Act, 2003. Ministry
      of Natural Resources and Energy, National Water Authority. www.ielrc.org/content/
      e0309.pdf.
47.   ———. 2009. National Water Policy—Final Draft. Ministry of Natural Resources and
      Energy, National Water Authority.
48.   ———. 2012. National Development Strategy. Ministry of Economic Planning and
      Development.      http://www.tralac.org/files/2012/12/The-National-Development-
      Strategy.pdf.
49.   ———. 2014. Sustainable Energy for All—Country Action Plan. May 2014.
50.   Grenon, M., and B. Lapillonne. 1976. The WELMM Approach to Energy Strategies and
      Options. IIASA Research Report RR-76-019. Laxenburg, Austria: International Institute
      for Applied Systems Analytics. http://pure.iiasa.ac.at/526/.
51.   Hermann, S., Welsch, M., Segerstrom, R.E., Howells, M.I., Young, C., Alfstad, T.,
      Rogner, H. and Steduto, P.. 2012. Climate, land, energy and water (CLEW) interlinkages
      in Burkina Faso: An analysis of agricultural intensification and bioenergy production.
      Natural Resources Forum 36 (4).
52.   Howells, M., S. Hermann, M. Welsch, M. Bazilian, R. Segerström, T. Alfstad, D. Gielen,
      et al. 2013. “Integrated Analysis of Climate Change, Land-Use, Energy and Water
      Strategies.” Nature Climate Change 1: 621–626.
53.   IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency). 2009. Seeking Sustainable Climate, Land,
      Energy and Water (CLEW) Strategies: Introducing the Development of an Integrated
      Systems Approach to Meet Sustainable Development Challenges. Vienna, Austria.



                                            124
54.   IEA (International Energy Agency). 2007. Climate Policy Uncertainty and Investment
      Risk. Paris. https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Climate_
      Policy_Uncertainty.pdf.
55.   ———. 2012. “Water for Energy: Is Water Becoming a Thirstier Resource?” Chapter
      17      in    World     Energy      Outlook     2012.    Paris:    OECD/IEA.
      http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/WEO_2012_Water_Excer
      pt.pdf.
56.   IEA-ETSAP and IRENA (International Energy Agency-Energy Technology Systems
      Analysis Programme and International Renewable Energy Agency). 2012. Water
      Desalination Using Renewable Energy. Technology Brief 112. http://www.irena.org/
      DocumentDownloads/Publications/Water_Desalination_Using_Renewable_Energy_-
      _Technology_Brief.pdf.
57.   IEA and World Bank. 2015. “Cross-cutting issues of energy: Exploring the nexus of
      water, food, health and gender”. Chapter 6 in Sustainable Energy for All 2015 – Progress
      Toward Sustainable Energy. June. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
58.   IHA (International Hydropower Association). 2016. Hydropower Sustainability
      Assessment      Protocol. London.   http://www.hydrosustainability.org/Protocol/
      Presentations.aspx.
59.   IISD (International Institute for Sustainable Development). 2013. The Water-Energy-
      Food Security Nexus: Towards a practical planning and decision-support framework for
      landscape      investment       and      risk    management.      February    2013.
      http://www.iisd.org/pdf/2013/wef_nexus_2013.pdf
60.   Inglesi-Lotz, R. and Blignaut, J. 2012. Estimating the opportunity cost of water for the
      Kusile and Medupi coal-fired electricity power plants in South Africa. Journal of Energy
      in Southern Africa 23(4): 76-8.
61.   Jägerskog, A., T. J. Clausen, T. Holmgren, and K. Lexén, eds. 2014. Energy and Water:
      The Vital Link for a Sustainable Future. SIWI Report 33. Stockholm Integrated Water
      Institute. http://www.worldwaterweek.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/2014_WWW_
      Report_web-2.pdf.
62.   Koch, H., and S. Vögele. 2009 “Dynamic Modelling of Water Demand, Water
      Availability and Adaptation Strategies for Power Plants to Global Change.” Ecological
      Economics 68: 2031–2039.
63.   KTH/UNDESA (Royal Institute of Technology and United Nations Department of
      Economic and Social Affairs). 2016. https://unite.un.org/sites/unite.un.org/files/app-
      globalclews-v-1-0/landingpage.html.
64.   Lempert, R. J., S. W. Popper, and S. C. Bankes. 2003. Shaping the Next One-Hundred
      Years: New Methods for Quantitative Long-Term Strategy Analysis. MR-1626-RPC.
      Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Pardee Center.



                                             125
65.   LEWA (Lesotho Electricity and Water Authority). 2014. Lesotho Electricity and Water
      Authority Strategic Plan 2014/15–2018/19. January 2014. http://www.lewa.org.ls/
      about/SP_FINAL_APPROVED.pdf.
66.   Linnerud, K., T. K. Mideksa, and G. S. Eskeland. 2011. “The Impact of Climate Change
      on Nuclear Power Supply.” The Energy Journal 32 (1). http://bwl.univie.ac.at/
      fileadmin/user_upload/lehrstuhl_ind_en_uw/lehre/ws1213/SE_Energy_WS12_13/The_
      Impact_of_Climate_Change_on_Nuclear_Power_Supply.pdf.
67.   Macknick, J., R. Newmark, G. Heath, and K. C. Hallett. 2011. A Review of Operational
      Water Consumption and Withdrawal Factors for Electricity Generating Technologies.
      NREL Technical Report NREL/TP-6A20-50900. Golden, CO: National Renewable
      Energy Laboratory. http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy11osti/50900.pdf.
68.   Madani, K., and S. Khatani, 2015. “Water for Energy: Inconsistent Assessment Standards
      and Inability to Judge Properly.” Current Sustainable/Renewable Energy Reports 2: 10–
      16.
69.   Manyatsi, A. M., and R. Brown. 2009. IWRM Survey and Status Report: Swaziland.
      Global Water Partnership Southern Africa.
70.   McKinsey Global Institute. 2011. Resource Revolution: Meeting the World’s Energy,
      Materials, Food, and Water Needs.
71.   Meadows, D. H., G. Meadows, J. Randers, and W. W. Behrens III. 1972. The Limits to
      Growth. New York: Universe Books.
72.   Mehta, L., R. Alba, A. Bolding, K. Denby, B. Derman, T. Hove, E. Manzungu, et al.
      2014. “The Politics of IWRM in Southern Africa.” International Journal of Water
      Resources Development 30 (3): 528–542.
73.   Mekkonnen, M., P. Gerbens-Leenes, and A. Hoekstra. 2015. “The Consumptive Water
      Footprint of Electricity and Heat—A Global Assessment.” Environmental Science:
      Water Research and Technology 1: 285–297.
74.   Miralles-Wilhelm, F. 2013. A Preliminary Assessment of South Africa’s Water
      Resources: Evaluation of Existing Data and Hydrological/Water Resources Management
      Models. Unpublished.
75.   ———. 2016. “Development and Application of Integrative Modeling Tools in Support
      of Food-Energy-Water Nexus Planning—A Research Agenda.” Journal of
      Environmental Studies and Sciences 6 (1).
76.   MRC (Mekong River Commission). 2012. Transboundary River Basin Management:
      Addressing Water, Energy and Food Security.
77.   Muller, M. 2014. “Allocating Power and Functions in a Federal Design: The Experience
      of South Africa.” https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mike_Muller/publications.
78.   NERC (North American Electric Reliability Corporation). 2012. Avoiding the Perfect
      Storm: Water-Food-Energy Nexus. Workshop report. Atlanta, GA: NERC Water


                                            126
      Security Knowledge Exchange Programme. http://archive.wskep.net/assets/documents/
      Uni-of-Exeter-Water-Food-Energy-Workshop-Report-Final.pdf.
79.   New, M. 2002. “Climate Change and Water Resources in the Southwestern Cape, South
      Africa.” South African Journal of Science 98: 1–8.
80.   Nexant. 2009. SAPP Regional Generation and Transmission Expansion Plan Study.
      Volume 1: Executive Summary. Harare, Zimbabwe: Southern African Power Pool
      Coordination Centre.
81.   ODI, ECDPM, GDI/DIE (Overseas Development Institute, European Centre for
      Development Policy Management, German Development Institute/Deutsches Institut für
      Entwicklungspolitik). 2012. European Report on Development 2011/2012—Confronting
      Scarcity: Managing Water, Energy and Land for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth.
      http://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/sites/default/files/downloads/resource/
      Confronting_Scarcity_EU.pdf.
82.   Ofetotse, E. L., and E. A. Essah. 2012. “Energy Overview of Botswana: Generation and
      Consumption.” Presented at the WABER 2012 Conference, Abuja, Nigeria, July 24–27.
83.   Prasad, G. 2012. Energy, Water and Climate Change in Southern Africa—What Are the
      Issues that Need Further Investment and Research? Rondebosch, South Africa:
      University of Cape Town, Energy Research Centre.
84.   Rahm, D., L. Swatuk, and E. Matheny. 2006. “Water Resource Management in Botwana:
      Balancing Sustainability and Economic Development.” Environment, Development and
      Sustainability 8 (1): 157–183.
85.   Rämä, M., E. Pursiheims, T. Lindroos, and K. Kaponen. 2013. Development of Namibian
      Energy Sector. Research Report VTT-R-07599-13. VTT Technical Research Centre of
      Finland.
86. Ray, P., and C. Brown. 2015. Confronting Climate Uncertainty in Water Resources
    Planning and Project Design: The Decision Tree Framework. Washington, DC: The
    World Bank Group.
87. REEGLE Country Profiles http://www.reegle.info/countries
88.   Rodriguez, D. J., A. Delgado, P. DeLaquil, and A. Sohns. 2013. Thirsty Energy. Water
      Papers 78923. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
89.   RSA (Republic of South Africa). 1998. National Water Act, 1998. Government Gazette, 26
      August 1998. http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/saf18718.pdf.
90.   RSA (Republic of South Africa). 2004. National Water Resource Strategy. First Edition,
      September 2004.
91.   ———. 2008. “No. 34 of 2008: National Energy Act, 2008.” Government Gazette 521
      (31638).
92.   ———. 2012. Proposed National Water Resource Strategy 2 (NWRS 2): Summary—
      Managing       Water    for      an    Equitable  and  Sustainable  Future.
      ww.gov.za/sites/www.gov.za/files/Final_Water.pdf.
                                            127
93.   RSA/DoE (Republic of South Africa Department of Energy). 2013a. Integrated Resource
      Plan for Electricity (IRP) 2010–2030. Update Report. 2013. Johannesburg.
      http://www.doe-irp.co.za/content/IRP2010_updatea.pdf.
94.   ———. 2013b. Integrated Energy Planning Report Draft. Johannesburg: South Africa
      Department of Energy. http://www.energy.gov.za/files/IEP/IEP_Publications/Draft-
      2012-Integrated-Energy-Plan.pdf.
95.   SADC (Southern African Development Community). 1996. Protocol on Energy in the
      Southern African Development Community (SADC) Region. http://www.sadc.int/
      documents-publications/show/Protocol%20on%20Energy%20%281996%29.
96.   ———. 2000. Revised Protocol on Shared Watercourses in the Southern African
      Development     Community.    http://www.sadc.int/documents-publications/show/
      Revised%20Protocol%20on%20Shared%20Watercourses%20%282000%29.
97.   ———. 2011. Regional Strategic Action Plan on Integrated Water Resources
      Development and Management (2011–2015): RSAP III. Gaborone, Botswana.
      http://www.sadc.int/files/6613/5293/3526/Regional_Strategic_Action_Plan_-
      IWRM_III.pdf.
98.   ———. 2012a. Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan. August 2012.
      http://www.sadc.int/files/7513/5293/3530/Regional_Infrastructure_Development_Mast
      er_Plan_Executive_Summary.pdf.
99.   ———. 2012b. Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan: Energy Sector Plan.
      August                 2012.             http://www.sadc.int/files/5413/5293/3528/
      Regional_Infrastructure_Development_Master_Plan_Energy_Sector_Plan.pdf.
100. ———. 2012c. Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan: Water Sector Plan.
     August   2012.   http://www.sadc.int/files/6313/5293/3538/Regional_Infrastructure_
     Development_Master_Plan_Water_Sector_Plan.pdf.
101. ———. 2013. “6th SADC Multi-Stakeholder Water Dialogue.” Lukasa, Zambia, October
     1. https://sadc.int/news-events/events/6th-sadc-multi-stakeholder-water-dialogue/.
102. ———. 2016. SADC Energy and Water Ministerial Workshop: “Energy and Water
     Crisis in the Region.” Issues Paper (not published). April 2016.
103. ———. n.d. SADC Facts and Figures. http://www.sadc.int/about-sadc/overview/sadc-
     facts-figures/.
104. SAPP (Southern African Power Pool). 2014. Table 2: Year 2012/13 Installed Capacity
     vs. Suppressed Demand. http://www.sapp.co.zw/docs/R9%20-
     %20SAPP%20Statistics%20-%202013.pdf
105. ———. 2015. Annual Report.
     http://www.sapp.co.zw/docs/SAPP%20Annual%20Report-2015.pdf.
106. Schreiner, B., and H. Baleta, 2015. “Broadening the Lens: A Regional Perspective on
     Water, Food and Energy Integration in SADC.” Aquatic Procedia 5: 90–103.


                                           128
107. SE4All 2015. Rapid Assessment Gap Analysis—Botswana. http://www.se4all.org/sites/
     default/files/l/2015/05/Botswana_RAGA.pdf.
108. SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute). 2012. “Integrating the WEAP and LEAP
     Systems to Support Planning and Analysis at the Water–Energy Nexus.” Sommerville,
     MA. https://www.sei-international.org/mediamanager/documents/Publications/Air-land-
     water-resources/SEI-2012-WEAP-LEAP-Factsheet.pdf.
109. SEI/Hoff (Stockholm Environment Institute and H. Hoff). 2011. “Understanding the
     Nexus.” Background paper for the Bonn2011 Nexus Conference.
110. Setlhogile, T., and R. Harvey. 2015. Water Governance in Botswana. SAIIA Policy
     Briefing 144. Johannesburg: South African Institute of International Affairs.
111. Shaw, E. M. 1988. “Hydrology in Practice.” London: Chapman & Hall. 2nd Edition.
112. Simonović, S. P. 2012. “A Systems Approach to Modelling Water-Energy-Food Nexus.”
     London, Ontario: University of Western Ontario, International Institute of Sustainable
     Development. https://www.iisd.org/pdf/2012/nascap_simonovic.pdf.
113. SIWI (Stockholm Integrated Water Institute). 2010. Challenges and Opportunities for
     Financing Transboundary Water Resources Management and Development in Africa.
     Prepared    for   the     EU   Water     Initiative  Finance    Working    Group.
     http://www.euwi.net/files/EUWI_TB_Waters_Financing_Concept_FINAL_0.pdf.
114. ———. 2012. Transboundary Water Management: Who Does What Where?
     http://www.siwi.org/documents/Resources/Reports/2012_TWM_REPORT.pdf.
115. ———. 2015. World Water Week. http://programme.worldwaterweek.org/.
116. SMEC and EHES, 2006. Review of the 1991 Botswana National Water Master Plan.
     Report prepared for the Government of Botswana.
117. Sousa Júnior, W. C., and J. Reid, 2010. “Uncertainties in Amazon Hydropower
     Development: Risk Scenarios and Environmental Issues around the Belo Monte Dam.”
     Water Alternatives 3 (2): 249–268.
118. Taliotis, C., M. Bazilian, M. Welsch, D. Gielen, and M. Howells. 2014. “Grand Inga to
     Power Africa: Hydropower Scenarios to 2035.” Energy Strategy Reviews 4: 1–10.
119. Turner, K., S. Georgiou, R. Clark, R. Brouwer, and J. Burke. 2004. Economic Valuation
     of Water Resources in Agriculture: From the Sectoral to a Functional Perspective of
     Natural Resource Management. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United
     Nations. http://www.fao.org/docrep/007/y5582e/y5582e00.HTM.
120. Turton, A. R. 2010. New Thinking on the Governance of Water and River Basins in
     Africa: Lessons from the SADC Region. SAIIA Research Report 6. Johannesburg: South
     African Institute of International Affairs. africaportal.org/jspui/bitstream/
     123456789/29708/1/SAIIA Research Report no 6.pdf?1.




                                           129
121. Turton, A. R., P. J. Ashton, and I. Jacobs. 2008. The Management of Shared Water
     Resources in Southern Africa. CSIR/NRE/WR/ER/2008/0400/C. Johannesburg: Council
     for Scientific and Industrial Research.
122. WAVES. 2014. Accounting for Water in Botswana. Global Partnership for Wealth
     Accounting and Valuation of Ecosystem Services (WAVES) Technical Reports.
     Washington DC: TheWorld Bank Group.
123. WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). 2012. Water
     Valuation: Business Case Study Summaries. http://wbcsdpublications.org/water-
     valuation-business-case-study-summaries/.
124. ———. 2013. Business Guide to Water Valuation: An Introduction to Concepts and
     Techniques.      https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/sustainability/publications/assets/wbcsd-
     business-guide-water-valuation.pdf.
125. Welsch, M., S. Hermann, M. Howells, H. H. Rogner, C. Young, I. Ramma, M. Bazilian,
     et al. 2014. “Adding Value with CLEWS—Modelling the Energy System and Its
     Interdependencies for Mauritius.” Applied Energy 113: 1434–1445.
126. Williamson, C.E., Saros, J.E., Vincent, W.F. and Smol, J.P. 2009. Lakes and reservoirs
     as sentinels, integrators, and regulators of climate change. Limnology and Oceanography
     54(6, part 2): 2273-2282.
127. World Bank. 2004. Water Energy Nexus in Central Asia—Improving Regional
     Cooperation in the Syr Darya Basin. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/
     WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2005/10/27/000090341_20051027100016/Rendered/PD
     F/338780ENGLISH0Water1Energy1Nexus.pdf.
128. ———. 2010a. Project Performance Assessment Report: Lesotho Highlands Water
     Project, Phase 1B. https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/Lesotho_Highlands_
     Water_Project-Phase_1B.pdf Accessed May 2015.
129. ———. 2010b. The Zambezi River Basin: A Multi-Sector Investment Opportunities
     Analysis. Volume 1. Summary Report.
130. ———. 2010c. The Cost to Developing Countries of Adapting to Climate Change: New
     Methods and Estimates. The Global Report of the Economics of Adaptation to Climate
     Change Study. Consultation Draft. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTCC/
     Resources/EACC-june2010.pdf.
131. ———. 2011. Water Supply and Sanitation in South Africa: Turning Finance into
     Services for 2015 and Beyond. An AMCOW (African Ministers’ Council on Water)
     Country Status Overview. Washington, DC: World Bank Water and Sanitation Program
     in collaboration with the African Development Bank, UNICEF, and World Health
     Organization.
132. ———. 2012. Renewable Energy Desalination: An Emerging Solution to Close the
     Water Gap in the Middle East and North Africa. MENA Development Report.
     Washington, DC.


                                            130
133. ———. 2014a. Enhancing the Climate Resilience of Africa’s infrastructure: The Power
     and the Water Sectors. Internal draft. Washington, DC.
134. ———. 2014b. Project Appraisal Document—Inga 3 BC and Mid-size Hydropower
     Development Technical Assistance Project. Washington, DC.
135. ———. 2014c. Project Appraisal Document—Southern African Power Pool (SAPP)
     Program for Accelerating Transformational Energy Projects. Washington, DC.
136. ———. 2014d Harnessing African Natural Gas: A New Opportunity for Africa’s Energy
     Agenda? Washington, DC.
137. ———. 2014e. Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant to the DRC of a INGA
     3 BC and Mid-sized Hydropower Development Technical Assistance Project. January 3.
     PAD536. Washington, DC.
138. ———. 2015a. Application of the Hydropower Sustainability Assessment Protocol in the
     Zambezi River Basin, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Malawi and Mozambique. Internal draft Terms
     of Reference. Washington, DC.
139. ———. 2015b. World Bank Thirsty Energy Case Study. Draft. October. Rondebosch,
     South Africa: University of Cape Town, Energy Research Centre.
140. ———. 2015c. Lesotho Water Security and Climate Change Assessment. August.
     Washington, DC.
141. ———. 2015d. Lesotho: Systematic Country Diagnostic. June 25. Washington, DC.
142. ———. 2015e. Botswana: Systematic Country Diagnostic. April. Washington, DC.
     http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2016/
     04/08/090224b084274e53/2_0/Rendered/PDF/
     Botswana000Systematic0country0diagnostic.pdf. Accessed May 2016 2016.
143. ———. 2015f. Guidelines for Economic Analysis of Power Sector Projects. Volume 1:
     Renewable Energy Projects. September. Washington, DC.
144. ———. 2015g. Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) Annual Report
     2015. Washington, DC.
145. ———. 2015h. Concept Note Southern Africa Zambezi Hydropower Sustainability
     Assessment Protocol. P155492, June 4. Washington, DC.
146. ———.        2015i. The Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project: Fact Sheet.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/brief/the-kariba-dam-rehabilitation-project-
     fact-sheet.
147. ———. 2015j. South Asia Investment Decision Making in Hydropower: Decision Tree
     Case Study of the Upper Arun Hydropower Project and Koshi Basin Hydropower
     Development in Nepal. World Bank Report AUS11077, World Bank, Washington, DC.
     June.
148. ———. 2016a. High and Dry: Climate Change, Water, and the Economy. Washington,
     DC.

                                          131
149. ———. 2016b. Toward Climate-Resilient Hydropower in South Asia. LiveWire
     2016/60, World Bank Group.
150. WEF (World Economic Forum). 2011a. Water Security: The Water–Food–Energy–
     Climate Nexus. Washington, DC: Island Press.
151. ———. 2011b. Global Risks 2011. Geneva.
152. WEF and HIS/CERA (World Economic Forum and HIS/Cambridge Energy Research
     Associates, Inc.). 2009. Thirsty Energy: Water and Energy in the 21st Century. Energy
     Vision Update 2009. Geneva. https://www.weforum.org/reports/thirsty-energy-water-
     and-energy-21st-century.
153. World    Energy    Council.    2010.     Water   for    Energy    2010.     London.
     http://www.worldenergy.org/publications/2010/water-for-energy-2010/.
154. WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Program). 2014. The United Nations
     World Water Development Report 2014: Energy and Water. Paris: UNESCO.
155. ZAMCOM          (Zambezi      River         Watercourse     Commission).       2016.
     http://zambezicommission.org/newsite/.




                                           132
