    Report No: ACS12528

.




    Republic of Uganda
    Leveraging Oil and Gas Industry for the
    Development of a Competitive Private
    Sector in Uganda


.
    March 25, 2015



.
    GTCDR

    AFRICA

.




                          1
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee
the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown
on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of
any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the
work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax
978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
pubrights@worldbank.org.



                                                     2
                               ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The study was undertaken by an international team led by Ms. Valeriya Goffe (Finance and Private
Sector Development Specialist, World Bank). The team included Mr. Andrea Dall’Olio (Lead
Economist, World Bank), Ms. Silvana Tordo (Lead Energy Economist, World Bank), Ms. Hannah
Messerli (Senior Private Sector Development Specialist, World Bank), Mr. Moses Kibirige (Senior
Private Sector Development Specialist, World Bank), Ms. Jiazhen Zhou (Junior Professional
Associate, World Bank), Ms. Celia Namyalo (Program Analyst, World Bank), Ms. Monica Rivero
(Program Assistant, World Bank) and Mr. Amos Bakeine (Consultant, World Bank). This report
captures the valuable comments and suggestions of peer reviewers Gosia Nowakowska-Miller
(Operations Officer, IFC), Simon Jones (Vice President, Solimar International), Sebastian Saez
(Senior Trade Economist, World Bank), Roberto Portugal (Senior Trade Economist, World Bank)
and Martin Molinuevo (Consultant, World Bank).

The team expresses sincere gratitude to the officials from the Petroleum Exploration and
Production Department (PEPD) of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD)
and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities (MoTWA) for the excellent collaboration
during the missions. We are also grateful for the support from various people from different
organizations, including government agencies promoting national content in the oil sector,
International Oil Companies (IOCs), regulatory authorities, financial institutions, private
enterprises, and international donors the team met during the missions.




                                               3
                                                               Table of Contents


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ....................................................................................................................... 3
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................... 6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................ 8
INTRODUCTION..................................................................................................................................... 15
   1.1.       PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES ......................................................................................................... 15
   1.2.       METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................................... 17
CHAPTER 1. LOCAL CONTENT POLICIES IN THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR .......................... 18
   1.1.       INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 18
   1.2.       OIL AND GAS VALUE CHAIN ....................................................................................................... 19
   1.3.       OVERVIEW OF LOCAL CONTENT POLICIES IN THE WORLD......................................................... 22
   1.4.       OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................. 39
CHAPTER 2. NATIONAL CONTENT DEVELOPMENT IN UGANDA .......................................... 41
   2.1.       UGANDA OIL DISCOVERY CONTEXT........................................................................................... 41
   2.2        OVERVIEW OF PETROLEUM LEGISLATION IN UGANDA .............................................................. 46
   2.3  ASSESSMENT OF BINDING CONSTRAINTS FACED BY LOCAL SUPPLIERS OF THE OIL INDUSTRY IN
   UGANDA .................................................................................................................................................. 50
   2.4        DETAILED ANALYSIS OF NATIONAL CONTENT SUPPORT INITIATIVES IN UGANDA ................... 61
   2.5        OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................. 69
CHAPTER 3. VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS OF AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES ..................... 74
   3.1        CURRENT STATE OF THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR IN UGANDA .................................................... 74
   3.2        CURRENT STATE OF THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR IN THE ALBERTINE REGION ............................ 80
   3.3        PROSPECTS OF SUPPLYING FOOD TO THE OIL CAMPS BY THE ALBERTINE REGION ..................... 87
   3.4        OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................. 96
CHAPTER 4. OIL AND TOURISM- CO-EXISTENCE OF THE TWO KEY DRIVERS OF
UGANDA’S ECONOMY ......................................................................................................................... 99
   4.1.       UGANDA TOURISM IN CONTEXT ................................................................................................. 99
   4.2.       THE IMPACT OF OIL EXTRACTION ON TOURISM ....................................................................... 102
   4.3.       MFNP SURVEY - RESULTS AND FINDINGS ............................................................................... 107
   4.4.       OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................... 112
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................ 117
ANNEX 1: ACTIVITIES AT EACH STAGE OF OIL & GAS VALUE CHAIN - GOODS &
SERVICES .............................................................................................................................................. 124

                                                                              4
ANNEX 2: STATUS OF LICENSING IN THE ALBERTINE GRABEN OF UGANDA ............... 126
ANNEX 3. LOCAL CONTENT OBJECTIVES OF THE NATIONAL OIL AND GAS POLICY 127
ANNEX 4. ANALYSIS OF ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT CENTERS IN SELECT
COUNTRIES ........................................................................................................................................... 129
ANNEX 5. IOC BASELINE SURVEY ................................................................................................. 137
ANNEX 6. ROUNDTABLE DINNERS ON NATIONAL CONTENT – CROSS-COUNTRY
LESSONS ................................................................................................................................................ 142
ANNEX 7. SIMPLIED STRUCTURES OF SELECT VALUE CHAINS IN THE ALBERTINE
REGION .................................................................................................................................................. 145
ANNEX 8. APPROACHES TO MAXIMIZE THE PARTICIPATION OF THE ALBERTINE
REGION IN SUPPLYING FOOD TO OIL CAMPS .......................................................................... 147
ANNEX 9. PROJECTED WEEKLY FOOD REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OIL CAMPS DURING
THE PERIOD 2015-2019 ....................................................................................................................... 158
ANNEX 10. NATIONAL PARKS IN UGANDA AND TOURISM OFFERINGS ........................... 159
ANNEX 11. CASE STUDIES OF NATURAL RESOURCES EXPLORATION IN NATURE
RESERVES AND PROTECTED AREAS ........................................................................................... 163
ANNEX 12. SURVEY INSTRUMENT FOR TOURISTS .................................................................. 170
ANNEX 13. SURVEY INSTRUMENT FOR GUIDES AND RANGERS ......................................... 173
ANNEX 14. SURVEY INSTRUMENT FOR TOUR OPERATORS ................................................. 175
ANNEX 15. SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND LIMITATIONS ..................................................... 177
ANNEX 16. LIST OF REFERENCES .................................................................................................. 178
ANNEX 17. LIST OF KEY INFORMANTS MET DURING THE MISSIONS ............................... 186




                                                                             5
             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AP       Aquaculture Parks
BDS      Business Development Services
BNDES    Brazil National Bank for Social and Economic Development
BP       British Petroleum
CAE      Centro de Apoio Empresarial
CEDP     Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project
CEM      Country Economic Memorandum
CNOOC    China National Offshore Oil Corporation
CPF      Central Processing Facility
CPI      Corruption Perception Index
CSR      Corporate Social Responsibility
DB       Doing Business
DFR      Department of Fishery Resources
DRC      Democratic Republic of Congo
DSIP     Development Strategy and Action Plan
EAC      East African Community
EDC      Enterprise Development Center
E&P      Exploration and Production
EPC      Engineering, Procurement and Construction
FDI      Foreign Direct Investment
FDP      Field Development Plan
FID      Final Investment Decision
FFVs     Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
FSAP     Financial Sector Assessment Program
GATT     General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GATS     General Agreement on Trade in Services
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GNI      Gross National Income
GoU      Government of Uganda
GPA      Agreement on Government Procurement
HODFA    Hoima District Farmers Association
HODFE    Hoima District Farmers Enterprise
IBS      Industrial Baseline Survey
IEC      Industry Enhancement Center
IFC      International Finance Corporation
IOC      International Oil Company
JVP      Joint Venture Partner
LCP      Local Content Policy
LNG      Liquefied Natural Gas
MCC      Milk Collection Center
MFNP     Murchison Falls National Park
MEMD     Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
MNC      Multinational Corporation
MOFPED   Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

                                   6
MOTWA      Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
MOU        Memorandum of Understanding
MSMEs      Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
MTIC       Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives
NAADS      National Agricultural Advisory Services
NDP        National Development Plan
NGO        Non-Governmental Organization
O&G        Oil and Gas
OFSE       Oil Field Services and Equipment
PDPs       Productive Development Policies
PEDP Act   Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act
PEPD       Petroleum Exploration and Production Department
PNP        Progressive Nationalization Plan
PPE        Protective Personal Equipment
PPP        Public Private Partnership
ROI        Return on Investment
SDT        Special and Differential Treatment
SSA        Sub-Saharan Africa
TDA        Tourism Development Area
TLO        Tourism Liaison Officer
TRIMs      Trade-Related Investment Measures
UBOS       Uganda Bureau of Standards
UIA        Uganda Investment Authority
UPIK       Uganda Petroleum Institute in Kigumba
UTB        Uganda Tourism Board
UWA        Uganda Wildlife Authority
WBG        World Bank Group
WEF        World Economic Forum
WTO        World Trade Organization




                                     7
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR NATIONAL CONTENT DEVELOPMENT IN UGANDA

1.      Discovery of oil resources offers a unique opportunity to Uganda to leverage these
resources for the development of the economy. Oil revenues can be used to finance priority
domestic investments crucial for diversified growth. But even before oil production commences
and oil revenues start coming in, local private sector can participate in supplying the oil industry
and start growing their business and national economy in general. In order to achieve maximum
impact for the economy, policymakers in Uganda need to encourage Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) in the oil and gas (O&G) industry, provide support to improve competitiveness of domestic
O&G suppliers, and ensure sustainability of national content development programs.

2.      Uganda’s economy can significantly benefit from FDI in the O&G industry. This
industry is very new for Uganda and local capacity in many sectors needed to supply the IOCs is
quite low. While it might be possible to develop local capacity in some sectors to reach the level
of quantity and quality required by the IOCs, it might not be feasible in others. For sectors which
are too complex to develop locally in a short period of time, multinational corporations (MNCs)
need to be encouraged to set up subsidiaries in Uganda. They would provide such benefits for
Uganda’s economy as employment, technology transfer, and sourcing of local goods and services
to carry out production. For those sectors which already exist in Uganda or capacity can be easily
developed, there would be more feasibility to make investments locally and/or establish joint
ventures. Each individual deal would be structured depending on unique circumstances and
requiring a specified percentage of local ownership is not recommended.

3.      Considerable benefits for Uganda’s economy are expected if competitive domestic
firms are able to supply goods and services demanded by the O&G industry. Ugandan
suppliers, especially micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), are presently facing a
number of constraints, including information asymmetries, challenging business environment,
inadequate infrastructure, and others. It is essential to address these constraints in a timely manner.
Given that the construction phase is expected to commence in a few years, support to the private
sector needs to be provided urgently to give enough time for enterprises to build capacity. Please
refer to Table 1 below for the main constraints faced by local O&G suppliers and key strategic
actions to address them. The Government of Uganda (GoU), the IOCs, the local private sector and
the development partners all have a role to play in addressing these constraints.

4.       Multiple national content support initiatives are already underway. These include,
inter alia, the establishment of the Industry Enhancement Center (IEC), documentation of O&G
quality standards, communication of IOC demand, and simplification of processes of business
registration and licensing. Most of the constraints facing private sector are currently being
addressed to some extent but for several constraints significant additional support is required (e.g.,
assistance with access to finance for suppliers, alleviation of infrastructure bottlenecks).




                                                  8
    Table 1: Addressing General Constraints Faced by the Local O&G Suppliers in Uganda

#            Issue                     Key Findings                           Key Strategic Actions               Timeframe
1     Lack of               IOC procurement plans are not            Making IOC procurement plans known           12-18
      information on        known to suppliers in advance;           well in advance; establishing an IEC to      months
      opportunities in      tender announcements require an          inform suppliers of upcoming
      the O&G sector        answer within several weeks; unless      opportunities
      for local suppliers   suppliers have some “connection” to
                            the IOCs/EPC, there is little public
                            information available
2     Business              In the Doing Business (DB) 2015          Implementation of investment climate         24-36
      environment           report, Uganda ranked 150 (out of        reforms, including simplifying the           months
      unconducive to        189 countries). In the Global            processes of business registration,
      private sector        Competitiveness Index 2014-15            business        licensing,      obtaining
      growth                Report, Uganda ranked 122 (out of        construction permits, getting electricity,
                            144 countries).                          paying taxes, registering property,
                                                                     trading across borders.
3     Challenges with       Lack of long-term resources in the       Establishing risk sharing facilities,        12-18
      accessing credit      financial system; inadequate             credit lines (especially for long-term       months
      for local suppliers   financial infrastructure; lack of        capital) for O&G suppliers; developing
                            acceptable collateral; low financial     capital markets; carrying out pension
                            literacy; availability of other          system reform; strengthening credit
                            investment options for financial         infrastructure; capacity-building of
                            institutions                             financial institutions and MSMEs;
4     Inadequate            Poor road infrastructure; lack of        Alleviation of major infrastructure          24-36
      infrastructure        access to electrical grids, water etc.   bottlenecks (access to electrical grids,     months
                                                                     water, road network); exploring
                                                                     possibilities for establishing an
                                                                     industrial park with shared facilities
5     Difficulties          Differing standards between the          Harmonization of quality standards           12-18
      meeting IOC           IOCs; lack of knowledge by               between the IOCs; completion of the          months
      quality standards     suppliers which standards apply in       documentation of the required quality
                            particular fields; high costs of         standards; capacity-building of business
                            certifications; challenges with          development service (BDS) providers
                            finding acceptable service providers     and suppliers on standards
6     Difficulties          Contracts are large and require          Unbundling contracts where possible to       12-18
      meeting high          suppliers to have significant            ensure that more local suppliers become      months
      volume/quantity       capacity; financing to increase          eligible to bid; improving access of
      requirements          production capacity is difficult to      suppliers to finance to increase capacity
                            obtain
7     Limited business      Limited knowledge of suppliers on        Establishing an IEC to provide               12-18
      knowledge of          how to prepare bids, what quality        comprehensive local content                  months
      suppliers             standards to use, where to obtain        development programs to suppliers in
                            information on the O&G industry          the O&G industry

    5.     Besides the initiatives benefitting all O&G suppliers, supplementary actions can also
    be developed to target priority sectors and regions for maximum impact. Such interventions
    have the potential to solve bottlenecks in a focused way.

    6.     The Industrial Baseline Survey (IBS) carried out by the IOCs identified twenty five
    sectors with high potential for national content. These include transportation and logistics, food
    supply, domestic waste management, facility management, manpower agency, work safety
    products, road construction and others. These are the sectors which are less technical and where

                                                                9
local capacity exists. Unfortunately, there are only two sectors (security and cement
manufacturing) among the twenty five which are meeting O&G standards and have a quantity gap
of less than 10 percent. The remaining twenty three sectors face either quantity, or quality gap, or
both. Without support, national content in these sectors will be much lower than it could be.
Support can be provided through matching grants for technology improvement, quality
certification, infrastructure interventions benefitting these sectors, dedicated financing programs.

7.       Additional support can be targeted to specific regions of the country to improve
competitiveness of the private sector there. Due to the importance of Kampala for national
economy and availability of many businesses which could serve the O&G industry there1, it is
strongly recommended that Kampala become the center of national content initiatives. The IEC
would be expected to be headquartered in Kampala to accommodate entrepreneurs located in the
capital and nearby districts. At the same time, satellite centers would be set up in one or several
districts of the Albertine Region where oil fields are being developed to ensure active participation
of enterprises in those districts in supplying the oil camps. Similar approach was taken by a number
of other countries which set up enterprise development centers2.

8.      The possibilities for extensively involving the private sector of the Albertine Region
in the oil industry as suppliers also need to be explored. The prospect of supplying food to the
oil camps appears a major opportunity for the region given that most of the population is involved
in agriculture. Achievement of a significant level of participation of the Albertine Region is highly
desirable- both from the social and economic standpoint.

9.      A positive example already exists in the Albertine Region. Traidlinks, a NGO in the
Hoima district, has helped local farmers grasp opportunities coming from the oil fields
development through supplying fresh fruits and vegetables to the oil camps. By December 2013,
the Traidlinks project had provided over 25 tons of fresh produce to Tullow camps and around 600
farmers had been trained in business skills and quality assurance. So far, Traidlinks remains the
sole initiative aimed at linking Albertine region suppliers to oil camps in a systematic manner.
Originally it was meant to be a pilot to be scaled up to other districts, but due to lack of funding,
the scale up did not take place. Going forward, there are three possible approaches to increase
participation of the Albertine region in supplying the O&G industry (Table 2).

    Table 2: Approaches to Increase Participation of the Albertine Region in the O&G Sector

    Approach                   Description                                          Considerations
    1.NGO       NGO lobbies IOCs and other agencies           As evidenced by Traidlinks’ activities, this approach has
                to finance its operations (as in the case     achieved only a small impact. A larger impact could be
                of Traidlinks). Training and inputs are       achieved if operations were expanded to other districts of
                provided to smallholders; produce is          the region and assistance was provided to enable supply of
                aggregated and supplied to oil camps.         other food categories besides fruits and vegetables



1
  A large number of members of the association of oil and gas service providers are based in Kampala
2
  For example, in Chad the main center was located in the capital N’Djamena with satellite centers in Doba, Moundou
and Sahr in the South. Once the demand from the oil sector goes down, the center can serve other industries, and its
location in the capital facilitates this transition. Following the decline in oil related activities, the center in Chad later
became a unit of the chamber of commerce.

                                                             10
 2.The large   Large scale investors (possibly foreign)    A package of incentives (e.g., tax incentives, land
 scale         would set up processing facilities in the   concessions) could be provided by the GoU to investors to
 investor      Albertine Region and use local              set up operations in the region and use smallholders as
               smallholders as outgrowers or contract      outgrowers or contract farmers. Each investor could target
               farmers.                                    a particular product or a group of products (e.g., milk
                                                           plant, chicken farm, beef plant).
 3.The         A group of enterprises would be housed      This approach could help Uganda achieve the much
 agro-         within the agro-industrial park area        needed transformational impact as shared facilities would
 industrial    with shared infrastructure. On the          help to overcome the challenges of the high cost of modern
 park          agricultural side, housed enterprises       infrastructure. The government has earmarked 29 square
               could include processing plants for         km of land for the construction of the refinery and
               fruits and vegetables, milk, meat and       infrastructure, and 2-3 km could be available for housing
               fish, among others.                         of agro-processing enterprises within this area.
                                                           Nevertheless, caution needs to be exercised with this
                                                           approach due to many failures of industrial parks in the
                                                           world in general and negative experiences in Uganda (in
                                                           particular, Namanve park).

10.     Strategies also need to be designed for the periods following the scale-down of
procurement by the IOCs when the construction phase is over. Both the authorities and the
businesses need to keep in mind that the high demand from the O&G industry will be very short
lived. After the demand goes down, businesses which benefitted from the IOC contracts will be
expected to continue operating successfully, serving other industries in Uganda and abroad, and
for this they need to be competitive. A labor mobility strategy (e.g., redeploying skilled
professionals from O&G industry to other fields) needs to be carefully thought through. Strategies
for redeploying O&G suppliers to other industries in Uganda or foreign markets which demand
similar goods and services also have to be developed. When selecting priority sectors for national
content development, it would be particularly important to consider possibility of using products
of these sectors in other industries in Uganda and/or overseas.

OIL AND TOURISM- CO-EXISTENCE OF THE TWO KEY DRIVERS OF UGANDA’S ECONOMY

11.     Tourism is a critical player in Uganda’s economy. Each dollar of expenditure by a
foreign tourist in Uganda generates 2.5 dollars of GDP. In terms of competitiveness of the sector,
at present Uganda lags behind a number of regional peers: it currently ranks 13th on the regional
ranking of the travel & tourism competitiveness index, behind such neighbors as Kenya (8),
Rwanda (9) and Tanzania (12).

12.     Uganda’s main tourism resources include renowned national parks and wildlife .
Murchison Falls National Park (MFNP) attracts the largest number of visitors. 40 percent of
Uganda’s known oil resources also lay beneath it. Uganda is not the only country to discover oil
reserves in the national parks. Both developed and developing countries around the world are also
facing the challenge of balancing extractive activities and tourism activities in protected areas,
including Canada, Australia, Ecuador, Peru, and Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).

13.    At present, Total operates in two exploration areas which are mainly located in the
northwestern part of MFNP. During the construction phase, it is estimated that around 750-800
wells will be drilled. Development drilling activity will span over 13 years and up to three rigs
could be drilling simultaneously in the park.

                                                           11
14.      While carrying out its operations, Total has committed to respecting the natural and
human environment. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments are conducted prior to all
activities and this process includes stakeholder consultations. On the public sector side, the Uganda
Wildlife Authority (UWA) also has provided operational guidelines for O&G exploration and
production in protected areas to regulate the behaviors of oil companies operating in the park.

15.     The ongoing oil activities will bring both benefits and challenges to the tourism sector
and the local communities. Improved access and upgraded infrastructure required for full-scale
oil operations will benefit the development of the tourism sector in the region. For instance, the
planned upgrade of the Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi–Kigumba road will enable tourists to
significantly reduce driving time between Queen Elizabeth and MFNP. Oil is also expected to
attract more travelers to the region: the numbers of business travelers for oil operations and related
conferences have already been increasing and the region has attracted new investments in hotels.
As the oil sector moves from exploration phase to development and eventually production, there
is a growing opportunity for local supply of services such as accommodation and transport.
Business travelers and service providers for the oil sector are also likely to travel to other parts of
the country. With more effective planning and a regulatory system, local communities could be
expected to benefit more from the growing hospitality industry. Finally, due to increased scrutiny
over oil activities in the park, there has been significant progress in the fight against poaching:
UWA has discovered hundreds of snares targeting animals in the park, which otherwise would not
have been discovered.

16.     But oil will also bring challenges to the tourism sector. Oil extraction activities in the
national park have a potential to negatively affect the overall image of Uganda in the eyes of
tourists. To better understand current tourists’ experience in the MFNP, a survey was conducted
by the team from the MoTWA and the World Bank in MFNP in 2014. The goals of the survey
were to provide insights into the potential impact of oil activities on tourism and the possible
mitigation measures to ensure the beneficial cohabitation of oil and tourism in the park.

17.      At the time when the survey was conducted, Total had already completed exploration
and appraisal activities and there were no oil exploration activities ongoing. Nevertheless, 45
percent of the sample still reported that they noticed some oil activities in the park. They saw
workers, tracks, oil rigs, and no entry signs. 39 percent of surveyed tourists reported that oil
activities had some negative impact on their experience. When asked about the improvements
which could be done to enhance tourists’ experience at the park, the majority of the respondents
agreed that improvements were desirable. Tourists were largely in favor of separating oil and
tourism activities as much as possible, including utilizing separate tracks, entrances and ferries.
Answers also indicated that tourists need to be provided more information on oil related activities
than is currently being provided.

18.      Uganda is not the only country to discover oil reserves in the national parks. A number
of countries around the world are also facing the challenge of balancing extractive activities and
tourism activities in protected areas. In the Amazon basin area, both Ecuador and Peru have
announced that oil exploration will start in their national parks. In the DRC, oil exploration
activities have been permitted in Virunga National Park which is Africa’s oldest national park and
home to critically endangered mountain gorillas.

                                                  12
    19.     Due to the national economic interests, the challenges between protected areas and
    the extractives industry are not unique to the developing countries: developed countries are
    also working to identify the best practices. For example, Canada’s Sable Island, the national
    park which is home to wild horses and the largest grey seal colony in the world, is located in the
    middle of a petroleum field. To reduce the impact of oil-related activities on the national park,
    legislation limits oil and gas exploration activities to only those that are considered as low impact.
    Overall, there are a number of examples of oil and mining companies supporting improvements in
    protected areas systems, through contributing to the creation and extension of protected areas to
    include biodiversity values identified through project site assessment; providing direct financial
    assistance or non-monetary resources to unfunded parks; and supporting the development or
    implementation of protected area management plan.

    20.     Based on the results of survey and the lessons learned from other countries’
    experiences, Uganda’s stakeholders and policymakers need to develop a strategic framework
    to promote the co-existence of oil and tourism sectors during the lifecycle of oil field
    development. An oil and tourism communications unit needs to be established to help coordinate
    between different groups and coordinate planning and implementation efforts. This unit would
    need to be government endorsed. Tourists, rangers, lodge owners and other MFNP stakeholders
    need to be provided information about the oil-related activities, and this information needs to come
    from the government (not the IOCs) to ensure its objectivity. Currently, the preparation of national
    oil spill contingency plan has been initiated by PEPD with the support from Norwegian
    government.

    21.      As oil is a finite resource and tourism is going to be one of the top sectors driving
    Uganda’s economy in the long-term, it is essential for the GoU to ensure that appropriate
    measures are taken to minimize disruption to the tourism activity at MFNP while oil
    activities are ongoing. Please refer to Table 3 below for the main issues caused by oil-related
    activities at MFNP and key strategic actions to address them. Tourism and oil-related activities
    need to be separated as much as possible to ensure that Uganda can benefit to the fullest from both
    of these sectors. More weight needs to be given to the development of tourism activities in the
    MFNP which would not be impacted by the oil. Finally, it would be essential to fully restore
    affected sites (including replanting vegetation indigenous to the area) following the completion of
    activities.

    Table 3: Addressing the Potential Issues Caused by the Oil-Related Activities in MFNP

#          Issue                          Key Findings                          Key Strategic Actions            Timeframe
1    Information on      No materials are currently provided to          Providing sufficient information to     6-12
     oil-related         tourists on oil-related activities by park      the tourists, guides/rangers in the     months
     activities in the   authorities and Total flyers are the main       park and other stakeholders to
     park is limited     source. The results of the survey of tourists   ensure that they possess up-to-date
     and mainly          at the MFNP indicated that the majority of      information on the oil-related
     provided by the     tourists wanted more information to be          activities. The information needs
     IOCs                provided. Many guides/rangers are not           to come from the government (and
                         knowledgeable about oil activities and do       not Total) to ensure its objectivity.
                         not possess the latest information on the
                         upcoming oil field development activities.



                                                              13
2   Potential          The results of a study on responses of           Development of integrated land use         12-18
    deterioration of   wildlife show lower densities of the larger      plan; intensification of restoration       months
    natural and        mammals and birds in MFNP. Some restored         efforts in the areas where activities
    wildlife assets    sites were not replanted with vegetation         have finished; continuation of
                       indigenous to the area. The population has       monitoring of the migration and
                       been moving closer to the park in search of      sightings patterns of the key
                       job opportunities.                               animals       species;       improving
                                                                        community readiness and capacity
                                                                        building.
3   Disruption of      Oil workers and tourists use the same ferry      Separation of oil activities and           12-18
    tourism            and the same entrances and tracks. Oil           tourism activities; developing             months
    activities         related activities cause congestion and noise    tourism products which are not
                       in the park. High ratio of oil workers to        affected by oil; engaging cross-
                       tourists is expected when rigs drilling starts   sector stakeholders; establishing
                       during the construction phase.                   operational        guidelines        and
                                                                        legislation.
4   Threat of          Uganda currently ranks only 13th on the          Establishing        a       government     12-18
    negative           regional ranking of the travel & tourism         endorsed       oil      and     tourism    months
    destination        competitiveness index, behind regional           communication unit to help
    brand and          neighbors. Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania. If        coordinate efforts to ensure co-
    lower              tourists have a negative experience at           existence between oil and tourism;
    competitiveness    MFNP, the most visited park in Uganda, it        developing             communication
                       can further reduce the value of Uganda’s         strategy      to       inform       both
                       tourism offering. Comments provided by           stakeholders         and       tourists;
                       tourists reflected many concerns about the       conducting periodic surveys of
                       future of the park.                              tourists’ and guides’/rangers’
                                                                        perceptions        once      oil-related
                                                                        activities re-start in the park
5   Threat of oil      An oil spill disaster would lead to decreased    Making       environmental         bond    18-24
    spill disaster     demand for leisure tourism, decline in           mandatory             for         IOCs;    months
                       related tourism expenditures and interruption    implementation           of     disaster
                       of local economic development.                   prevention mechanism; developing
                                                                        disaster strategy and action plans.




                                                            14
                                      INTRODUCTION
1.1. PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES

22.     The study represents a background study for the proposed Uganda Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM), a joint product of the GoU and the World Bank, which seeks
to address the issue of efficient use of oil resources and examine synergies between the oil industry
and the rest of the economy, through growth poles or linkages.

23.     The oil industry can help Uganda to promote robust growth in the economy. Oil
revenues can be used to finance priority domestic investments crucial to diversified growth.
However, it is important to keep in mind that it will take a number of years until oil revenues start
flowing into Uganda’s economy. After the Final Investment Decision (FID) is reached, it will take
time to develop the oil fields and start oil production.

24.     In the meantime, there are immediate opportunities opening up for Uganda’s
businesses to supply the oil industry with goods and services. The demand from the IOCs will
be high during the period of construction and these opportunities need to be leveraged by the
domestic private sector to the fullest. The IOCs would like to procure a range of goods and services
locally to keep their costs down, and ability to do that might have an impact on whether FID will
be made or not.

25.      In most cases, Uganda’s suppliers, especially MSMEs, are not expected to become
first tier contractors to the IOCs. They will likely be sub-contractors, oftentimes in the very
bottom of supply chain, and will face a lot of challenges. It is essential to ensure that Uganda’s
suppliers are sufficiently competitive to supply part of the IOCs’ requirement for goods and
services. This study focuses specifically on the considerations for the development of competitive
domestic suppliers to serve the emerging oil and gas sector.

26.    The main objective of this study is to provide recommendations to the GoU on policies
and strategies of leveraging the oil discoveries for the development of the national economy
in order to transform the oil resources into sustained growth. Using desk review, interviews,
focus groups and survey, the study conducts the analysis and provides recommendations in the
following four areas:

o Overview of local content policies in the world

The study reviews the typology of policies for local sourcing used in the world. It includes ample
examples of other countries’ experiences with developing their local content policies and
providing support to priority sectors to boost local content which could be useful for Uganda from
the standpoint of lessons learned. As part of this work, roundtable dinners on national content
featuring speakers from oil-producing nations are also financed in Uganda.

o Recommendations for domestic supplier development in Uganda




                                                 15
The study conducts a detailed analysis of the binding constraints faced by domestic oil and gas
suppliers in Uganda, takes stock of existing national content support initiatives and identifies areas
which are in urgent need of further support.

o Value chain analysis of agriculture and fisheries

The IBS carried out by the IOCs identified a number of high-potential sectors for national content
development. As part of this study, it was decided to select one high-potential sector - food supply
for the oil camps - to perform an in-depth value chain analysis. This analysis is complementary to
a broader review conducted as part of the IBS. We note that the available budget for the study did
not allow for a comprehensive analysis of several sectors; as such, only one sector was analyzed
in-depth.

The study examines how the oil sector can be used as a driver of agriculture and fisheries sectors
in the Albertine Region and other regions of Uganda from the standpoint of food supply to the oil
camps. Food supply has been selected as the focus of the study for multiple reasons. First, it is
usually a relatively easy win for local content in many developing countries compared to some
other sectors the development of which would be much more complex (for example, oilfield
equipment manufacturing) 3 . Second, in Uganda’s economy, agriculture is still the largest
employer. The Albertine region’s livelihoods specifically depend on agriculture and fisheries, with
90 percent of people engaged in agriculture. While we would not expect that all food supply would
come from the Albertine region, it would be very beneficial to ensure that some of it does come
from the region to meet the expectations of the locals and give them an opportunity to benefit from
the development of the oil sector.

o Oil and tourism- recommendations to ensure co-existence of the two key drivers of Uganda’s
  economy.

Because 40 percent of Uganda’s known oil reserves are found in the MFNP4, one of the greatest
tourism attractions in Uganda, it is critical to ensure that risks which oil can pose to the tourism
sector in the country are properly managed. The study explores the issue of co-existence between
the oil sector and the tourism sector, another important driver of Uganda’s economy, to provide
recommendations on how growth in the economy from the development of the oil sector can be
complemented by growth in the tourism sector.

27.     The recommendations developed as part of this study will contribute to the
achievement of the objectives of the Uganda CEM, including on how to leverage the new oil
resources to promote diversified growth of the economy. The study will provide critical input
in the area of the growth potential of Uganda and specific sectors which can drive future growth
of the country. The study will also inform the overall program of the WBG in Uganda, including
sector programs and the reform agenda of the country.


3
  We note that development of local content in agriculture can also face a lot of challenges, which should not be
underestimated. Some of the challenges relate to the inability of smallholders to deliver consistent quality and quantity
on a defined schedule, meeting high quality standards, unavailability of processing/packaging/storage facilities etc.
4
  Developing the Lake Albert Upstream Resources, Total, 2013

                                                           16
1.2.METHODOLOGY

28.     The analysis has been based on a combination of document review and analysis, key
informant interviews, group discussions, as well as survey. We reviewed the existing literature
of the local content policies used in the world, with particular focus on Africa, and extracted
examples which could be relevant for Uganda’s context. We also conducted a number of
interviews to understand constraints facing local enterprises who want to supply the oil industry
and existing national content support initiatives in Uganda. Finally, we proposed feasible options,
relevant to the Uganda context, to support national content development in the petroleum sector.
In obtaining information, we have sought to use the following means:

   Desk Review. The team conducted a desk review of existing literature on local content
    development in other countries to draw lessons learned by other nations in the development
    of local content in the petroleum sector. Extensive research of available reports on national
    content development in Uganda conducted to date has also been undertaken. Annex 15 lists
    the full bibliography.

   Roundtable Dinners on National Content. Some of the countries, experience of which
    would be useful for Uganda from the standpoint of lessons learned, were featured in the cycle
    of roundtable dinners on national content. The roundtable dinners were chaired by the
    Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and benefitted from the technical support and
    practical knowledge of an expert coming from the country featured at a particular session.
    Countries featured included Ghana, Malaysia, Egypt, Nigeria, and Gabon. Discussions held
    by stakeholders as part of the dinners have been reflected in this report.

   Working Groups. The team participated in the working group on the establishment of the
    Industry Enhancement Center (IEC) to support suppliers of the oil and gas industry.

   Interviews. Detailed information regarding national content development in Uganda has been
    obtained through interviews with the senior executives of governmental agencies, IOCs,
    financial institutions, micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) engaged in the oil and
    gas sector, as well as key players in the agriculture sector. Discussions served as a source of
    opinions, insights, and hypotheses on the constraints existing for local enterprises to supply
    the oil industry in Uganda and to get a grasp of existing national content support initiatives.
    The team also interviewed a large number of tourism sector stakeholders to explore the topic
    of co-existence between the tourism sector and the oil sector. The list of key informants is
    presented in Annex 16.

   Focus Groups. During the course of the assignment, the team interviewed several
    entrepreneurs as part of the oil and gas suppliers focus group to discuss constraints they are
    facing in supplying the oil and gas industry. The team also conducted focus group discussions
    with farmers and fishers in the Albertine Region.

   Survey. The team undertook the survey of tourists’ perceptions at the MFNP to provide
    insight into the potential impact of oil activities on tourism and the possible mitigation
    measures to ensure the cohabitation of oil and tourism in the park.

                                                17
       CHAPTER 1. LOCAL CONTENT POLICIES IN THE OIL AND GAS
                             SECTOR
1.1. INTRODUCTION

29.     The demand for oil is the result of our demand for energy. Oil has been the leading
source of energy since the early twentieth century due to its perceived benefits vis-à-vis other types
of energy. Oil has distinct advantages as a carrier of energy: it has a high content of energy per
weight unit, which minimizes transportation costs; it is rather easily handled, being fluid and
storable without much cost. The fluidity of oil makes uninterrupted supply of fuel easy to achieve
and the high energy-to-weight ratio makes it possible to carry sufficient energy supplies in a
vehicle for travel over long distances. Furthermore, oil products are not easily displaced in certain
types of use. For instance, oil is the only type of fuel used in aviation. Cars, trucks, aircrafts and
ships use almost exclusively oil products for their engines. Oil continues to dominate in the
transportation sector which is critical for any country’s economy. Oil is a strategic commodity,
and without it, modern society as we know it would cease to exist.

30.     The success of oil has largely come from its availability in sufficient quantities and at
a reasonable price. Oil is a nonrenewable resource. It is formed underground from remains of an
organic material such as debris; although it is an ongoing process, the rate of formation of new oil
is extremely slow, and what we are using now is immensely greater than whatever is being formed.
Ever since oil was discovered, however, additions to known reserves have been as great as or
greater than what we are using up5. Such additions have come both from finds such as offshore
fields that are expensive to exploit and less expensive finds onshore. Technological progress has
exerted a steady downward pressure on extraction costs.

31.      There are different types of oil, some of which are more valuable than others. Crude
oil is fairly useless in its natural state and to be useful, it must be refined. Oil can be refined by
heating it; the lighter the product, the lower the temperature is at which it evaporates. Crude oil
that contains a large proportion of molecules with few carbon atoms is referred to as “light”, while
oil containing small amounts of hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide is referred to as “sweet”.
"Light sweet crude oil" receives a higher price in the commodity markets and is the most sought-
after version of crude oil as it contains a disproportionately large fraction that is directly processed
into gasoline, kerosene, and high-quality diesel when converted into products by an oil refinery.
Some of the producers of light sweet crude include the United States, Norway, India, Angola,
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Nigeria, and others.

32.    For many low income countries, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, the extractive
sectors represent one of the most crucial sources of investment and income in their
economies. Such countries are largely dependent on revenues flowing from extractives for their
economic development and the welfare of their population. Extractive sectors rely heavily on
foreign investment, and foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows have expanded rapidly over the
past decade. Linkages and spillovers from this FDI can play a critical role in ensuring that the
countries benefit over and beyond the lifespan of oil, gas, or mining project and develop

5
    Rognvaldur Hannesson. Issues and Strategies of Oil and Natural Gas Production. Quorum Books. 1998

                                                        18
sustainable and competitive alternative sectors. Given the non-renewable nature of the extractive
sectors, this is a particularly critical concern for policymakers.

33.      Africa accounts for 9.7 percent of the world’s proven oil reserves 6. In 2007, Africa
produced 488.5 million tons of oil and consumed 138 million tons. Africa is home to several large
oil producers, such as Algeria, Angola, Chad, Cameroon, Republic of Congo, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon, Libya, South Sudan and Tunisia. Nigeria is Africa’s largest oil producer and has
been producing oil for many years. A number of African countries, such as Uganda, Kenya,
Ethiopia, and others, are now busy exploring oil and are hoping to join the ranks of oil-producing
nations in the near future. One of the key challenges facing the African countries trying to develop
the oil industry is lack of local expertise and technologies in the oil sector.

1.2. OIL AND GAS VALUE CHAIN

34.    One of the most distinctive features of the extractive industries is the diversity of
different functions within them and of the range of professional and management skills
necessary to accomplish them. These sectors use a number of goods and services.

35.    O&G value chain is complex. It includes the global processes of exploration,
development, production, treatment and Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), refining, petrochemical
and primary distribution. Annex 1 presents the main inputs across the oil/gas value chain.

36.      Because oil industry uses goods and services from other industries as inputs and its
products have a lot of uses in other industries, it has backward and forward links with other
sectors of the economy. Backward links relate to the demand of one industry for the outputs of
other industries known as upstream (to be used as its inputs). For the oil industry, these are
activities related to providing goods and services to the companies that perform oil exploration
and production. Forward links relate to the output of one industry as supplied to other industries,
which are called downstream (as input for their output)7. For the oil industry, the downstream
sector refers to the refining of petroleum crude oil as well as the marketing and distribution of
products derived from crude oil. The downstream sector touches consumers through products such
as gasoline or petrol, kerosene, jet fuel, waxes, as well as hundreds of petrochemicals.

37.     Depending on a country, oil sector can have strong or weak links with other sectors
of the domestic economy:

       Backward links. In those cases when the oil sector sources a lot of inputs from the local
        market (both labor and the outputs of other sectors), backward linkages are strong and such
        purchases provide significant benefits to the domestic upstream industries and economy in
        general. If a lot of domestic labor is employed, local employees will spend much of their
        wages on domestically produced goods, and thus create even more jobs. If inputs are
        largely purchased from domestic suppliers, this benefits not only this particular company
        but also companies from which inputs for production are purchased. Whenever most inputs

6
 Ruchita Beri, Uttam Sinha. Africa and Energy Security. Academic Fundation New Delhi. 2009
7
 Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      19
             are imported, the connection with local economy is limited and so are the benefits for the
             economy. In this study, we are primarily concerned with backward linkages due to the
             current stage in the cycle (i.e., development).

            Forward links. Oil extraction also can supply other sectors (e.g., refineries, petrochemical
             industry), creating forward linkages for the local economy if such downstream industries
             are domestically situated. Oil is the raw material for many chemical products, including
             pharmaceuticals, solvents, fertilizers, pesticides, and plastics. Table 4 shows the uses of
             different oil products.

                                   Table 4: Uses of Different Oil Products8

      #          Product          No. of carbon atoms                        Main uses
     1       Gas                  1-4                        Fuel, carbon black
     2       Petroleum ether      5-7                        Solvent, dry cleaning
     3       Gasoline             5-12                       Motor fuel
     4       Kerosene             12-16                      Stoves, diesel engines, rockets, and jets
     5       Gas oil (fuel oil)   15-18                      Furnaces, diesel engines
     6       Lubricating oil      16-20                      Lubrication
     7       Greases              18+                        Lubrication, sizing paper, medicines
     8       Paraffin (“wax”)     20+                        Candles, waterproofing
     9       Petroleum coke                                  Fuel, carbon electrodes

38.     In the recent World Bank study Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector, the
authors have undertaken an analysis to calculate backward and forward links from the oil
and gas sector for a sample of 48 countries. The data used in the study was obtained from the
Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP8) database which reports intermediate demand and bilateral
trade flows for the years 2004 and 2007. The researchers used the most recent data available in the
database (from 2007) and calculated normalized links (ratio of the oil and gas sector link to the
average unweighted link over all sectors, with a value greater than unity implying that the key
sector has a greater link than the average across other sectors in the economy grouped). The results
are presented in Figure 1.

39.     The measurement of backward and forward links was formalized by Rasmussen
(1956) and Chenery and Watanabe (1958), based on the use of input-output tables. An
important distinction between these two approaches is treatment of direct and indirect links.
Chenery and Watanabe concentrated on the immediate inputs into a sector (backward link) or
immediate outputs provided to other sectors (forward link). At the same time, while Rasmussen
focused on the cumulative effect of both direct and indirect links (e.g., for backward links- inputs
into the sector, the inputs into these inputs, and so on). Local content policies (LCPs) are most
often concerned with the direct links (sectors supplying the oil and gas sector) and more rarely
with indirect links (how supply sectors affect other sectors).



8
    Hussein K. Abdel-Aal and Robert Schmeltzer, Petroleum Economics and Engineering

                                                       20
     Figure 1. Chenery-Watanabe and Rausmussen Links from the Oil and Gas Sector9




40.    The results have shown that the strength of links between the oil sector and other
sectors greatly varies from country to country but some broad inferences could still be
drawn:

       There are very few countries which have relatively high both backward and forward links
        between the O&G sector and other sectors of the local economy. In all countries studied,
        forward links are stronger than backward ones, and backward links are predominantly low
        compared to that of other sectors for the majority of countries. Few, if any, industries have
        a lower direct backward link. The low values are due to the fact that relatively inputs
        purchased locally as they are sourced mainly from abroad. Indirect backward links are
        higher but still below forward ones, and the sector’s pull on the rest of the economy is
        lower than the average for other sectors.
       In most countries, O&G industry has one of the highest forward links with the rest of the
        economy. The direct Chenery-Watanabe forward link (FLcw) is substantially larger than
        the average for other sectors in 33 of the 48 countries in sample. In these 33 countries the
        forward link was among the highest across sectors. The direct plus indirect forward link is
        even higher in most countries. When domestic downstream industries are present in the
        country, they greatly benefit from the oil sector. Therefore, in many cases, it can be
        beneficial for countries producing oil to establish downstream sectors because they can
        draw heavily on the domestic oil sector and use this to add value.

41.    Based on the results of the World Bank study, Local Content Policies in the Oil and
Gas Sector, oil and gas sector in Uganda exhibits both backward and forward links with
other sectors of the economy:


9
 Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      21
          Backward links. Consistent with the results of many other countries, oil sector backward
           links in Uganda are significantly weaker than forward ones. For Uganda, NBLCW is 0.61,
           which is significantly below 1 (value of 1 would imply that the link is average compared
           to other industries). Compared to other countries in the region, Uganda ranks somewhere
           in the middle. It is evident, however, that it is significantly behind some other countries.
           For Uganda, only 18 sectors (out of 54) appear to have direct backward links with the oil
           and gas sector, compared to 52 for Philippines (out of 53). Consistent with results of many
           other countries, NBLR is higher than NBLCW, implying that the relationship with the
           economy is stronger when indirect links are taken into consideration. It is necessary to note,
           however, that the data used in the study has been from 2007 and a number of actions were
           taken by the GoU since then to help build the local content, so backward links could be
           higher with more updated data. Figure 2 below shows some comparisons between Uganda
           and some other countries in Africa and other regions.
          Forward links. Similar to most other countries, Uganda demonstrates relatively strong
           forward links of the oil sector with other sectors (greater than 1), with NFLCW being 1.5.
           Although not the highest among the countries (compared to Bahrain with 7.45 and Nigeria
           with 4.62), this value is still significant.

             Figure 2: Backward and Forward Links of the Oil/Gas Sector-Uganda vs. Select
                                            Countries10



              Normalized Backward Links                         Normalized Forward Links
         Country         NBLCW     Rank                    Country       NFLCW      Rank
         Philippines     2.4       52                      Bahrain       7.45       49
         Kazakhstan      1.04      33                      Nigeria       4.62       50
         South Africa    0.78      13                      Mauritius     3.4        47
         Mauritius       0.74      26                      Malawi        2.56       49
         Cote d’Ivoire   0.71      12                      Philippines   2.34       47
         Uganda          0.61      18                      Kazakhstan    2.1        50
         Malawi          0.43      7                       Uganda        1.5        41
         Cameroon        0.39      3                       Cameroon      1.14       42
         Mozambique      0.33      7                       Cote d’Ivoire 0.66       31
         Bahrain         0.23      5                       South Africa  0.11       11
         Nigeria         0.1       5                       Mozambique 0.03          9



1.3.OVERVIEW OF LOCAL CONTENT POLICIES IN THE WORLD

Definitions of Local Content



10
  Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      22
42.     In broad terms, LCPs are government interventions that look to increase, in the long
term, the share of employment or of sales to a sector that are locally supplied at each stage
of the value chain. Such policies encourage the participation and development of national labor,
goods and services, technology, and capital. LCPs are part of a broader category of policy
interventions called productive development policies (PDPs), or industrial policies 11. LCPs have
been adopted and applied by large number of governments including those of the developed
economies at the period of their industrialization. Australia used local content in its automobiles
and tobacco industries, Canada used the policy in its automobiles industry, and most of the
European countries also applied the policy in their automobile and electronic industries. Other
countries also used the policy extensively in their wind power industries12.

43.     The correction of the market failure is usually used to justify LCPs. In the oil and gas
sector, market failure could be caused by the fact that a country is still new to the oil and gas sector
and private sector needs to learn the know-how. Another possible scenario is that small local firms
in developing economies are oftentimes not able to participate in the sector due to large contract
size and high bargaining power of large MNCs which already have established relationships with
the IOCs all over the globe. This creates a bias against the use of local suppliers who are not
properly considered for the contracts as they presumably cannot fulfil the requirements of the IOCs
as well as the MNCs. There are also social arguments for setting LCPs, such as increase in local
employment and compensation of local communities for any adverse effects which come from the
oil and gas exploration.

44.      There are numerous definitional issues which need to be discussed when formulating
the LCPs. The concept of “local” is subject to a range of definitions, and it is important for the
governments to select the appropriate definition for their LCP. The company from which an input
is purchased may be locally based and owned, locally based but foreign owned (in total or in part),
or even locally owned but located abroad. It is up to the government to determine what kind of
companies will be targeted via the policy. Direct benefits to the national economy can differ
depending on the ownership of the “local” company. Any monitoring of local content will need to
consider the nature of ownership. Without a clear definition applied consistently to all licensees,
it will be impossible to aggregate the data and measure local content.

45.     In order to be effective, LCPs have to be carefully designed to ensure that
requirements set by them are commensurate with existing and future local supply capability,
as well as the life cycle of the petroleum sector. Incorrectly designed LCPs can lead to the
encouragement of unproductive practices, higher costs, lower quality, restriction of competition,
and longer timeframe of completion of tasks. Local content, both actual and potential, will vary
over the life cycle of the petroleum sector. An individual field will go through phases of
exploration, construction, and production. Because the inputs used at these various stages can be
quite different, the extent and nature of local content can vary over time and across stages. LCPs
need to recognize this cycle and set realistic targets.


11
   Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013
12
   Rabiu Ado. Local Content Policy and the WTO Rules of Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMS): The Pros
and the Cons. International Journal of Business and Management Studies. 2013

                                                      23
46.     It is also important to note that LCPs are concerned not only with an immediate
increase in local content (for example, increasing the percentage of local employment in the
petroleum sector) but also with actions that will lead to its longer-term increase. These include
the provision of training in appropriate skills to the local labor force or business development skills
to local suppliers). Such a policy does not lead to an automatic increase in local content but, if
carried out appropriately, can create and enhance local capabilities that can be applied in the
petroleum sector at later stages and also transferred to other sectors. In this context, it becomes
important to support the development of skills that are common to all sectors, as well as the
creation of cluster developments with other industries that have natural synergy with the petroleum
sector.

47.      Given that oil fields are usually located in a particular region of countries (as opposed
to being spread around), local content can refer to jobs or value-added that is created
anywhere in the domestic economy as a result of the actions of an oil and gas company, or it
can more narrowly refer to jobs that are created in the neighborhood of the oil fields. Policies
in most countries normally refer to local content without specifying its location within the
economy, but it is also important to take into consideration the interests of communities which are
located close to oil fields. It is common that these communities will exert the most pressure to
obtain jobs and carry out supplies to the sector, given that they are usually the most affected by
the oil sector development (for example, through resettlement due to construction). It is beneficial
to take some initiatives to facilitate their participation in the industry to meet their expectations
and build trust.

48.     Local content may also refer to the provision of infrastructure by the IOCs that is not
an input into its own production but intended for the benefit of the local population . This
infrastructure can include schools, medical facilities etc. and the benefits can be to the nation
generally or the neighborhood of the installations.

49.     When designing LCPs, it is important to recognize that policy instruments used to
address general market failures are different from those used to promote specific sectors .
The government could be interested in horizontal interventions (support to specific activities-
R&D, training, basic infrastructure, business climate) or in vertical/selective interventions (support
of specific sectors). PDPs targeted to sectors take into consideration each sector’s latent
competitive advantage. Because policy interventions for sectors or clusters entail choosing
favorites, they are more prone to capture by lobbies. Horizontal interventions are usually less
subject to political economy pressures and have been generally more preferred by economists, as
long as market failure actually exists. It is important to note, however, demand from the oil and
gas sector targets rather specific sectors of the economy, and as the result, LCPs are unlikely to be
sector neutral.

50.     The objectives and guiding principles of LCPs in the oil and gas sector may be
outlined in overall or specific policy statements and/or economic plans. Principles and
objectives may then be detailed in primary or secondary legislation, and more often than not, in
negotiated contracts, licensing agreements, or concession agreements. Channels for LCP
implementation can be very diverse. Implementation may rely on a variety of policy tools,
including petroleum rights allocation systems, taxes, tariffs, incentives, penalties, procurement
rules, and training arrangements.
                                                  24
51.     The manner in which an LCP is codified under law varies considerably. Local content
provisions may be embedded within the wider primary legislation governing petroleum
exploration and development (such as Law on Subsoil and Subsoil Users in Kazakhstan), or they
may be the object of a separate law on local content (such as the Oil and Gas Content Industry
Development Act in Nigeria). LCPs may also be the object of secondary legislation, such as in
Angola (Ministerial Order No. 127/03 on the Contracting of Services and Goods from Angolan
Companies by Petroleum Industry Companies) and Kazakhstan (Decree No. 965/2012), or be
embedded in broader regulation for the petroleum industry, as in Mozambique (Decree No.
24/2004 on Petroleum Operations Regulations). Some governments have issued freestanding
LCPs, and these documents vary widely among the countries. For instance, in Ghana and Trinidad
and Tobago, local content policy frameworks containing statements of broad principles have been
issued. Petroleum agreements (e.g., concessions, leases, licenses, production sharing contracts)
commonly contain legally binding requirements on local content, and have traditionally been the
dominant vehicle for mandating local content.

Types of Policies for Local Sourcing

52.     Given the relatively low level of direct employment in the exploration and production
(E&P) of oil and gas, the development of domestic suppliers of goods and services is one of
the possible benefits of petroleum exploitation. Most petroleum codes and contracts require that
the holders of petroleum E&P rights afford some measure of preference for domestic goods and
services. The domestic content provision may be limited, or may contain criteria to compare and
select from among competing suppliers.

53.         Policies for local sourcing fall into three broad categories:
           Policies that involve the setting of local content targets;
           Policies built around a margin of preference to domestic suppliers; and
           Local sourcing policies using process of contract award and execution13.

      (i)      Policies that involve the setting of local content targets

54.     Some countries have set specific targets for local content. Their legislation requires that
certain volume of goods in a particular industry be sourced from local suppliers. These policies
may or may not be protectionist, depending on whether the targets are set realistically in relation
to the capacity, capability and competitiveness of the local industry, or not.

55.     If the targets are fully commensurate with the local capacity, they can be beneficial
for the economy. This is because they would require IOCs and their Engineering, Procurement
and Construction (EPC) contractors to source certain volumes from local suppliers who are capable
to supply the goods and services at adequate quality and in sufficient quantities. This would benefit
qualified local suppliers who would get the contracts and get an opportunity to grow their business.
In many cases, qualified local suppliers do exist (especially when it comes to activities which do
not require large investment and specialized know-how), but they do not get selected as preference
is given to foreign suppliers which IOCs and their EPCs have had long-term ties. Appropriate LCP
13
  Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      25
can encourage IOCs/EPCs to look at local suppliers who may be equally qualified and able to meet
the demand with a high level of quality.

56.     Nevertheless, it might be quite difficult to determine which targets and realistic and
which are not, and very thorough analysis needs to be performed before-hand. In case if
targets are unrealistic, they can lead to unproductive practices in the economy. Moreover, the
targets cannot be set for an indefinite period of time; these have to be temporary measures, or else
incentives of local companies to invest in improving efficiency and competitiveness will be greatly
diminished. Box 1 below shows experiences of Brazil and Ghana with setting local content targets.

                    Box 1. Local Content Targets – International Experiences

                                             BRAZIL14
In Brazil local content targets in procurement associated with the criteria for the award of
petroleum exploration and production rights have changed over the years. The first licensing
rounds set minimum targets for local procurement that operators and their partners—including the
national oil company, Petrobras—were obligated meet. The targets were global (i.e., they referred
to the total aggregation of local content across all categories of spending in either the exploration
phase or development phase).

Later licensing rounds set both global targets and sub-targets for each subcategory of expenditure.
For example, round 7 in 2007 established a global minimum of 37 percent local content for all
expenditure during exploration, and targets for individual segments of spending, including 40
percent for the interpretation of geological survey data, 10 percent for logistical support to drilling
and completion services, and 95 percent for detailed engineering for field production systems.

The question remains whether these targets represented the capabilities, quality, delivery, and price
competitiveness of the Brazilian upstream petroleum supplier market. If this were the case,
arguably supplier and subcontractor contracts would have been awarded on an internationally
competitive basis. If not, then the contracts were received by local firms which were less efficient
and potentially had lower standards, which would not be a positive outcome.
                                             GHANA15
The minimum local content for any petroleum activity in Ghana needs to be set at the levels
specified in the First Schedule of the Ghana’s Petroleum (Local Content and Local Participation)
Regulations, 2013, Minimum Local Content in Goods and Services. Importantly, the regulations
specify that the Commission will take into consideration the work program of the licensee and its
subcontractors when determining the minimum local content levels to be achieved. The Minister
in consultation with the Commission may vary the minimum content level specified in the First
Schedule.

The First Schedule includes targets for the start, 5 years and 10 years in future. There are 100%
targets for a number of services from the onset: catering, cleaning and laundry, security services.


14
   Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013
15
   Ghana Petroleum (Local Content and Local Participation) Regulations, 2013

                                                      26
For all other categories, initial targets are below 100% (and in some cases very low, such as
10%) and gradually increase over the years.

The majority of 10-year targets are rather high (70% and higher). There are a number of 10-year
targets which are set at 100%. The starting targets are more modest to reflect the currently
inadequate local capacity. In order to ensure that ambitious levels are achieved in the 10-year time,
it will be critical for Ghana to build up local capacity. If this does not happen, setting these targets
will not lead to beneficial outcomes of the LCP. As an example, some of the local content levels
set by the First Schedule are shown below. Given that these targets were set up relatively recently,
there are no results available yet to determine how realistic they were and if they benefited the
economy or, on the contrary, led to unproductive practices.

          Item                      Start                    5 years                  10 years
Subsea systems             10%                         40%                     80%
Steel pipes                40%                         80%                     100%
Cement                     40%                         70%                     80%
Drilling services          30%                         60%                     85%
Freight forwarding         80%                         90%                     100%
Network installation       80%                         90%                     95%
Pollution control          20%                         30%                     45%

      (ii)   Policies built around a margin of preference to domestic suppliers

57.     Many countries have also set local sourcing policies involving margins of preference.
A typical clause establishing a margin of preference might read as follows: “The Operator shall
give preferential treatment to the purchase of local goods and services when such goods and
services are internationally comparable in terms of quality, availability, quantity required, and
are offered at prices inclusive of taxes not higher than X percent of the available imported goods.”
Both Angola and Ghana have used 10 percent as the margin of preference to domestic suppliers.

58.     A more stringent form of domestic preference places restrictions on operators such
that only national firms are eligible to tender for certain categories of goods and services .
This policy does not necessarily imply that contracts are awarded on an uncompetitive basis. It is
possible that goods and services on the restricted list are available in-country at prices and quality
that are competitive with international suppliers. But these rules contravene the principle of open
international competition, and can sometimes affect companies’ decisions and strategies with
respect to the incorporation of local subsidiaries. The examples of Angola, Nigeria, Malaysia, and
Ghana are in Box 2 below and demonstrate how these countries have set margins of preference
and restrictions on tendering for certain categories of goods and services to indigenous companies
only.

59.     Margins of preference, like any other forms of domestic preference, entail
distortionary effects and inefficiency, which need to be carefully analyzed by policy-makers
and weighted against alternative approaches. To some extent, margins of preference can be

                                                  27
useful in helping domestic suppliers win contracts. However, caution needs to be applied because
when competition and transparency are weak, local companies may take advantage of this
preference by charging higher than normal prices.

                Box 2. Margin of Preference Application in Different Countries16

                                         ANGOLA
In Angola the dominant secondary legislation for local content in procurement in the petroleum
sector is the Ministerial Order No. 127/03 on the Contracting of Services and Goods from
Angolan Companies by Petroleum Industry Companies.

The regulation provides for different regimes for different goods/services:

     (1) Procurement expenditures reserved to Angolan companies. These are activities not
         requiring heavy capital investment and with a basic, medium or higher level of non-
         specialized know-how, where foreign companies shall only take part on the initiative of
         Angolan companies. The list includes the following activities:

            •    Pressure tests for storage tanks and oil and/or gas pipelines
            •    Transportation of equipment, materials, and foodstuffs, or drilling and production
                 platforms
            •    Supply of industrial and drinking water
            •    Catering
            •    Supply of technical materials
            •    General cleaning and gardening
            •    General maintenance of equipment and vehicles
            •    Supply postoperators and managers (airports, ports, and service stations)
            •    Quality inspection of products distributed and marketed (oil products and
                 derivatives)
            •    Retail sales of kerosene, gas, and lubricants
            •    Transport of products from terminals to supply posts

     (2) Spending categories that fall under the regime of semi-compliance. These areas require
         a reasonable level of capital in the oil industry and in-depth know how. Participation of
         foreign companies in these activities is permitted, but only in association with indigenous
         Angolan companies. There are many expenditure categories under this regime and some
         examples include geophysical sciences, drilling controls and fluid analysis, production
         tests, transportation of crude oil to refinery, manufacture of plastics, and the operations and
         maintenance of production facilities.
     (3) Spending categories that fall under a competitive regime which places all other
         categories of expenditure into international competitive tender. Nevertheless, Articles 5
         and 6 of this order provide for Angolan State companies and/or private companies the right



16
  Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      28
           of recourse and preferential rights for indigenous companies if the amount of the relevant
           bid is no more than 10 percent higher than those of other companies.

                                            NIGERIA
The 2010 Nigerian Oil and Gas Industry Content Development Act stipulates not only local
sourcing targets for a wide range of goods and services but also requires that international
companies operating as Nigerian-registered companies “shall demonstrate that a minimum of 50
percent of the equipment deployed be owned by Nigerian subsidiaries.” This means that
international companies that wish to be eligible to tender for work in Nigeria have to place into
Nigerian ownership at least 50 percent of their equipment and technologies to be used in the
contract. The advantage of this policy for technology transfer to the Nigerian economy is clear.
But the policy is also not without challenges. These obligations may challenge the ability of
equipment producers and service suppliers to protect propriety technologies. Meanwhile, not
finding solutions to this challenge may prevent these companies from accessing local markets.

                                            GHANA
In the section Preference to indigenous Ghanaian companies, the regulations specify a margin of
preference for local suppliers of 10 percent: in those cases, when the bid of a qualified Ghanaian
company does not exceed the lowest bid by more than 10 percent, the contract needs to be awarded
to the indigenous Ghanaian company. Moreover, whenever bids are adjudged to be equal, the bid
containing the highest level of local content needs to be selected. Whenever a non-indigenous
Ghanaian company is required to provide the goods or services, the regulations specify that this
company needs to be incorporated in and operated from Ghana, and provide goods and services in
association with an indigenous Ghanaian company where practicable.

                                          MALAYSIA
PSAs require petroleum companies to acquire all materials and supplies from Malaysian-registered
companies or to purchase them directly from the manufacturer when no Malaysian-registered
company is available to provide the required material or perform the service. The law reserves
domestic shipping for Malaysian registered vessels. Foreigners are permitted to hold a 70 percent
stake in shipping and logistics companies and 49 percent in forwarding agencies. The limitation
also applies to vessels that support oil and gas operations. Moreover, restrictions based on
citizenship or permanent residency apply to legal services, engineering services, taxation and
accounting services, professional services, telecommunications, advertising, financial and
insurance services, and banking services. Finally, the law mandates local incorporation of foreign
companies and a minimum share of domestic equity holding.

   (iii)      Local sourcing policies using process of contract award and execution

60.      Reduced Pre-Qualification Criteria. There is often considerable debate as to whether the
criteria adopted to prequalify vendors should be relaxed to avoid excluding local suppliers and
contractors from an opportunity to participate in tenders. Introducing some flexibility in
prequalification criteria is an important policy consideration. On the one hand, there is a concern
about the possibility that substandard vendors may be allowed to bid- particularly on contracts that
require minimum levels of health and safety, quality and management experience- as this could
affect project implementation leading to delays, cost overruns, and/or accidents. Moreover, a

                                                   29
rigorous prequalification process may help local vendors to understand and address their
weaknesses. Local vendors that successfully obtain prequalification may become more attractive
to international partners and in future obtain contracts not only with the IOCs but other large
companies. On the other hand, reality on the ground might dictate that some criteria could be
relaxed without sacrificing quality, and relaxing these criteria would open the door for a number
of strong local suppliers, especially for certain kinds of contracts. It might be challenging to strike
the right balance; supplier databases detailing capabilities of suppliers might be a useful tool in
demonstrating what local suppliers are available and helping to make the correct determination on
whether pre-qualification criteria need to be reduced.

61.      Bid evaluation. Overall, the tender evaluation criteria and weightings in contract awards
are important tools to support and drive LCPs. The relative weight assigned to each criterion, as
well as the absolute weight that local content carries among overall criteria (which will usually
include technical capability and commercial terms) need to be given careful consideration. In
practice, it is more likely that local content will command a lower weight in contract award in
cases where the opportunities to use local labor or materials are weak. This might include contracts
for drilling services, proprietary equipment, or specialist engineering design services. In contrast,
one might expect local content within logistics and accommodation contracts to command higher
weighting, as there are usually many qualified suppliers available.

62.     Contract award veto. In some countries, government has an opportunity to veto the
contract award on the basis of insufficient local content and/or inadequate local content plan. This
is rather controversial policy because it is rather subjective and it would be hard to determine
whether veto was exercised with due regard to the principle of award on an internationally
competitive basis or not.

LCP Pass-Through

63.      Extent of policy pass-through also merits significant attention on the part of
regulators. While the oil companies used to have capacity and carried out most of the steps in the
value chain, they have over the years constantly redefined and narrowed their core competence.
Today their core competence is often restricted to the exploration process combined with the
ability to manage risk and raise financing. The consequence of this strategic shift has been massive
outsourcing from the oil companies to the service providers and contractors. The oil companies
now have numerous suppliers with contracts frequently organized as a hierarchy of subcontractors,
or a supply chain. This development has a large impact on national content issues and how this
topic can be approached. Attention for local content development now needs to be directed towards
suppliers in the bottom of supply chain. Governments, however, only interact with them indirectly
through the IOCs. Thus, it is important to assure that the IOCs have the ultimate responsibility for
national content efforts all through their supply chains.

64.    In the IOCs procurement is a specialized function generally managed by a central
unit at the headquarters (corporate office). This unit makes decisions for larger and global
contracts for the whole corporation. Local offices in single oil producing countries have a limited
say. This forms a major barrier for domestic companies with ambitions to compete, as they are



                                                  30
unable to gain any access to the central unit. In general, a domestic company will have to link into
one of the supply chains to be able to be a part of the global supply contracts.

65.     In frontier countries, with a few exceptions, the setting of targets for sourcing local
goods and services and the use of margins of domestic preference are aimed primarily at
transactions between the operating company and their direct suppliers and contractors. In
more mature petroleum settings, local content targets, and margins of preference are cascaded to
lower tiers of suppliers (see Box 3 below). We note that although these targets are set in policy,
they are necessarily implemented effectively.

                           Box 3. Kazakhstan’s Policy Pass-Through17
The recently mandated formulae for reporting local content in Kazakhstan illustrates a policy of
driving local content regulations down through supply chains. The Republic of Kazakhstan Decree
964/2010 mandates a unified method for calculating local content in the procurement of goods,
works, and services. The formula requires the measurement of the proportion of Kazakh labor and
goods in both first- and lower-tier subcontracts and suppliers. The method involves tracking both
the level of local content delivered by the primary contract holder through its direct suppliers and
contractors, as well as the local content delivered by the first-tier contractors and suppliers in
fulfillment of the contract. For each of these first- and lower-tier tranches of the original contract,
the foreign component of labor or goods is deducted. The local content figure is then the total of
the residual local value of each tranche, presented as a proportion of the original contract sum. A
similar approach is taken to driving LCP in supply chains in Brazil.

66.     The choice of metric for measurement of local content has a strong bearing on the
implementation outcomes of a policy on local sourcing. For example, if the metric for setting
targets for local content in the purchase of equipment is based on whether the supplier is owned
by national citizens, the policy will drive national ownership, and the outcome will be wealth
creation for (some) national citizens. On the other hand, if the metric is defined as a combination
of different economic empowerment indicators, including (1) the number of nationals employed
by the supplier, (2) the number of nationals in management positions, (3) the value-added to the
product in-country, and (4) ownership, then achieving higher levels of local content (assuming the
weightings of these different indicators in any tender evaluation are evenly balanced) would have
a broader economic impact. It is also important to avoid imposing high administrative and
compliance costs. Complex LCPs may make it difficult for policy makers to monitor their
implementation, assess their impact, and enforce their application. Especially for small businesses,
assimilating and complying with complex administrative and technical rules can create an
unreasonable burden.

LCPs and International Regulations

67.    Local content measures are governed by two sets of the World Trade Organization
(WTO) agreements. These include the following: (i) local content requirement for the acquisition
of goods which are covered by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and Trade


17
  Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      31
Related Investment Measures (TRIMs) agreements18; and (ii) measures related to the sourcing of
services which fall under the scope of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
Moreover, there are relevant provisions of the Subsidies Agreement depending on the type of
subsidies that countries’ provide which are relevant.

68.     The TRIMs Agreement, introduced during the Uruguay Round, pertains to measures
related to goods. The agreement on TRIMs banned the imposition of ‘performance requirements’
– a hallmark of industrial policy between the 1960s and early 1980s. TRIMs apply to all WTO
members, and prohibit local content requirements that mandate particular levels of local purchases
by an enterprise. The TRIMs agreement allowed for transitional arrangements to maintain certain
(protectionist) measures for a limited time following a country’s entry into the WTO. The grace
period initially was two years in the case of developed countries, five years for developing
countries, and seven years for least-developed countries (LDCs). The disciplines of Annex 7 of
the Hong Kong ministerial declaration modified the transitional periods for LDCs. This
declaration is directly relevant to the case of Uganda and de facto implies that LDCs may maintain
and adopt local content measures related to goods until 2020. As such, Uganda would be able to
maintain its local content measures related to goods for a number of years without violating
international agreements.

69.     Part III of the GATS contains provisions on access to WTO members’ markets by
foreign suppliers. It is important to note that market access and national treatment disciplines are
not of a general application, but apply only on the sectors where the WTO member has undertaken
specific commitments19. This is particular relevant in the case of Uganda, which has undertaken
commitments for market access and national treatment only on telecoms, hotels and restaurant
services, and travel agencies. This means that Uganda remains free to provide for preferential
(discriminatory) conditions for its own services and services providers in all other sectors,
including oil and gas.

LCPs and Development of Local Industries

70.      LCPs can help to develop industrial clusters and regional trade synergies.
Collaboration and interaction among IOCs, integrated service providers, national oil companies
and local suppliers and service providers are critical to the sustainable development of a local
industrial capacity. Geographical and sectoral clusters have been used by some governments as a
means to accelerate the development of local enterprises, as well as to strengthen the national
system of innovation. Some countries have taken the concept of clusters beyond the domestic
market, by supporting the development of regional trade synergies through regional hubs and the
integration of LCPs at the regional level, with the objective to help provide the scale to the
economy necessary to sustain local comparative advantages. The example of Malaysia in Box 4
below shows what actions are currently being taken by this country to become a regional hub for
the oil field services and equipment.


18
  The TRIMS are a codification of Articles III and XI of the GATT
19
  In the sectors where special commitments were undertaken, all WTO members should accord services and service
providers from other WTO member countries and show them treatment no less favorable than that provided for
under the common terms, limitations, and conditions mutually agreed among WTO members

                                                     32
                          Box 4. Development of Local Industrial Capacity

MALAYSIA OIL FIELD SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT REGIONAL HUB CREATION
                           STRATEGIES20

LCPs in the oil and gas sector are an integral part of Malaysia’s economic transformation plan. In
its 2010 Economic Transformation Program, the government of Malaysia laid out a
comprehensive package of measures to transform the nation into a regional hub for the oil field
services and equipment (OFSE) industry21. The Asian market for OFSE has grown by 20 percent
a year over the last decade and the sector outlook remains bright. The regional market for OFSE
is fragmented, with players setting up operators in Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore and Vietnam,
unlike Europe and the North America, where OFSE operators concentrate their activities in a few
centers (Aberdeen, Stavanger and Houston). This creates an opportunity for Malaysia, which has
a competitive domestic workforce, technically challenging domestic reserves that drive a growing
local demand for OFSE, and geographical proximity to resource-rich countries in Asia and the
Middle East.

To capitalize on these advantages, the government has set out a strategy of complementary LCPs
to incentivize the rationalization of local fabricators and the establishment of joint ventures with
OFSE MNCs in critical value-adding activities. The objective is for Malaysia to become a regional
hub in 2017. Some of the entry point projects (EPPs) identified by Malaysian government to
achieve this objective include:
- Attracting MNCs to Bring a Sizeable Share of Their Global Operations to Malaysia.
Malaysia aims to attract 10 to 20 major international companies in the OFSE industry to bring
approximately 10 percent of their business operations to the country. If this aspiration is achieved
it will have considerable impact creating over 20,000 jobs. A Government body called Oil Field
Services Unit was set up to oversee industry growth and development.
- Consolidating Domestic Fabricators. Domestic fabricators in Malaysia lack scale and are not
cost-competitive. For example, domestic companies often hire large cranes for operation in large
projects because their limited size precludes purchasing them. Major regional players by contrast
directly own such cranes and are better able to operate more efficiently and cheaply as a result.
Consolidation of major offshore structure fabricators in Malaysia to match the scale and efficiency
of major regional players would translate to the creation of 5,000 jobs. Consolidating the many
companies operating within the industry would require PETRONAS to award licenses to only a
limited number of domestic fabricators.
- Developing Capabilities and Capacity through Strategic Partnerships and Joint Ventures.
At present there are considerable gaps in the domestic OFSE industry, with Malaysian companies
lacking capabilities and experience particularly in engineering and installation, limiting their
ability to gain a strong share in the regional market. This activity aims to incentivize domestic
companies to form joint ventures with world class companies to build their capabilities and track
records. Malaysia’s ambition is to gain 15 percent of the shallow water and 50 percent of the


20
   Economic Transformation Program. A Roadmap for Malaysia. Chapter 6: Powering the Malaysia Economy with
Oil, Gas and Energy. 2010
21
   OFSE sector includes land drilling services, offshore drilling services, geophysical services, operations and
maintenance and other services. Some of the players include Schlumberger, Abbot Group, and Baker Hughes.

                                                      33
deepwater market in Asia Pacific (of which the vast majority are found in Malaysian waters) by
2020. Achieving this would mean creation of some 15,000 jobs.

Since the policy goal envisaged for the petroleum sector is to transform Malaysia into a regional
hub for OFSE, a strict measure of local content levels in the OFSE sector would fall short of the
government’s objective. Instead, the following three performance indicators are monitored: (1) the
amount of investment made by OFSE multinationals; (2) the number of successful merger of
fabricators; and (3) the number of JVs between multinationals and local OFSE companies. This
policy represents a change compared to earlier approaches in Malaysia whereby regulation focused
on maximizing local content levels and not so much on value addition, competitive advantage and
sustainable growth 22. It appears that a combination of measures building the capacity of local
suppliers and attracting FDI represents a receipt for success.

Since inception of the program, there were a number of important achievements. Consolidation
among domestic fabricators has been successful after two years, with the establishment of three
sizeable Malaysian EPC entities from eight small and medium-sized fabricators. Malaysia will
now focus on helping these companies to take on the global stage. Aberdeen Drilling School has
set up a learning center in Malaysia to provide customized training in drilling practices and
technology, cost reduction/unscheduled events prevention, safety, communication and leadership.
Aberdeen’s long-term plan is to use Malaysia as a base for its regional expansion. Several local
companies have inked JVs with foreign specialists, giving them access to technology and gaining
experience that better positions them for future jobs and new markets. To attract more foreign
MNCs, plans are underway to present Malaysian OFSE companies at international conferences
such as Offshore Europe and the World Gas Conference23.

                 CHINA DEEP SEA FIELD DEVELOPMENT KNOW-HOW24

In the past, China offered foreign companies the right to explore in the South China Sea as it lacked
equipment and skills to do this. It however insisted that if projects went into commercial
development, then CNOOC – China’s main offshore company- would take a majority stake.
China is now able to handle a lot of exploration activities on its own as it acquired significant
know-how during the development of a deep-sea gas field off Hong Kong, Liwan (in which
CNOOC owns 51 percent), working closely with Canada-based and Hong-Kong owned Husky
Energy. Some of the world’s most technically advanced deep -water companies were also
employed in the project, including Seadrill Ltd. and Saipem SpA, further contributing to
knowledge transfer to China. During the development of Liwan China has also tried some if its
locally manufactured equipment. The Chinese-built deep-water rig was put into work in
developing this field. It is designed to operate at depths as much as 10 kilometers in the seabed,
while withstanding typhoons that ravage the South China Sea. A Chinese-built vessel for laying
deep-water pipes was also tried at Liwan. The vessel built by China Rongsheng Heavy Industries
is able to operate at depths of 3,000 meters and lay five kilometers of subsea pipeline a day.


22
   Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013
23
   Economic Transformation Program. Annual Report. 2013
24
   China Ready to Drill Deep on Its Own. Wall Street Journal. May 13, 2013

                                                      34
In part because of the know-how acquired as part of the project, CNOOC now can carry out its
own seismic surveys to find hydrocarbon-rich deposits, drill wells to confirm their presence and
economic viability, and lay subsea pipelines needed to extract oil and gas.

CNOOC gained additional offshore-drilling expertise with its $15 billion purchase of Canada’s
Nexen Inc. in 2012. In addition to the large oil fields in the North Sea owned by Nexen the purchase
also gave CNOOC access to deep-water skills used by Nexen in the Gulf of Mexico.


Local Content Development Programs

71.     While LCPs can mandate certain levels of local content in goods, services and
employment, they can only achieve limited economic impact if capacity of the local private
sector is inadequate. It is critical for the policy-makers to facilitate the development of
competitive, capable, and sustainable local skills and supply industries, rather than simply drive
an increased share of local content in total expenditure, regardless of its competitiveness and long-
term sustainability. A number of countries established comprehensive local content development
programs through the creation of enterprises development centers and some other initiatives.
Annex 4 presents a detailed analysis of enterprises development centers in Angola, Ghana, Chad,
and Azerbaijan. Table 5 summarizes the experiences of these centers. Some of the
programs/initiatives undertaken by the centers in these countries included:

   Comprehensive local supplier survey, suppliers' ranking according to the level of competency
    and creation of a supplier database;
   Communication and training of local suppliers on relevant standards (HSE etc.)
   Training of local suppliers on overall business skills and preparation of bids
   Business incubation
   Promotion of collaboration between SMEs
   Introduction of an e-procurement system and training of local suppliers to use it
   Provision of information on the pipeline of bidding opportunities
   Assistance with access to finance and identification of JV partners.

72.     Provision of financing is one of the key elements of the supplier development
programs. No matter how good the skills of the suppliers are, they will not be able to win and
deliver on contracts with the IOCs unless they have access to working and investment capital.




                                                 35
                                           Table 5. Summary of Enterprise Centers’ Features in Select Countries

Country      Name/Year           Partners           WBG Role                      Features of the program                                           Achievements
ANGOLA      Centro    de    Sonangol, British         NO                  SMEs assisted with financial analysis,                       The project generated 4,809 jobs; certified
            Apoio           Petroleum, Exxon                       preparation of bids, and training on specific elements of     100+ companies in various sectors; and delivered
            Empresarial     Mobil, Total, and                      provision of goods and services to the oil industry           over 224 business training courses.
            (CAE), 2005     Chevron                                       A company directory created including certified              Participant SMEs won 300+ contracts
                                                                   local companies and an assessment of their capacity                  Database established with 1400+ SMEs
                                                                          Assistance with access to finance                            CAE became an organ of Chamber of
                                                                                                                                 Commerce of Angola in 2011
CHAD        Enterprise      The program was            YES                 A comprehensive survey of local SMEs                        Number of local suppliers considered y
            Center, 2004    implemented by the                     conducted; SMEs evaluated according to their level of        ExxonMobil went up from 17 to 1,300 SMEs
                            IFC, in association                    competency and given a rating.                                       Applications per bid in Chad increased five-
                            with ExxonMobil                                Public workshops provided SMEs with access to       fold, from 5 to 25 SMEs.
                            and the Chamber of                     information on the pipeline of bidding opportunities and             As of 2009, 102 local firms were assisted in
                            Commerce of Chad                       standards required.                                          bidding. 30 contracts worth over $56 million have
                                                                           eProcurement system introduced and SMEs             been awarded. In 2012, purchases of goods and
                                                                   trained in using it.                                         services from local suppliers totaled $175 million
                                                                           SMEs provided with access to computer/ Internet.            The Chad Enterprise Center became an
                                                                           Programs to improve access to finance for SMEs      integral unit of the Chamber of Commerce in 2010
GHANA       Enterprise      Government         of       NO                 Identification of opportunities and facilitating    The center was only recently launched and results are
            Developmen      Ghana's initiative in                 the development of local SMEs for their participation in      not yet available
            t    Center,    collaboration with                    the oil and gas sector.
            2013            the Jubilee Partners;                          Communication of required standards.
                                                                           Promotion of collaboration among SMEs.
                            Enablis        Ghana                           Training and development; business incubation,
                            appointed          to                 and consultancy services to SMEs
                            establish the center
AZERBA      Enterprise      BP and its partners       YES25                Training at no cost for local SMEs on HSE                   1000 companies registered with supplier
IJAN        Center,                                               policies, tender process; technical requirements of oil and   database and participated in development activities;
            2002-2008                                             gas operators; identification of foreign partners.                    93 companies successfully graduated from
                                                                           Seminars “How to do Business with Oil               the program;
                                                                  Companies”                                                            360 gap analysis and tailored development
                                                                                                                                plans produced


       25
        IFC did not play a role in establishing the Enterprise Center, but actively participated in local supplier development programs in partnership with the Enterprise
       Center, IOCs and other donors and the private sector

                                                                                       36
73.      Some countries designed specialized programs to provide financing for oil and gas
suppliers, especially SMEs. As demonstrated in Annex 4, different models were applied in
different countries. In Angola, Zimbo Fund was established by Total and Angolan Bank Banco
Totta to provide partial credit risk guarantees to SMEs. In Azerbaijan, supplier finance credit
facility of US$15 million was funded by the IFC, British Petroleum (BP) and Micro Finance Bank
of Azerbaijan to provide financing to small and medium sized contractors to BP and its affiliates.
In Nigeria, a lot of financing comes from local banks (see Box 5). In Brazil, a robust program has
been designed to alleviate access to finance constraints for oil and gas suppliers (Box 6).

                         Box 5. Financing of the Oil Projects by Nigerian Banks

First Bank of Nigeria Plc. provided over $3.3 billion for financing of various oil and gas projects
in Nigeria in 2012. This financing package, which represents 37.40 percent of the bank’s portfolio,
represents the bank’s total financing activities for the upstream, midstream and downstream sub-
sectors of the oil and gas industry. The provided financing is in line with the bank’s efforts to boost
local capacity in the oil and gas sector. US$ 650 million has been committed for the development
of selected marginal field operations, while US$ 270 million was expended for offshore pipeline
projects and US$ 234 million - as local contract support for specialized vessel acquisition scheme.
First Bank is widely acknowledged as the leading player in oil and gas financing. 26 The bank is
committed to growing its involvement in the oil and gas industry and assisting particularly
indigenous firms in taking full advantage of the opportunities in the industry in line with the
Nigerian local content act. Some of the products currently offered by the bank to serve the oil
industry include project finance facility; bond/guarantee lines (performance bonds etc.); invoice
discounting financing; term loans/working capital financing.
Access Bank has also supported a large number of activities of the mid-stream operators, oil
service operators and EPC contractors. Diamond Bank Plc. has also put together about US$ 1
billion for the funding of oil and gas projects in Nigeria27. Among other things, Diamond Bank
was the sole financier of one of the newly acquired dive support vessels worth over US$ 30 million,
acquired by CNS Marine Nigeria Limited in Lagos. The bank undertook to finance the project due
to its support for Nigeria local content initiative, aimed at deepening indigenous participation in
the nation’s oil and gas industry.

Financing provided for the acquisition of vessels is a major milestone for the Nigerian content
imitative. Nigerian economy lost over US$ 100 billion in five decades to foreign owned vessels
that have been lifting crude oil from the country. Financing provided by local banks greatly helps
to reverse this trend and boost the local economy. Other areas where the Local Content Act is
already spurring increased Nigerian participation are boat building and ship repair, coastal trade
under the Cabotage regime, insurance, banking and legal services. The fact that banks in Nigeria
provide a lot of financing for the oil sector is not surprising given the might of the financial system
in the country. 13 Nigerian banks are among the world's top 1000 banks, confirming the country
as the leading financial center in Africa, according to 2014 edition of the Banker Magazine of the
Financial Times Group. Overall, Africa has 31 banks in the top 1000 world banks in 2014, with
Nigeria's 13 slots representing 42%.


26
     First Bank Stakes $3.3 billion on Oil and Gas Projects. Nigeria NewsDay, May 10, 2013
27
     Diamond Bank commits N150bn to oil, gas financing. Punch. September 1, 2013

                                                         37
                                Box 6. Financing of Oil Projects in Brazil28

To support the local industry development, the Brazilian Government through the Brazil National
Bank for Social and Economic Development (BNDES) and Petrobras offer several funding
sources. “Brasil Major Plan” was launched in 2011 by the Brazilian Government with
approximately US$ 70 billion in credit for investment. BNDES provides a number of funding
options:

          BNDES O&G Structuring. A credit line, originated in the “Brasil Major Plan” aims to
           create and expand the productive capacity of suppliers of goods and services related to oil
           and gas, to support mergers and acquisitions of companies, upgrading of businesses,
           technological investments etc.
          BNDES – Investment Support Program. A credit line is aimed to stimulate production,
           acquisition and export of capital goods and technological innovations.
          BNDES FINEM. A credit line to support projects of development and production of oil
           fields and installation, expansion and modernization of refineries.
          BNDES Proengenharia. This line supports engineering projects in a number of sectors,
           such as defense, automotive, oil & gas, chemical, petrochemical.
          FINAME Program. Supports financing of parts and components, including electronic,
           locally manufactured, provided by manufacturers registered with the BNDES, for
           incorporation in machinery and equipment in production stage.
          Progressive Nationalization Plan (PNP). Funding is provided to manufacturers of
           products with reduced local content. Products can be submitted to the PNP if they present
           minimum local content percentage (40%) with commitment to reach 60% within 3 years.

Another important initiative, Progredir Financing Program, allows companies within the
Petrobras supply chain and its subsidiaries to obtain loans from accredited banks using supply
contracts signed with Petrobras as guarantees. The program was created in partnership with the six
largest retail banks in Brazil (Banco do Brasil, Bradesco, Caixa Ecônomica Federal, Itaú, HSBC,
and Santander) and with the National Oil and Natural Gas Industry Mobilization Program
(Prominp). The program was officially launched in 2011 after completing a pilot phase. It
primarily targets SMEs. In the first 18 months of operation, loans worth $1.9 billion were extended
to 404 businesses. In order to improve financial and risk conditions, Petrobras is the anchor of
Progredir and transfers its better credit perception in the market to participants. Requests for
funding are submitted through the Progredir Gateway to all of the participating banks, implying
an increase in competition between the banks. Progredir Portal stores information on supply
contracts, financing and individual performance data on each supplier, allowing the banks access
to supplier track record data. Implementation of this innovative program had the effect of reducing
the financial costs for the supplier by 20%- 50%.




28
     The Brazilian Oil and Gas Industry. PricewaterhouseCoopers Brazil Ltda. 2013

                                                         38
1.4.   OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

74.     A number of lessons can be learned by Uganda from the examples presented in this
chapter and other available models. There is no blueprint for the LCP (as well as industrial
policy in general) and these policies are very much tailored to a particular country. Nevertheless,
there are many lessons learned from experiences of other countries which can be leveraged.

75.      This chapter shows that many countries developed and adopted LCPs. They involve
setting of local content targets, specify a margin of preference to domestic suppliers and/or adjust
the process of contract award and execution to benefit local suppliers. It is important to remember
that these policies will be beneficial for the economy if targets/preferences are set in line with
domestic capacity and are temporary in nature. Otherwise, they can lead to support of unproductive
practices and increase costs of the development of the industry. As such, if decision is made to use
these instruments in Uganda, they need to be used with caution and be backed by solid analysis. It
is also important to make sure that policies pass through to the bottom of the supply chain to ensure
that the smallest contractors are able to benefit from these policies.

76.    In terms of international regulations, at this time, Uganda is not expected to breach
such international agreements as GATT and GATS by applying local content policies. For
goods, local content policies can be applied by Uganda until 2020 in line with the WTO Hong
Kong Ministerial declaration. For services, no special commitments for market access and national
treatment were undertaken by the country in relevant sectors and therefore Uganda can apply
preferential conditions for its own services and services providers in all other sectors.

77.     A number of countries have used their LCPs to help develop industrial clusters and
regional trade synergies. Example of Malaysia in this chapter demonstrated how this country
identified the area where it wanted to excel (OFSE) and made a decision to become a region hub
in OFSE. Becoming a regional hub in some area of oil and gas E&P could be a very promising
strategy for Uganda, given that there is a lot of exploration activity taking place in Africa and there
will be a lot of need for oil and gas related services. Attraction of foreign firms to set up operations
in Uganda would be an essential first step, and know-how could be transferred to the country
gradually. The key for Uganda would be to pick the right industry to focus on and develop a
strategy in accomplishing the goals.

78.      Comprehensive local content development programs have been established in many
countries to facilitate participation of local suppliers in the oil and gas sector. Enterprise
centers were established in such countries as Ghana, Angola, Azerbaijan, Chand, and others. As
the result of some of these programs, a lot of suppliers in these countries got a chance to participate
in this emerging industry and grow their business.

79.     It would be highly beneficial for Uganda to establish an enterprise development
center to build the capacity of local enterprises and enable them to be more competitive when
bidding for contracts with the IOCs which require goods and services to meet high
international standards. If set up and managed appropriately, such a center would greatly benefit
Uganda’s local private sector seeking to participate in the opportunities offered by the oil and gas
sector.

                                                  39
80.     Due to the importance of Kampala for national economy, the center would need to be
established there. At the same time, one or several smaller satellite centers could be set up in the
Albertine region where the oil fields are being developed to facilitate the inclusion of local
suppliers in the supply chain of the IOCs. After the demand of the oil and gas sector goes down,
the enterprise development center could continue building capacity of suppliers serving other
industries of the economy.

81.     Besides building the capacity of local suppliers, many countries have also provided
assistance with access to finance. IOCs, local financial institutions, and international donors have
played a key role in establishing such programs. It would be important for Uganda to also provide
support to local oil and gas suppliers with access to working and investment capital for them to be
able to participate in the opportunities offered by this industry.




                                                40
      Chapter 2. NATIONAL CONTENT DEVELOPMENT IN UGANDA
2.1.UGANDA OIL DISCOVERY CONTEXT

82.     Uganda’s longstanding prudent macroeconomic stance and consistent market -
oriented policy reforms have delivered strong performance during the recent years, but fell
short of Uganda’s aspiration to catch up with the middle-income countries. Although annual
growth was averaging 7.0 percent during the 2000s, it resulted only in modest per capita income
gains due to fast population growth. With a per capita gross national income (GNI), Atlas method,
of US$440 (2012), Uganda continues to be classified among the poorest countries in the world.
Uganda also exhibits increasing inequalities resulting largely from uneven spatial development.
Much of Uganda’s structural transformation and rising productivity in market-oriented agriculture
has been spatially concentrated in the South, Central, and Western regions, while the Northern
region, affected by protracted conflicts for many years, has lagged behind.

83.     Uganda discovered commercial oil reserves, estimated at more than 6.5 billion barrels
(out of which 1.4 billion is commercially recoverable), in the Lake Albertine Rift basin in
200629. Additional gas is also expected to be produced as associated gas when production of oil
commences. So far the estimates of associated gas based on the oil gas ratios for the different fields
in the Albertine Graben is 173 billion cubic feet of gas.

84.    Three IOCs in the process of developing the oil fields include a Chinese state-owned
company China National Offshore Oil Corporation (“CNOOC”), U.K.-based Tullow Oil and
France's Total. Total entered Uganda’s oil industry early in 2013 after it signed onto a joint
venture with CNOOC and took up a third each of Tullow’s exploration assets in the country.

85.     The three IOCs are partners, each with a third interest in all the three areas. There
are currently five distinct discovery areas, some of which are offshore and others are onshore, as
depicted in Annex 2. Total is the operator for two discovery areas in the northern tip of Lake Albert
(Lyec and Paara, combined area over 600 sq. km); Tullow is the operator for two other areas (one
in the northern tip, Buliisa, and one in the middle of Lake Albert, Kaiso-Tonya, with combined
area of over 1,500 sq. km), while CNOOC operates one area in the southern tip of Lake Albert,
Kingfisher (344 sq. km). By the end of 2013, total number of wells drilled was 115, out of which
101 had hydrocarbons, signifying an 85 percent success rate. By the end of 2013, oil companies
had invested up to US$2.3 billion and PEPD projections indicate that by the end of this year they
would have invested up to US$3 billion in exploration, development and production30.

86.    CNOOC obtained a production license to develop the Kingfisher field over a period
of four years. The license is for 25 years and can be renewed. Production would be achieved by

29
   According to PEPD, the estimates were originally 3.5 billion barrels in place, of which 1.2 billion barrels were
recoverable. Following the appraisal work undertaken on each of the discoveries, which led to an improved
understanding of the nature of the petroleum reservoirs in Uganda, the estimates of oil reserves were revised upward,
while there was a reduction in the ratio between the oil in place and recoverable oil. Improved technology such as the
use of gas injection, steam flooding and injection, polymer flooding and microbial injection have the potential to
increase the recovery factor
30
   Government to Announce Oil Refinery Investor. Daily Monitor. February 25, 2014

                                                         41
drilling 40 development wells, of which 27 would be producers and 13 would be injection wells.
Production is expected to start in 2017 and the field will have an initial capacity to produce between
30,000 to 40,000 barrels of oil per day.31 The Kingfisher field is estimated to hold 635 million
barrels of oil, of which 196 million are recoverable. The recovery rate will be about 31 percent,
slightly above the internationally known 30 percent32. CNOOC has started drilling and 3 wells
have already been drilled as of March, 201433. The company is expected to drill most of the 40
wells in the first 10 years of the field life. The on-site construction will start after necessary
conditions are met, including the social and environmental impact assessment.

87.     Tullow and Total are currently in the appraisal stage of oil exploration and
production cycle. They have submitted a number of production license applications together with
respective field development plans (FDPs) and petroleum reservoir reports to the Ministry of
Energy and Mineral Development as per agreed upon schedule. The submission of production
licenses by the IOCs is taking place according to an agreed upon schedule. Please see Table 6
below with information on the status of production licenses.

                        Table 6: Status of Production Licenses by Operator34

     Operator       Discovery            Discovery           Production License Application Status
                       Area
 TULLOW           Kaiso-Tonya           Mputa             Submitted to PEPD
                                        Nzizi             Submitted to PEPD
                                        Ngassa35          Written off due to offshore appraisal and
                                                          development being uneconomic
                                 Waraga                   Under preparation- to be submitted in 2014
                  Buliisa        Kigogole                 Submitted to PEPD
                                 Nsoga                    Submitted to PEPD
                                 Ngara                    Submitted to PEPD
                                 Ngege                    Submitted to PEPD
                                 Kasamene                 Submitted to PEPD
                                 Wahrindi                 Submitted to PEPD
 TOTAL            Lyec           Lyec                     Under preparation
                  Paara (located Ngiri                    Submitted to PEPD
                  in Murchison Jobi                       Submitted to PEPD
                  Falls National Rii                      Submitted to PEPD
                  Park)          Jobi-East                Under preparation
                                 Mpuyo                    Under preparation
                                 Gunya                    Under preparation
 CNOOC            Kingfisher     Kingfisher               Granted by PEPD

31
   China's CNOOC wins $2bn Uganda oil field contract. BBC News, September 26, 2013
32
   Uganda issues first ever oil production license to CNOOC. CCTV News, September 26, 2013
33
   CNOOC drills oil wells for production. New Vision Uganda. March 21, 2014
34
   Tullow Sees Bright Future Despite Tough 2013. The Weekly Observer (Uganda), February 19, 2014
35
   Ngassa, along with other non-commercial fields (such as Turaco, Karuka, and Taitai), has again become property
of the Government. The GoU is free to license the relinquished areas to other players during the new licensing round

                                                        42
88.    An announcement for the new licensing round is planned for the beginning of 2015.
The government possesses good data on the discoveries which can be used for promotion and
negotiation during the new licensing rounds.

Oil Industry Infrastructure

89.     On February 5, 2014 the GoU and the IOCs signed a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) for the development of oil resources in the country. As negotiations took a rather long
time, their successful conclusion represents a very positive step forward and will help to increase
the pace at which the country’s oil resources will be developed. The comprehensive plan agreed
upon includes the use of the gas resources for power generation, supply of crude oil to the refinery
to be developed within Uganda and the export of crude oil through an export pipeline constructed
by the oil companies. According to Total, this will be a US$10-15 billion project, one of the largest
in East Africa. The costs of the crude export pipeline alone are estimated in the range of US$3-4
billion36. Following the signing of the MOU, a detailed implementation plan will be developed
between the GoU and the IOCs.

       (a) Refinery and its infrastructure

90.     The GoU has made a decision to construct a domestic oil refinery following an East
African Community (EAC) study which recommended that another refinery is needed in the
region and most preferably needs to be built in Uganda. EAC already has one refinery located
at the Kenyan seaport of Mombasa. Kenyan refinery is run by India’s Essar Energy and the Kenyan
government and serves Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and DRC. The decision to build a
refinery has been informed by statistics that indicate the regional consumption currently stands at
over 200,000 barrels of oil per day and growing at five per cent per annum. The Kenyan refinery
only produces 35,000 barrels per day and can only reach 70,000 after an upgrade. The feasibility
study which determined that refinery was the best option for Uganda was conducted by Foster
Wheeler Energy Limited UK. Uganda’s oil refinery is expected become operational by 2017/1837.

91.     Products to be produced by the refinery include diesel, petrol, kerosene, jet fuel,
liquefied petroleum gas, and heavy fuel oil. The refinery will originally have the capacity to
process 30,000 barrels of oil a day which will be increased to 60,000 barrels per day before 2020,
much less than the government had initially planned. The government has hired U.S.-based
investment firm, Taylor-DeJongh which is providing advisory services on the selection of a lead
investor for the refinery, the sourcing of financing, crude and product pipelines terminal, as well
as the formation of a refining company. The refinery shall have the right of first call on production
volumes from the licensed areas.

92.     The refinery will be located in Hoima district, some 130 miles west of the capital
Kampala. Over 29 square kilometers of land were already earmarked for the construction of the
refinery, with the rest of the land to be used for infrastructure like an airport, petro chemical
industries, waste management facilities and houses for the refinery workers. The GoU intends to
construct Hoima International Commercial Airport before construction of the refinery begins. The

36
     For investment in oil and gas, EA’s potential remains largely untapped . The East African. February 22, 2014
37
     50 Global Firms Target Uganda’s Oil Refinery. New Vision. November 12, 2013

                                                           43
airport is urgently needed to deliver construction equipment for the refinery, which is too delicate
to be transported by road. The UN’s international Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has been
contracted to procure a consultancy firm to draw the masterplan for the proposed airport38. The
GoU also has plans to construct an ammonia fertilizer plant, which will be the first of a kind in the
region39.

93.     The Uganda refinery will be constructed on a public private partnership arrangement
where government would own 40 percent of the refinery and the other 60 percent would
belong to the private sector. The GoU has invited the East African countries to buy interests in
the 40 percent public stake. The Request for Qualification for international firms to build and
operate the proposed oil refinery and related pipelines and infrastructure was launched on October
8, 2013, and attracted responses from 75 firms. Five consortia and one independent firm were
shortlisted to submit their detailed tender bids. 40 Four shortlisted firms/consortia submitted
detailed proposals to the GoU, later final two contenders emerged, and the winning bidder,
Russia’s RT- Global Resources, was selected in February, 2015 by an evaluation team comprising
of representatives from the GoU and Transaction Advisor TaylorDeJongh.

94.       Oil sector infrastructure needed to feed the refinery will include the following:

         Internal crude oil pipelines. These are the 97-kilometre northern pipeline from Nwoya
          and Buliisa oil fields, the 50-kilometre pipeline from Kingfisher [Buhuka, Kyangwali sub-
          county], Hoima district and another pipeline from Kaiso-Tonya. The construction and
          development of these crude pipelines will be facilitated by the oil companies.
         Three central processing facilities (CPFs). The CPF is where these impurities are
          removed from the oil. CPFs will be set up in Buliisa for the northern fields, at Kaiso-Tonya,
          and near the Kingfisher field.
         Storage Facility. Before the process of refining starts, the country will have to also first
          construct a storage facility in Buloba, off Mityana road, in Wakiso district. Once
          production starts, any excess crude can be stored at Buloba. During periods when there is
          no refining, crude can be stored at Buloba. Construction of a 205-kilometre pipeline from
          Hoima to Buloba is expected.

      (b) Export pipeline

95.     Three main proposals have been considered for the construction of the crude oil
export pipeline (see Figure 3). There has been an indication that the Northern route (Hoima-
Lokichar-Lamu, 1,380 km) was preferred but no official announcement has been made yet.
Uganda and Kenya recently signed an agreement with a Japanese company to undertake the
feasibility study for the export pipeline. The feasibility study will provide the best option for the
transportation of the crude and the most cost-effective route, as well as recommendations in terms
of ownership and management.



38
   UN agency to advise on Hoima airport Master Plan. New Vision (Uganda). September 8, 2014
39
   Oil Producers to Set up an Ammonia Fertiliser Plant. Daily Monitor (Uganda). June 13, 2014
40
   Six Companies to Inspect Oil Wells. New Vision Uganda. March 14, 2014

                                                      44
96.     In case if the decision is indeed made to select the Northern route, the arrangements
will be as follows. The pipeline will run from Hoima via Karamoja-Lokichar basin in Turkana to
Lamu with a possibility of linking at Lokichar with another crude pipeline from South Sudan. This
pipeline would involve the setting up of a storage facility at Lokichar. Each country will build the
portion of the pipeline on its territory. A single transaction advisor will be appointed but each
country has an option of choosing its own financing agreement41. Kenya is to construct the pipeline
from Lokichar basin while Uganda is expected to construct its part of the pipeline from the Lake
Albert rift basin to link up with the Kenyan pipeline and another from South Sudan to Lamu.

                                              Figure 3. Pipeline Routes42




97.     As the waxy crude oil found in Kenya and Uganda solidifies at ambient temperatures,
the pipeline will contain a specialized heating system to keep the oil flowing. If built, the
pipeline would be the longest heated pipeline in the world. Figure 4 shows the timeline for various
oil industry initiatives in Uganda.




41
     Oil Pipeline Deal to be Sealed Next Month. The East African. May 2014.
42
     Ibid

                                                         45
                    Figure 4. Timeline for Oil Industry Initiatives in Uganda




2.2 OVERVIEW OF PETROLEUM LEGISLATION IN UGANDA

98.     The National Oil and Gas Policy for Uganda was approved in early 2008. The policy’s
goal is to use the country’s oil and gas resources to contribute to early achievement of poverty
eradication and create lasting value to society. A five-phase development strategy has been
adopted with the first phase referred to as “Early Commercialization” in the period 2012 -2015.
The National Oil and Gas Policy includes two objectives related to national content development:
Objective 7: To ensure optimum national participation in oil and gas activities, and Objective 8:
To support the development and maintenance of national expertise. The detailed text of these
objectives is presented in Annex 4.

99.    Consistent with the National Oil and Gas Policy, the model PSA for Uganda (2006)
includes a number of requirements with respect to the employment and training of nationals
in the workforce (see excerpt below)

Article 20—Purchases in Uganda

      Maximize use of local goods and services, where available on a competitive basis
      Implement tender procedures that give adequate opportunity for local suppliers to compete
      Report achievements in utilizing Ugandan goods and services.

                                               46
Article 21—Training and Employment

        Train and employ suitably qualified Ugandan citizens following commencement of
         production
        Undertake the schooling and training of Ugandan citizens for staff positions, including
         administrative and executive management positions.
        Provide grants to support the training of government officials on matters related to the
         management and oversight of the petroleum sector

100. Overall, the Policy and the PSA call for promotion of provision of goods and services
to the oil and gas industry by the entrepreneurs, employment and transfer of skills and
technology in the country. However, all of these goals are rather general and specifics need to be
set by other legislation.

101. Two importance pieces of petroleum legislation have been adopted. These include the
Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production (PEDP) Act and the Petroleum Refining,
Gas Conversion, Transportation and Storage Act.

102. The PEDP Act establishes several new institutions: the Directorate of Petroleum, the
Regulatory Petroleum Authority of Uganda, and the National Oil Company (“Natoil”), am ong
others. This is in line with National Oil and Gas Policy for Uganda 2008, which recommended that
the roles of regulation, policy setting and commercial aspect being undertaken by the Ministry of
Energy and Mineral Development are separated. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Development is already in process of drafting regulations to operationalize the two institutions.
The Natoil is expected to be incorporated as a private company, with shares initially held by
MoFPED (1 percent) and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (99 percent), to be later
floated on the stock exchange and purchased by private investors (similar to Statoil Norway and
Petrobras of Brazil). Natoil is expected to own 40 percent in the refinery and 15 percent of stake
in the oil fields under development43.

103. Both the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act and the Petroleum
(Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage) Act contain provisions
encouraging local content in Uganda. Articles 125-127 of the PEDP Act set requirements for
provision of goods and services by Uganda entrepreneurs, training and employment of Ugandans
and technology transfer. Articles 53-55 of the Midstream Act have the text very similar to the
Articles 125-127, with only minor differences. Due to the fact that during the current phase in
Uganda PEDP Act is applicable, we will concentrate our analysis on it.

104. Article 125 (below) of the PEDP Act specifies the requirements for provision of goods
and services, which this study is primarily concerned with.

(1) Oil companies, their contractors and subcontractors shall give preference to goods which are
produced or available in Uganda and services which are rendered by Ugandan citizens and
companies.

43
  Legal loopholes emerge even as oil authority, company are set to start. The Weekly Observer (Uganda),
September 11, 2013

                                                       47
(2) Where the goods and services required by the contract or licensee are not available in Uganda,
they shall be provided by a company which has entered into a joint venture with a Ugandan
company provided that the Ugandan company has a share capital of at least forty eight percent in
the joint venture.

(3) The licensee, its contractors and subcontractors shall ensure that the entities referred to in
subsection (1) are— (a) notified of the quality, health, safety and environment standards required
by the licensee; and (b) notified of the upcoming contracts as early as practicable.

(4) The entities referred to in subsection (1) shall— (a) have capacity to add value to meet the
health, safety and environment standards of the petroleum activities carried out by the licensee;
and (b) be approved in accordance with criteria prescribed by the Minister by regulations.

(5) Within sixty days after the end of each calendar year, the licensee shall provide the Authority
with a report of its achievements and its contractors and subcontractors’ achievement in utilizing
Ugandan goods and services during that calendar year.

105. Article 125 of the PEDP Act has a number of positive features. One positive of the
Article 125 is that the requirements to give preference to local contractors are set not only for IOCs
themselves but also extended to their whole supply chain, i.e., their contractors and subcontractors.
This is important because most of Uganda’s local enterprises, especially SMEs, will be dealing
not with procurement departments of the IOCs but of their EPCs. Nevertheless, while the legal
basis might be there, the enforcement of the law is what will really make the difference for small
local companies in Uganda. Another positive feature of this article is that the Act specifies that the
preference is given to goods which are produced in Uganda (which implies that they can be
produced by any company which is based in Uganda, not necessarily indigenous). This opens
opportunities for FDI in the country. Finally, IOCs are required to notify suppliers of upcoming
contracts as soon as practicable and submit a report of achievements in utilizing Ugandan goods
and services during the calendar year, as well as a detailed program for recruitment and training
of Ugandans and a report on the execution of the program.

106. Nevertheless, despite some of the strengths, the PEDP Act also suffers from some
weaknesses. First, while it sets a requirement to “give preference” to locally produced goods and
rendered services, this term is very broad, and therefore this requirement is easy to avoid. The level
of preference would need to be much more specific to make this requirement operational. As long
as the goods and services are available in Uganda, IOCs have an excuse to use foreign service
providers as they have a long-standing relationship with them, leaving small Ugandan suppliers
out. Second, while PEPD Act requires IOCs and their EPCs to inform suppliers of upcoming
contracts as early as practicable, there is no specific timeline specified, and IOCs can provide this
information too late for suppliers to be able to act on it. The Act also does not provide the definition
of an indigenous company to be used in the calculation of national content. It is important to ensure
that the definition of an indigenous company is defined in the legislation. While IOCs have
reported some figures on the national content, they have used their own definition, which may be
biased, and as such national content levels are measured incorrectly.

107. The PEPD Act also stipulates that where the goods and services required by the
contactor or licensee are not available in Uganda, they shall be provided by a company which
                                                  48
has entered into a joint venture with a Ugandan company provided that the Ugandan
company has a share capital of at least forty eight percent in the joint venture. Imposing such
a harsh requirement is not recommended, as instead of promoting local participation in the oil
industry, it will simply prevent FDI and creation of joint ventures. In many cases local companies
will not possess sufficient amount of capital to contribute forty-eight percent of the venture, and
this will be a deal breaker. Such a high requirement for local ownership may lead to creation of
questionable practices (e.g., shell companies) and will unlikely help to achieve the goals of
developing the national economy.

108. In many developing countries, including Uganda, “localization” would be sufficient
to spark innovation and national content development. The approach in favor of “localization”
is argued in the study “Enhancing National Participation in the Oil and Gas Industry in Uganda”
which was commissioned by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The study states
that national content needs to be defined in terms of value addition in Uganda, as opposed to
ownership of the company performing the value addition.

109. It is true that some other countries have gone down a similar path of requiring the
formation of joint ventures. For instance, the Chinese government helped to nurture domestic
capabilities in consumer electronics and other technologically advanced sectors through targeted
policy interventions. Foreign investors were required to form joint ventures with local companies,
to transfer technology, and to source their inputs locally. However, new evidence suggests that,
when combined with policies aimed to foster transfer of technology, FDI is likely to drive faster
and more sustainable productivity gains for local producers. “Localization” is likely to yield more
and faster benefits than “nationalization”.

110. Brazil’s example could be useful to review in this case. Following the completion of a
competitiveness diagnostic study in 2003, an action plan was prepared to address competitiveness
and capacity gaps. Strategies were designed taking into consideration the relevance of each
subsector to the oil and gas industry, the level of local production capacity and the competitiveness
of the subsector. For example: (1) where local supply capacity existed but was inadequate—such
as in marine vessel fabrication, engineering services—strategies were designed to incentivize
foreign contractors to partner with Brazilian firms; and (2) where local capacity did not exist or
could not be developed- as in the manufacturing of centrifugal compressors and diesel engines -
international firms were encouraged to establish subsidiaries in Brazil, including by bundling
together work packages and using repeatable designs to increase the returns and reduce the
commercial risks to investment in Brazil.

111. In Uganda, a similar approach could be used. For goods and services not available in
Uganda at this stage, MNCs would be encouraged to set up subsidiaries in Uganda, without a
requirement to form joint ventures. For those subsectors which already exist in Uganda, there
would be more feasibility to establish joint ventures and it would be important to facilitate
establishment of relationships between local suppliers and foreign firms. Nevertheless, we would
again not argue for a specified percentage of ownership, as the interest of a foreign company to
form a joint venture would depend on the unique circumstances.

112. Overall, ownership of a company does not matter very much: linkages are linkages
whether they are developed by a subsidiary of a MNC that set up camp in Uganda, or by a
                                                 49
Ugandan company. If a MNC sets up operations in Uganda and does not have any local
shareholding, it would still greatly benefit Uganda’s economy from the standpoint of technology
transfer, employment and sourcing of local goods/services to carry out production. Given the high
local shareholding requirement stipulated in the law, a lot of multinationals, otherwise interested,
might just decide not to set up operations in Uganda. More flexibility needs to be given to attract
such firms.

113. The “National Content Policy for the Petroleum Sector in Uganda”, currently under
development by the government, also favors “nationalization” compared to “localization”,
although does not stipulate the required percentage of local ownership in a joint venture. We
would recommend re-visiting this topic and re-considering the approach of the government, and
especially reviewing experience of other countries to take advantages of lessons learned by them.
Even Brazil and Malaysia that have highly sophisticated economies appreciate the effects of
localization on the transfer of skills and technology that eventually leads to a strong national
system of innovation. This is a very critical point, especially in sectors that rely extensively on
patented products and processes.

114. At present, there is no margin of preference defined in the legislation, and IOCs have
developed their own rules in the absence of the specifics. According to local suppliers, IOCs
and their contractors add uniform 10 points for national content in their bid evaluations, regardless
of the percentage of ownership or the industry the supplier functions in. PEPD is in the process of
developing regulations for national content, and there is a possibility that some targets will be set.

115. As mentioned earlier in this report, in order to make a positive impact on the
economy, setting any margins of preference would need to be informed by very thorough
analysis of sectors of the economy to understand their capacity to serve the oil industry from
the standpoint of both quantity and quality. If such a decision to set targets is made, it would
be important to ensure that they are in line with the capabilities of the domestic market and do not
exceed its capacity. The targets would need to be developed based on thorough analysis of
domestic capacity in particular sectors to ensure that local suppliers in these sectors can
realistically provide goods and services meeting strict quality and quantity standards of the oil
industry. Setting of realistic for local capacity global targets (i.e., minimum local content for
exploration phase) can be more difficult to achieve, compared to targets for particular sectors.

2.3 ASSESSMENT OF BINDING CONSTRAINTS FACED BY LOCAL SUPPLIERS OF THE OIL INDUSTRY
    IN UGANDA


116. The oil sector offers Uganda a unique opportunity to transform its economy. With its
massive demand for infrastructure and goods and services, the oil sector can serve as a potential
driver of specific sectors of economy which to date did not have sufficient demand to achieve a
major shift. With appropriate measures in place, there is a great potential to generate a "pull" effect
for some sectors and take them to the next level in terms of the quality and quantity of production,
later enabling enterprises in these sectors to effectively serve other industries in Uganda and export
markets. The benefits for the local private sector are expected through increased employment,
value addition and technology transfer.



                                                  50
117. For Uganda’s private sector, significant opportunities are opening up in supplying
goods and services demanded by the oil industry. Given the highly entrepreneurial culture of
Ugandans, this channel seems to be very promising.

118. According to Sub-Saharan African Regional Report (2012)44, Ugandans report one of
the most positive attitudes towards entrepreneurship in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA): 81
percent of Ugandans perceive opportunities in entrepreneurship, compared to the SSA
average of 70 percent. Only 15 percent of Ugandans have fear of failure, compared to 24 percent
in SSA. This number is particularly impressive given that SSA is the world leader in the
entrepreneurship culture: over twice as many people in SSA see opportunities than do people in
Europe and the Asia Pacific and South Asia region. 79 percent of Ugandans have entrepreneurial
intentions, compared to 53 percent SSA average. New business ownership rate in Uganda is also
one of the highest in SSA (28 percent). High entrepreneurial activity in Uganda is largely due to
lack of other sources of income: the report shows that 46 percent of entrepreneurship in Uganda is
necessity-driven.

119. Opportunities for Ugandan entrepreneurs to get involved in the petroleum sector are
only available for a short time. The construction phase during which most of the contracts will
be tendered is nearing. Development of enterprise capacity to make local businesses competitive
in relation to well-established foreign players takes a long time and oftentimes requires significant
investment. If local suppliers are not able to offer competitive terms, contracts will be lost to
foreigners.

120. Unfortunately, many emerging opportunities for Ugandan suppliers might not
materialize due to a number of constraints which local private sector is presently facing.
Overall, firms remain primarily in low value-added, labor intensive areas of production,45 and, as
a result, it is difficult for Ugandan firms to compete in international markets. Total factor
productivity is lower in the manufacturing sector in Uganda than it is in most other countries in
SSA. Finally, the country is also lagging behind SSA averages in agricultural productivity.46 Low
productivity in agriculture is a function in part of a lack of investment in business development
services (BDS) by many Ugandan firms.

Business environment

121. Business environment in Uganda is currently not sufficiently conducive to private
sector development. A number of studies and surveys of Uganda’s private sector undertaken by
the World Bank and other donors have all led to this conclusion. This represents a problem both
from the standpoint of having local entrepreneurs participate in the oil sector and attracting foreign
companies to set up subsidiaries and form joint ventures in Uganda to serve oil sector.

122. In the Global Competitiveness Index 2014-15 Report, Uganda ranked rather low: 122
(out of 144 countries measured). In terms of basic requirements (institutions, infrastructure,

44
   African Entrepreneurship. Sub-Saharan African Regional Report. 2012
45
   An Assessment of the Investment Climate in Uganda). The World Bank. 2009
46
   According to national accounts data, agricultural output expansion over the past two decades has come from the
rapid increase in the agricultural labor force and area expansion, rather than productivity growth.

                                                        51
macroeconomic environment and health and primary education) Uganda is ranked 126, which is
very low. On efficiency enhancers, Uganda is ranked slightly higher (110) and on innovation and
sophistication- 104. The most problematic factors for doing business, according to the report, are
corruption (22.5 percent of responses), access to finance (14 percent) and inadequate infrastructure
(13.5 percent).

123. The country also performs poorly in the World Bank’s annual Doing Business (DB)
report and on the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index (CPI). In the DB
2015 report, Uganda ranked 150 (out of 189 economies). Uganda was ranked 142 (out of 175
countries) on Transparency International CPI. Among East African countries, on this indicator
Uganda lags behind Rwanda (ranked 55) and Tanzania (ranked 119), but it is ahead of Kenya
(ranked 136) and Burundi (ranked 159).

124. Box 6 shows how Uganda performs in DB report and in the Transparency
International Corruption Perception Index compared to a number of resource-rich countries
in the world. Some of these countries have business environment conducive to private sector
development, as demonstrated by high DB and corruption perception rankings, while others have
much less favorable business environment. It would be expected that population in general (and
private sector in particular) in countries with favorable business environment would generally be
able to benefit from oil resources much more than in countries where business environment is
unfavorable. GNI per capita of these resource-rich nations demonstrate that generally, countries
with a favorable environment for business are wealthier on per capita basis.

                      Box 6. Rankings of Select Resource-Rich Countries

             Country             DB 2015                Corruption                GNI per
                               Ranking (out           Perception Rank            capita (DB
                                  of 189              2014 (out of 175             2015)
                                economies)              economies)
          Norway                     6                        5                   102,610
          United States              7                       17                    53,670
          Chile                     41                       21                    15,230
          Botswana                  74                       31                     7,730
          Uganda                   150                      142                      510
          Nigeria                  170                      136                     2,760
          Burkina Faso             167                       85                      670
          Angola                   181                      161                     5,010
          Chad                     185                      154                     1,020
          CAR                      187                      150                      320

125. Recent DB reports show that many constraints affect Ugandan firms, including
challenges with getting electricity, trading across borders, starting a business, dealing with
construction permits, and registering property. Among all DB 2015 indicators, Uganda’s
lowest rank is currently on getting electricity (184 out of 189 economies). Among EAC countries,
this is the lowest ranking: Rwanda is ranked 62, Tanzania- 87, Kenya- 151, and Burundi- 182.


                                                52
126. Trading across borders and obtaining construction permits are also a major
challenge in Uganda. The country ranks 161 and 163, respectively, on these indicators. Uganda
also ranks low on registering property (125). Land policies are currently very cumbersome and
land tenure security is weak, and investors cannot yet be sure of reaping the full benefits of land
deals and investments. Business registration, which is inefficient, slow, and a significant barrier to
entering the Ugandan market, continues to be a burden for enterprises. Uganda is ranked 166 on
starting a business. Business licensing is also administratively burdensome for businesses. As
informal businesses cannot participate in supplying the oil industry, high costs of operating legally
represent a significant barrier for local businesses to partake in the emerging opportunities.

127. The recently conducted Enterprise Survey in Uganda (2013) revealed that the top
business environment constraints are electricity, practices of the informal sector, tax rates,
access to finance and business licenses and permits. Figure 5 below shows the percent of firms
which identified each of the constraints as the biggest obstacle to their business.

            Figure 5. Top Ten Business Environment Constraints for Firms in Uganda47




128. Access to finance is a significant constraint to doing business in Uganda. According to
Enterprise Survey (2013), very few Ugandan firms have a bank loan/line of credit compared to all
countries, and even SSA: only 9.8 percent in Uganda compared to 24 percent in SSA and 36.5
percent worldwide. The value of collateral required for a loan is slightly lower than world average,
but proportion of loans requiring collateral is higher. Very few firms in Uganda use bank loans to


47
     Enterprise Surveys in Uganda (2013)

                                                 53
finance investments (8 percent in Uganda compared to 27 percent worldwide). Table 7 below
shows a number of indicators in Uganda against SSA and world averages.

                                  Table 7. Access to Finance Indicators48

                                                                                               All
                                  Indicator                                 Uganda   SSA
                                                                                             Countries
     Percent of firms with a checking or savings account                    86.7     88.1    88.2

     Percent of firms with a bank loan/line of credit                       9.8      23.8    36.5

     Proportion of loans requiring collateral (%)                           86.4     79.7    77.3

     Value of collateral needed for a loan (% of the loan amount)           159.4    175.2   182.2

     Percent of firms not needing a loan                                    41.9     34.1    40.9

     Percent of firms whose recent loan application was rejected            7.7      15.3    14.5

     Percent of firms using banks to finance investments                    8.2      18.0    27.3

     Proportion of investments financed internally (%)                      79.5     78.3    69.2

     Proportion of investments financed by banks (%)                        3.3      9.9     16.3

     Proportion of investments financed by supplier credit (%)              3.2      3.9     5.1

     Proportion of investments financed by equity or stock sales (%)        13.0     3.7     5.0

     Percent of firms using banks to finance working capital                21.7     23.5    31.0

     Proportion of working capital financed by banks (%)                    7.0      9.9     12.6

     Proportion of working capital financed by supplier credit (%)          3.5      7.2     10.8

     Percent of firms identifying access to finance as a major constraint   20.2     43.0    30.8


129. Uganda ranks 131 on the Getting Credit indicator in the DB 2015 report. In terms of
depth of credit information, Uganda receives 0 points out of 6. While credit reporting system in
the country largely answers the requirements (e.g., both positive and negative data is distributed,
data is available on both individuals and firms), in fact, coverage is only 4.9 percent of the
population, which is extremely small to make an impact. The DB methodology is such that if the
credit bureau or registry is not operational or covers less than 5 percent of the adult population, the
total score on the depth of credit information index is 0, regardless of whether the system overall
exists and is designed properly.

48
     Enterprise Surveys in Uganda (2013)

                                                         54
130. In terms of strength of legal rights of creditors, Uganda also ranks quite low (6 points
out of 12) as there are some issues. For instance, while movable assets can be used as collateral
in Uganda, financial institutions are usually quite reluctant to use them alone, unless immovable
property is also pledged alongside. Moreover, the fact that there is no collateral registry and
secured creditors are not paid first when the business is liquidated makes creditors even more
reluctant to lend against movable assets. Finally, Uganda ranks quite low on related DB indicators
(Resolving Insolvency- 98 and Enforcing Contracts- 80) which makes debt resolution challenging
and in part explains reluctance of creditors to lend to smaller, more risky borrowers

131. The Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) 2011 update also revealed that
private enterprises, particularly MSME’s in Uganda have limited access to financial services.
Credit remains concentrated in the corporate sector and financing and leasing facilities for MSMEs
are inadequate. The FSAP update did indicate that financial development has somewhat
accelerated and competition in the banking sector has improved in the recent years, but efficiency
gains are yet to materialize. In 2012-2013, domestic credit to private sector as percent of GDP in
Uganda was lagging behind a number of regional peers (Table 8).

                              Table 8: Financial sector depth, 2012-201349

                                                 Domestic credit to private sector
                            Country                    (percent of GDP)
                                                     2012                2013
                      South Africa                  151.8                156.1
                      Mauritius                     100.8                108.0
                      Kenya                          37.0                 39.6
                      Burundi                        19.5                 18.0
                      Tanzania                       17.9                 17.2
                      Uganda                         16.2                 15.5
                      Zambia                         14.8                 14.6

132. The cost of financing is also very high in Uganda compared to other countries in the
region and the world. The average shilling commercial bank lending rate in Uganda was 21.57
percent in 2014. According to the WEF Global Competitiveness Report 2014-15, Uganda ranks
121 (out of 144 countries) by affordability of financial services (down from 116 a year earlier). In
comparison, Kenya and Rwanda rank 64 and 56, respectively, on this indicator.

133. Access to finance is especially costly for MSMEs in Uganda. Low quality of financial
statements, information asymmetry, and high perceived risk are some of the main reasons why
banks are reluctant to extend financing to MSMEs and would do that only at very high interest
rates.

Specific constraints faced by oil and gas suppliers



49
     World Bank Data. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FS.AST.PRVT.GD.ZS

                                                      55
134. In order to understand specific constraints faced by suppliers of the oil and gas
industry in Uganda, the World Bank team leveraged a number of sources. A focus group
discussion was organized with several members of the Oil and Gas Service Providers Association.
Relevant government authorities and financial services providers were interviewed. The team also
benefitted from the ample discussions held as part of the roundtable dinners on national content.
Finally, the team leveraged results of numerous studies, including the Industrial Baseline Survey
(IBS) conducted by the IOCs50 and a study Constraints and Opportunities for SME Investment in
Uganda’s Oil and Gas Sector conducted by the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA).

135. The IBS revealed that main constraints faced by the oil and gas suppliers were : (1)
visibility over demand; (2) access to finance; (3) poor infrastructure; (4) administrative
bureaucracy (process of obtaining required approvals, such as safety, environment, electricity from
the public administration); (5) lack of training of skilled people; (6) O&G high quality standards;
and (7) low capacity of suppliers. Please refer to Annex 5 for the detailed description of the IBS
survey and its results.

136. A study Constraints and Opportunities for SME Investment in Uganda’s Oil and Gas
Sector (2012) undertook a survey to identify the greatest determinants of SME willingness to
invest in oil and gas sector in Uganda. The top three determinants revealed by the study included:
(i) investment capital, (ii) knowledge of oil business, and (iii) access to credit.

137. Entrepreneurs interviewed as part of the oil and gas suppliers focus group organized
by the World Bank listed a number of constraints they are facing in supplying the oil and
gas industry. These included access to finance51 ; existence of information asymmetries; high
quality standards which are different between the three IOCs, and high costs associated with
meeting them; high volume/quantity requirements of the IOCs; and other constraints. Below we
provide a detailed analysis of the key constraints faced by local suppliers.

138. Although access to finance is a constraint for all businesses in Uganda, this challenge
is even more intensified for the oil and gas industry suppliers. Affordability of finance in
Uganda is clearly a major problem, and so is the availability of truly long-term funding. To be able
to be competitive in this capital-intensive and quality-conscious industry, local suppliers need
access to both investment and working capital at reasonable terms. High costs of financing make
Uganda suppliers uncompetitive and they cannot contend with foreign competitors, which are
financed at much lower costs, bidding for the same contracts with the IOCs.

139. Lack of access to affordable working capital represents a significant problem for local
suppliers of oil and gas industry. Since the IOCs undoubtedly have the bargaining power, they
usually negotiate rather favorable for them payment terms, and actual payment is often extended
even beyond. This does not represent a problem for many foreign companies which are able to
access working capital solutions on favorable terms, but does represent a challenge for Ugandan

50
   Similar initiatives have been carried out in other countries. For example, at the end of 2003 in Brazil the Ministry
of Mines and Energy and Petrobras launched a national competitiveness diagnostic study to identify current and
project local supplier capability.
51
   Suppliers taking part in the focus group noted that this is their single greatest obstacle in supplying the oil and gas
industry

                                                            56
suppliers, especially MSMEs. Cash flow becomes a major problem for them because they need to
purchase materials to fulfil purchase orders, perform the work and then wait for 30 days or more
to get paid after the delivery. While some companies have started exploring factoring solutions,
they are not yet widely used and awareness of these instruments needs to be built.

140. Suppliers also report that they are unable to gain access to affordable investment
capital of long-term duration, which prevents them from taking advantage of many
investment opportunities which the oil and gas industry offers. First, in order to serve the oil
and gas industry, small local suppliers oftentimes need to scale up their business significantly, but
this is very difficult to do without taking out a loan (or getting an equity partner). Second, in many
cases, proper equipment is critical for producing goods of high quality and unless a business is
able to purchase this equipment, they would not be able to meet the standards of the IOCs. Because
such equipment is usually quite expensive, many small businesses might not be able to afford it.

141. Generally, many endeavors, even though potentially very profitable, might never be
pursued by local companies in Uganda due to lack of access to investment capital. The results
of the IBS support this conclusion. For instance, investments in food processing plants could be
desirable both from the standpoint of supplying the oil and gas industry and Ugandan market as a
whole, but might never materialize due to lack of funding. Substantial investments would also be
needed to buy new trucks, pumps and tanks for local suppliers to effectively operate in generic and
hazardous waste management industries where local capacity is currently below the projected
demand from the IOCs. Companies engaged in road construction and rehabilitation would need to
significantly increase their capacity to meet the increasing demands from the oil industry, which
would require sizable investments in earth moving equipment and bitumen. In the transportation
and logistics industry, domestic capacity is also significantly below the projected demand of the
IOCs and investments would need to be made to substantially increase the fleet of trucks and
number of warehousing and storage facilities. The results of the IBS undertaken by the IOCs
highlight that enterprises in many sectors (e.g., light manufacturing, facility management, food
supply, furniture manufacturing, road construction) considered access to finance one of their
binding constraints for effectively supplying the oil industry.

142. From the supply-side perspective, discussions with select financial institutions
confirmed that there were no overall capacity constraints in banking today, but rather a
shortage of qualified borrowers. Financial institutions have reported that in fact they would be
interested to finance eligible borrowers at market rates for a short-term maturity (and possible
medium-term maturity for the most qualified borrowers). This is consistent with the findings of
the WEF Global Competitiveness Report 2014-15 in which Uganda ranked 86 (out of 144
countries) on availability of financial services. Of course, despite this evident availability of
resources, the problem of cost of funds and duration still remains.

143. One of the interviewed financial institutions noted that many of entrepreneurs
interested in supplying the oil industry have approached it in the last several years . The
challenge was that these prospective borrowers did not know even the basics of securing financing
(preparation of the business plan etc.). The institution worked with several such entrepreneurs who
showed the most promise. Under the provided guidance, they managed to prepare the necessary
documents and secured financing. This experience highlights a very important point.


                                                 57
144. Ugandan oil and gas suppliers currently do not have any particular center where they
could obtain information and, if needed, capacity-building in terms of where to apply for
financing, what documents are needed, how to prepare them and other formalities. While
large local firms usually possess all of the required information, MSMEs are typically much less
savvy. It is evident that capacity-building of oil and gas suppliers should not be provided by private
financial institutions as this is not their mandate. These trainings should be developed and
delivered to interested suppliers through an enterprise development program, along with other
useful modules.

145. It is necessary to emphasize that financing would be availed primarily to suppliers
who already signed contracts with IOCs (as opposed to those who are only aspiring
suppliers). The experience of some financial institutions shows that in order to reduce their risks,
they structured financing to the suppliers under the condition that the IOC (buyer) would pay for
goods/services directly to the bank as opposed to the supplier. This requirement makes chances of
financing for those suppliers who do not yet have contracts with the IOCs or other well-recognized
buyers rather low, unless they possess required amounts of collateral (as noted in Table 7 above,
collateral amount in Uganda approximately 160 percent of the loan).

146. Even suppliers possessing contracts with IOCs would still face challenges with
obtaining financing. First, the financial institutions would primarily consider contracts with
several years duration as there would be some certainty that the enterprise would be supplying for
an extended period of time. There would be no sense to go through the hassle of arranging for
direct payment to the bank if the supplier is only contracted for a month or two. Moreover, Uganda
suppliers report that many of them currently have what is called “a framework agreement”, an
umbrella agreement which establishes terms governing contracts that may be awarded during the
life of the agreement. Suppliers are then called upon to provide particular services within a
specified period of time. Such an agreement would most likely not be acceptable to financial
institutions because it does not place an obligation on the IOC to purchase a particular volume of
goods and services. Second, even when a supplier possesses a contract which places an obligation
on an IOC to purchase from him, access to truly long-term funding would most like be illusive.
They would most likely be able to obtain 1-3 year financing. This would make purchases of long-
term assets, which are largely needed to increase domestic capacity in a number of key industries,
very difficult.

147. Despite its high importance, access to finance for oil and gas service providers is not
currently being addressed through any centralized, well elaborated programs in Uganda .
While there has been a mention in the press of a technical group under the Prime-Minister’s office
working on creation of a fund for firms in oil services provision, no decision has yet been made.
In the absence of a mechanism targeted to provide affordable financing to MSMEs seeking to
participate in the extractives industry, despite a lot of other viable initiatives, many companies
might end up being locked out of this exciting industry.

148. Existence of information asymmetries represents another major problem for local
suppliers in Uganda. At present, the 3-5 year plan of procurement of oil companies is not known
to local suppliers, which makes it difficult for them to prepare in advance. Tender announcements
require an answer within several weeks, which makes it impossible for local suppliers to team up,
build up capacity in necessary areas, expand their operations, upgrade certain processes etc. to be
                                                 58
able to compete for the contract. If demand of oil companies were known well in advance, local
suppliers would be able to see where the opportunities are coming up and look for financing, joint
venture partners etc. to be prepared to bid when the tender opens.

149. This problem is common among developing countries, and some countries have tried
addressing it. In Kazakhstan, Decree No. 965/2012 stipulates that operators must formulate and
submit to the government their procurement plans. The aim of this regulation is inform
Kazakhstani suppliers of the short- and long-term procurement plans of different oil and gas
companies operating in the region. There is also experience of addressing this issue via non-
regulatory interventions. For example, Brazil launched the Site Opportunities Supply Chain of
Petroleum and Natural Gas in order to provide market information about the demand for materials,
equipment and components required to carry out oil and gas projects, and encourage interaction
between suppliers and buyers. The site allows SMEs and larger companies learn about supply
opportunities52. Similar interventions could be applied in Uganda. In addition to establishing a
website with oil and gas opportunities, information could also be sent to mobile phones of suppliers
who signed up to ensure that SMEs can get information quickly.

150. Leaving aside 3-5 year plans, suppliers in Uganda also report that unless they have
some “connection” to the IOCs (or their EPC), there is little public information available to
guide them in where to look for information on upcoming oil and gas opportunities and how
to bid for contracts. IOCs’ tender processes and procedures are generally designed to target
established international suppliers and small local firms have a difficult time getting this
information. Many current suppliers report that they received contracts with the three IOCs
because at some point in time they supplied their predecessors (e.g., Heritage, Neptune). Others
managed to break through owing to some contacts. But many suppliers, especially those not in
Kampala, are left behind because they are not aware of how to apply for opportunities with oil
companies, where to go for information etc.

151. IOCs have conducted some ad-hoc seminars for local suppliers to educate them on
the procurement process and opportunities but only suppliers in their database receive these
invitations. With the exception of an organization called Traidlinks, which is discussed in Chapter
3, as well as associations (e.g., Oil and Gas Service Providers Association), there is currently no
dedicated agency where local suppliers who are interested in supplying the oil industry can get
information about opportunities and assistance with linking them to the oil companies. In order to
address problem of this kind, in many countries enterprise development centers were established.

152. Uncertainty about the timeline of oil initiatives in Uganda is another source of unease
for the private sector. Falling oil prices, exit of some IOC executives and other developments
create doubts in the mind of the private sector whether this is a good time to invest and expand
their business to serve the oil industry. Same applies to banks: they are more reluctant to fund oil
industry related initiatives when it is unclear if the project will be profitable in the end and
borrower will be able to repay. Better communication can help alleviate anxiety and make private
sector more inclined to invest and banks to fund these projects.


52
  Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas Sector. The World Bank.
2013

                                                      59
153. Another major challenge for oil and gas suppliers in Uganda is meeting high quality
standards of the IOCs. According to the WEF Global Competitiveness Report 2013-14, overall
supplier quality is very low- Uganda is ranked 129 (out of 144 countries). Not surprisingly, very
few local businesses in Uganda comply with high oil and gas industry standards or even know
what certification is needed and how to obtain it. The challenges are exacerbated by the fact that
there are three IOCs working in Uganda, all of which come from different countries and have
different standards. Until harmonization is achieved, local enterprises will have to bear an
additional burden of complying with three different sets of standards. It is worth noting that due to
their high quality standards, IOCs are reluctant to use suppliers which are not well-established as
the perception is that they do not have the capacity to perform the tasks. While this may be true
for many suppliers in Uganda, this does not necessarily represent the rule. Policymakers should
consider facilitating the integration of local suppliers in IOCs’ procurement strategies.

154. There is also a great challenge in meeting significant costs of certifications and finding
the acceptable provider. Some Ugandan suppliers involved in logistics report that in the past, the
local companies actually needed to team up to fly in a representative of a certification company
from the UK to conduct a certification, as there was no local office in Uganda. The situation
improved in the last several years when Lloyds British Testing Uganda, a wholly owned subsidiary
of Lloyds British Testing, a leading global inspection, testing and training company, set up its
offices in Uganda in February 2011 as a base for its operations in East Africa. Nevertheless, costs
still remain significant.

155. Ability to meet volume/quantity requirements of the IOCs is also a challenge for
Uganda oil and gas suppliers. Similar to other countries, IOC contracts are large and require
suppliers to have significant capacity to be eligible for these contracts. Requirement to unbundle
the contracts would be very useful in this case, as more local suppliers would become eligible to
bid for these contracts.

156. A number of suppliers also mentioned that the tender evaluation criteria did not
adequately incorporate the issue of national content. The 10 points allocated for local content
were universal across the board for all the IOCs and all kinds of contracts (irrespective of industry).
Issues were also cited with the definition of “local company” applied, as none was provided in the
legislation. In order to address this challenge, one of the options could be to establish a higher local
content weighting in contracts for industries in which Ugandan suppliers have enough expertise
and are able to meet O&G requirements (e.g., logistics, food supply, accommodation contracts).
A lower weight for local content in contract award could be warranted in cases where the
opportunities to use local labor or materials are weak, and high expertise is needed (contracts for
drilling services, proprietary equipment, or specialist engineering design services). In contrast, one
might expect local content within logistics and cleaning services to command higher weighting.

157. Additional challenges arise from the fact that a large number of suppliers in Uganda,
especially SMEs, represent suppliers in the bottom of the supply chain. They are second- or
even third-tier suppliers which do not have a direct interaction with the IOCs. For instance, local
suppliers of food would be discussing their contracts not with the IOCs procurement department,
but with the catering company contracted by the IOCs. Although the IOCs might have the best
intentions in promoting local content and reportedly incorporated certain clauses to that account
in their agreements with the EPCs, in practice, local suppliers face a lot of challenges in their
                                                  60
interactions with the EPCs, as EPCs are not in exactly a developmental role and would not go an
extra mile to support the national content.

158. Suppliers have noted that monitoring and evaluation of the award of contracts by
PEPD is currently is not sufficiently robust and needs to be improved to assist the local
industry. At present, the review takes place after contracts have been awarded, and it does not
provide an opportunity to remedy the situation even if any irregularities have been discovered.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that occasionally, local suppliers were at a disadvantage (e.g., a
Request for Proposal (RFP) document was issued in Chinese). It would be much more beneficial
to institute review of select contracts (e.g., high value) at different stages of procurement process
to ensure that appropriate procedures are followed and appropriate remedial actions are taken in a
timely manner. It would also be important to ensure that not only IOCs but also their EPCs (1st,
2nd tier contractors) report on national content to determine if the supply chain stretches to the local
MSMEs and what is the volume of goods and services purchased from them. Tracking female
participation would also be important; if participation appears low, strategies need to be desired to
increase women’s participation.

2.4 DETAILED ANALYSIS OF NATIONAL CONTENT SUPPORT INITIATIVES IN UGANDA

159. In Uganda, a lot of analysis has already been conducted on national content
development and some initiatives supporting national content are underway.

 A.    UGANDA GOVERNMENT SUPPORT

160. The GoU has been actively involved in promoting national content development in
the oil and gas sector. Some of the prominent initiatives include preparation of the studies
“Enhancing National Participation in the Oil and Gas Industry in Uganda” and “Constraints and
Opportunities for SME Investment in Uganda’s Oil and Gas Sector”, development of the “National
Content Policy for the Petroleum Sector in Uganda”, establishment of the Uganda Petroleum
Institute in Kigumba, and organization of a cycle of roundtable dinners in Kampala for a selected
group of key national content stakeholders.

161. The study Enhancing National Participation in the Oil and Gas Industry in Uganda ,
commissioned by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, was completed in 2011.
The study highlights a number of opportunities for Uganda to leverage the oil and gas industry. If
appropriate capacity is developed, Uganda can serve as a competence center for the oil and gas
sector in the East African region. The multiple educational offerings available at Uganda
universities (e.g., BSc and MSc in petroleum geosciences at Makerere University, the diploma at
the Uganda Petroleum Institute in Kigumba) can already serve neighboring countries. Uganda also
has potential to become the location for the regional offices of key service companies and
technology providers internationally, given that Uganda now is in the forefront of oil and gas
exploration and development in the region.

162. The study suggests a number of important recommendations, grouped around 5
pillars: (i) Institutional framework; (ii) Capacity-building in people; (iii) Enterprise development;
(iv) Facilitating national participation; and (v) Monitoring national content achievements. Some
of the recommendations are contained in Box 7 below.

                                                  61
    Box 7. Key Recommendations of study Enhancing National Participation in the Oil and
                                Gas Industry in Uganda

      Establish a government body for national content enhancement. The functional responsibility for national
       content enhancement should be delegated to one institution, and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral
       Development ought to be most suitable
      Regulate procedures for procurement. Procedures need to be established for the dissemination of information
       on field development plans and future demand and on how oil companies and their supply chains shall adhere
       to national participation. Procedures also need to be described regarding contracting plans and contract
       awards. Inspired from how it was done in Norway, the government should be given the right to suggest that
       domestic firms are included on the bidders list, but not the right to exclude any that the oil companies want
       to invite.
      Define and operationalize how national content should be measured. National content needs to be defined in
       terms of value addition in Uganda, as opposed to ownership of the company performing the value addition.
       As such, national content refers to value added in firms with an infrastructure in Uganda.
      IOCs need to commit to national content development. Training centers should be established by the IOCs.
       These training centers will help to accelerate the development of relevant capacity in the petroleum industry.
      An adequate capacity building program for the industry needs to be developed. Capacity status of the
       potential suppliers to the petroleum sector should be subject to the training needs assessment to identify gaps
       and a capacity-development program designed based on these findings. Implementation of the program needs
       to rest with an appropriate institution such as Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU).
      An SME program for the petroleum sector needs to be established in close cooperation between the GoU,
       IOCs, financial institutions and other key players. The program should bring in international companies in a
       sponsorship role and provide access to finance.
      Industrial projects with a large market potential should be identified. The production of high-grade cement
       has been identified as one project possibility. Industrial projects do not necessarily have to be directly linked
       to core oil activities. If food supply to the oil industry could be used as a means to establish systems for
       quality assurance in the production of agricultural products, larger markets could open for an industry that
       makes up the most of Uganda’s economy.
      Contracts should be structured to align with domestic capacity. For instance, it would be beneficial to
       structure procurement into smaller packages for some key industries to enable participation of local suppliers.
       Preferably an up-front payment should be offered.
      A central information office for national content should be established. This office should act as the focal
       point for all information needed by the local industry to be a participant in the supply to the sector, including
       all information on required certificates and standards.
      A national register for prequalified companies should be established. This register should serve as a means
       for foreign companies to find well qualified Ugandan suppliers to team with, either in joint-ventures or
       through ordinary contracting.
      National content needs to be closely monitored and a system of evaluation of national content performance
       established. The measurement process needs to be open and transparent.

163. The GoU is in the final stage of concluding “National Content Policy for the Petroleum
Sector in Uganda”. This policy clarifies the national intent, roles and responsibilities, and provides
guidance to subsequent legislative, regulatory and strategic actions both for the Government of
Uganda as well as for the private sector. The draft policy is supported by several National Content
Plans: National Content Plan #1 (Procurement Principles and Supply Chain Interaction); National
Content Plan #2/3 (Skills and Competencies Development); National Content Plan #4 (Enterprise
Development); and National Content Plan #5 (Measuring and Monitoring National Content).



                                                         62
164. A study Constraints and Opportunities for SME Investment in Uganda’s Oil and Gas
Sector (2012) was undertaken by the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) and Makerere
University. The study investigated key actors in the oil and gas value chain, potential business
linkages between the existing large oil prospecting companies and SMEs and factors that
influenced SME decisions and willingness to invest in the oil and gas value chain. A total of 220
registered SMEs were purposively selected from a cross section of sectors. The results of the study
revealed that the main actors in the oil and gas value chain were IOCs, large foreign and domestic
direct and indirect service providers with minimal involvement of SMEs. Business linkages for
SMEs and IOCs existed at the vertical and horizontal levels but they were rather poor. Only 10
percent of SMEs had permanent contractual terms to supply IOCs. According to the Logit model,
the strongest predictors of SME willingness to invest were having investment capital, access to
credit, information and owning fixed assets.

165. The GoU also realized that it must help provide the skilled manpower that oil and gas
upstream and downstream industries require. In February 2009 the GoU established the
Uganda Petroleum Institute in Kigumba (UPIK) in north-western Uganda. A UPIK Statute was
later tabled in parliament by the Hon. Minister of Education and endorsed in 2012, establishing
the Institute as a legally recognized and gazetted, tertiary education institution for petroleum
studies. In 2013/14 the GoU with the support of the World Bank initiated the production of the
Institutional Development Plan for UPIK. The plan specifies a number of objectives for UPIK,
including developing and delivering certificate and diploma level courses for skilled technicians,
partnering with an internationally recognized petroleum education and training institution and
adapting its programs and certification to meet the manpower needs in Uganda, and becoming a
center of excellence in workforce skills development at technician level in the petroleum sector in
Uganda and East Africa. The GoU plans to fund the implementation of this Plan at a cost of US$10
million under the Uganda Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project financed through the
World Bank.

166. Furthermore, the GoU rightfully identified meeting technical standards of IOCs as
one of the main constraints for local businesses. GoU therefore created Technical Committee
(TC) 16 to compile and document all the required standards in the oil and gas sector. It is a very
welcome initiative as suppliers currently face significant difficulties trying to comply with
different technical standards for each oil company. It is important to ensure that TC16 has adequate
capacity and resources to achieve the goals in a timely manner, as the task of documenting all the
oil and gas standards is quite challenging.

167. Moreover, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, with the support of the
Royal Norwegian Embassy and the World Bank, organized a cycle of roundtable dinners in
Kampala for a selected group of key national content stakeholders. Invitees include
representatives from the Government, the private sector (including IOCs), academia, the civil
society and donors active in the national content agenda. The roundtable dinners are chaired by
the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and benefit from the technical support and
practical knowledge of an expert coming from the country featured at a particular session. The
concept of the roundtable dinner is presented in Annex 6.




                                                63
         B. PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS

168. The Association of Uganda Oil and Gas Service Providers has been formed with the
idea of growing Ugandans’ participation within the oil industry. The association organizes
provides networking and capacity-building opportunities to its members.

169. The Uganda Chamber of Mines and Petroleum is a private sector lobby group that
advocates the interest of private sector players in the oil and gas industry. It has recently
partnered with ESLSCA, a European Business School founded in Paris, to enable young Ugandans
attain training in oil and gas. ESLSCA was established in Uganda in 2013 and is accredited to
offer undergraduate and postgraduate programs. ESLSCA Uganda Board of Trustees is headed by
Elli Karuhanga, the chairman of Uganda Chamber of Mines and Petroleum. ESLSCA is in the
process of starting degrees in Engineering and Petroleum Economics and Management in
partnership with the Uganda Chamber of Mines and Petroleum.

         C. IOC INITIATIVES

170. IOCs have also taken a number of important steps in supporting national content in
Uganda. Following the completion of the IBS, Joint Venture Partners (JVPs) commenced
implementation of national content initiatives recommended by the IBS. Please refer to Annex 5
which discusses in detail the content and recommendations of IBS as well as subsequent initiatives
to implement recommendations of the IBS.

171.     The activities initiated by the JVPs in the recent months include the following:

       o Establishment of the IEC to support capacity development of Ugandan companies to
         enable them to effectively respond to business opportunities on the oil and gas project.

          The working group on the establishment of the center has been established and includes
          representatives of the PEPD, Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC), the
          World Bank, Total, Tullow, and CNOOC. Several working group meetings have already
          taken place and terms of reference for a consultant to conduct the feasibility study for the
          Industry Enhancement Center have been finalized.

       o Creation of a talent register to create a record of Ugandan personnel for the current
         project and for subsequent projects post oil and gas development
       o Establishment of the supplier database to create a prequalification framework for Uganda
         suppliers of goods and services to the oil and gas project
       o Support to specific sectors, including steel products, hazardous waste management, PPE
         and agriculture.

172. The ongoing initiatives have potential to provide a significant contribution to
development of national content in Uganda. We note that it will also be essential for the IOCs
to ensure that recommendation #1 of the IBS, communication of the oil and gas project demand,
is implemented. IOCs are the only ones who possess this information and they need to make
procurement plans known to the local suppliers well in advance. With appropriate notice of


                                                  64
upcoming opportunities, local suppliers could look for financing and undertake investments in
time before the actual procurement for the contracts starts.

173. In addition to joint activities, each IOC has also taken specific actions to target
education and employment of Ugandans and enterprise development. The section below
discusses these efforts in detail.

           Total E&P Uganda

       o As part of their human resource strategy, Total E&P Uganda has, since its inception,
         launched an intensive recruitment campaign for national employees. Today, more than 80
         percent of Total E&P Uganda direct and indirect staff are Ugandan. The company currently
         employs approximately 250 direct staff out of which about 60 percent are Ugandans,
         employed in positions varying from engineers to personal assistants, both in Kampala and
         in the area of operations. In addition, more than 2,300 personnel have been employed by
         the company’s contractors in 2013, mostly in the field, out of which more than 80 percent
         are Ugandans53.
       o Total E&P Uganda is also working towards building capacity of its national employees.
         The company’s education commitment is based on three main areas: contributing the
         education in Uganda; anticipating future human resource needs by prioritizing the
         employment of local talent; and building networks of partners in the education sector.
       o Total educational offerings include the following:
             o Total international scholarships. These scholarships target outstanding students
                 who are willing to enroll in Bachelor’s or Master’s degree programs in a wide array
                 of disciplines, from petroleum engineering to economics and management.
                 Students who successfully completed these programs are employed by the
                 company. In 2012, there were 5 beneficiaries of this program and 2013- 4
                 beneficiaries who were enrolled in top universities of France, the UK and Nigeria.
                 After successful completion of these programs they joined the company.
             o Total local scholarship program. This scholarship program targets students born
                 and who have studied in the districts where Total E&P has its operations (i.e.,
                 Albertine region). The program sponsors 20 best performing students in science
                 subjects in the Uganda Certificate of Education to finalize their secondary
                 education in some of the top schools of Kampala. Five students are selected from
                 each of the districts of the Albertine Region (Nwoya, Buliisa, Nebbi and Masindi).
             o Total Quai D’Orsay scholarship program. This program targets civil servants in
                 Uganda government interested in pursuing further education in oil and related
                 fields. The program is established in partnership with the French Embassy in
                 Uganda. During the last several years, beneficiaries from the Ministry of Finance
                 and Development Planning, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities,
                 Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and other ministries sponsored to
                 pursue Master’s degrees in France.
             o MIT Empowering the Teacher Program. This program allows outstanding young
                 teachers from African universities to spend a semester at MIT where they observe


53
     Total E&P Confident to Beat Oil Timeline. The Weekly Observer. February 18, 2014

                                                        65
                  instruction, develop courses and interact with MIT faculty. 2 Ugandan teachers will
                  be sent to MIT in 2014 and 5 will be sent in 2015.
             o    Total Professeurs Associes. This program was established at the Group level and
                  operates as a non-profit organization. Member professors are working or retired
                  Total Group employees who lecture in their field of expertise. In Uganda, lectures
                  are delivered to students under the MoU signed with partner universities.
             o    Total Uganda internships. 4 students interned with the company in 2012 and 5
                  students- in 2013.
             o    Total Summer School. Total organizes an annual one week event in France for over
                  120 students from all over the world to discuss and analyze major energy issues
                  and challenges. Since 2012, 4 students from Uganda have attended the event.
             o    Graduate Management Trainee Program. This program aims to recruit fresh
                  graduates under the initial eighteen months contracts. Every year, approximately
                  10 trainees are recruited and exposed to the company’s operations. Since inception,
                  67% of trainees received full time employment with the company upon completion
                  of the program.
             o    Total Education and Energy Seminar. This seminar, which takes place every 18
                  months, brings together 70 university professors from best universities around the
                  world to take part in a weeklong session to discuss major energy challenges,
                  alongside Total key executives and international experts. In 2012, Uganda’s
                  representative, Dr. Tiberindwa, Dean of the Geology Department at Makerere
                  University in Kampala.

         Tullow

        Tullow noted in its 2012 Corporate Social Responsibility (CRS) report that up to 88 percent
         of its staff in Uganda are Ugandans. In 2012, Tullow spent US$ 47.5 million with local
         suppliers. US$ 44 million was spent on payroll for Ugandan employees54.
        Tullow also made a US$ 600,000 discretionary investment to open an enterprise center in
         Hoima and funded Traidlinks, an organization undertaking enterprise development and
         agriculture supply chain activities. Traidlinks is discussed in detail later in this report.
        In order to help suppliers achieve supplier pre-qualification and compete for business
         opportunities, in 2012 Tullow held ‘closing-the-gap’ seminars in Uganda and Ghana to
         help local companies understand the requirements of the oil and gas industry. 55 It also held
         a logistics suppliers’ forum in 2011, which 320 people representing 103 organizations
         attended56.
        Tullow has also instituted its Group Scholarship Scheme. Under this program, students
         have left for the UK to pursue Master’s degrees in various fields in the oil and gas industry.
         The scheme is run through a partnership between Tullow Oil and the British Council57.

     CNOOC


54
   Tullow 2012 Corporate Responsibility Report
55
  Ibid
56
   Haggai Matsiko. Battle for oil contracts. Independent. April 19, 2013
57
   Tullow lets 41 Staff Go. Daily Monitor (Uganda). 3/6/2014

                                                         66
          CNOOC has a total 482 suppliers on file, 285 of which are Ugandan58
          In 2013, CNOOC commenced a one year sponsorship program to support 70 students who
           enrolled for the Basic Skills Training Program at the Nile Vocational Institute Bishop
           Mukasa Center in Hoima district. The sponsorship covers all learning costs. The students
           receive training in a number of vocational fields, including metal fabrication, welding,
           electrical installation, plumbing and masonry59.
          CNOOC has also instituted an international scholarship program 2014. It offers
           opportunity for 3 Bachelor’s Degree scholarships (in Petroleum Engineering) and 2
           Master’s Degree scholarships (in Oil and Gas Wells Engineering and Field Development).
           The host school is China University of Petroleum.

174. The analysis of the IOCs’ national content support initiatives shows that a number of
these interventions have been driven by the CSR. CSR activities, through which the IOCs try
to give back to the community, mostly relate to providing scholarships, internships and
sponsorships to talented Ugandan students. As these are not profit driven, limited resources are
allocated to them and they are usually rather few in number. These initiatives are not expected to
achieve a significant impact in terms of recruiting locals, but nevertheless they provide great
opportunities for the select few qualified Ugandans. It is up to the government to ensure that more
locals get appropriate qualifications to be able to get jobs with the IOCs. A relatively unique CSR
initiative is opening of an enterprise center in Hoima to develop linkages between local farmers
and Tullow camps (described in more detail later in this report). While this center’s impact is very
small, it does provide opportunities for local farmers to build up their capacity and sell some
produce to the oil camps to benefit from the oil industry development in their area.

175. IOCs have also initiated a number of profit driven activities to support national
content development in Uganda. IOCs are expecting to benefit from them financially (as opposed
to simply giving back to the community), which makes them more inclined to pursue them.
Generally speaking, these are the “win-win” initiatives for both the IOCs and the local private
sector. They can actually lead to larger scale and more impactful support, compared to CRS for
which corporations can only allocate limited resources.

176. IBS undertaken by the IOCs was a profit driven initiative to determine what capacity
exists in the market and which goods/services are expected to be provided locally . The IOCs
realize that sourcing goods and acquiring services from within Uganda would be preferred if local
capacity exists. Local sourcing would be preferred for the local private sector as well, because
businesses would get an opportunity to get more orders and potentially expand their operations.
The IBS demonstrated that in some sectors, adequate capacity indeed exists and can be leveraged,
while other sectors need urgent support to be able to meet the quantity and quality requirements.
The initiative to establish the industry enhancement center, which came out as one of the
recommendations of the IBS, aims to significantly enhance capacity of suppliers in Uganda to be
able to meet the requirements of the IOCs, bid for contracts and win them. This will benefit both
the IOCs and the local businesses. Initiatives to develop the supplier database and talent register
also provide benefits to both the IOCs and the local private sector. Through these registers, IOCs


58
     Oil: Local Firms Still Missing Out. New Vision, May 16, 2014
59
     Uganda: CNOOC Offers Seventy Scholarships. East African Business Week (Kampala). March 18, 2013

                                                      67
will be able to obtain information on the skills and goods/services available locally and ultimately
employ more locals and source more goods locally.

D.       DONOR SUPPORT TO THE OIL SECTOR:

177. Uganda has received support from the Royal Government of Norway over a number
of years. The development of the National Content Policy is supported by the Norwegian Oil for
Development program, “Strengthening the Management of the Oil and Gas Sector in Uganda”,
2009 – 2014. This is a government funded program that aims to support the development of
Uganda’s emerging oil and gas sector. Through the program, the study “Enhancing National
Participation in the Oil and Gas Industry in Uganda”, has also been supported.

178. There also exists an informal donor working group working on issues of transparency
and accessibility in the oil sector. The group was started in July 2013 and current participants
include Royal Government of Norway and DFID. Democratic Governance Facility has also
recently expressed an interest in joining this group.

179. The World Bank’s portfolio also includes a number of activities which already
support or can be leveraged to support the development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda
and enhancement of local capacity:

        Investment Project Financing:

        The Skills Development Project, currently under preparation, seeks to improve capacity of
         institutions to deliver quality and relevant skills training programs in a number of sectors,
         including the oil and gas.

        The Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project which has been approved by the
         World Bank and is currently pending approval by the Parliament of Uganda, will finance
         the upgrading of an approximately 100 km stretch of road from Kyenjojo to Kabwoya
         which forms part of the 238 kilometer Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi–Kigumba road
         connecting the districts of Kyenjojo, Kibaale, Hoima, Masindi and Kiryandongo in
         Western Uganda. The improvement of the road will be essential for the development of the
         oil and gas sector in the area. The project also includes a component on local access,
         planning and development, which will provide financing for the development of local
         economic infrastructure (e.g., markets, fish landing sites, storage facilities) to strengthen
         supply chains. This component can be leveraged to strengthen the capacity of local
         suppliers to participate in the oil industry.

        The Uganda Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP), currently
         under implementation, includes a matching grant facility of US$ 8 million which can be
         used by MSMEs in a number of sectors, such as coffee, tourism, grains and pulses,
         horticulture, edible oils, fisheries, and IT/business process outsourcing, to access funds for
         business development services (BDS). BDS eligible under the project include management
         training, acquisition of quality certification, business plan preparation, production



                                                  68
       techniques, marketing, record keeping, and financial management. Oil and gas suppliers in
       these industries will be able to access these funds to develop their capacity.

      Technical assistance to support the GoU in national content development:

      The Capacity Needs Analysis for the Oil and Gas Sector in Uganda, currently under
       preparation, aims to assess the capacity needs of the oil and gas sector in Uganda, take
       stock of the existing institutional and human capacity, and prepare a recommended strategy
       to assist government in addressing the identified weaknesses. As the result of the study, a
       capacity development plan will be prepared that will act as a roadmap for intervention by
       government and other stakeholders in building Uganda’s human capacity to meet the needs
       of the oil and gas sector. Key areas of focus will include development of the curriculum
       plan; defining the role of public and private institutions in the implementation of the
       curriculum; preparation of the development plans for key public institutions responsible
       for development of petroleum-related skills; recommendations of upgrading the UPIK into
       a Center of Excellence in the oil and gas sector; and strategies for collaboration between
       different stakeholders.

      Roundtable Dinners on National Content. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the World
       Bank has supported a cycle of roundtable dinners in Kampala for a selected group of key
       national content stakeholders.

      Working Group on the Establishment of the IEC. As mentioned earlier in this chapter,
       the World Bank has been part of the working group on the establishment of the Industry
       Enhancement Center. The working group also includes PEPD, MITC and three IOCs.

2.5 OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

180. The analysis conducted in this chapter has demonstrated that oil and gas suppliers in
Uganda, especially MSMEs, are facing many challenges. These include lack of information on
opportunities in the oil and gas sector; business environment unconducive to private sector growth;
challenges with access to credit; inadequate infrastructure; difficulties with meeting IOC quality
standards; difficulties with meeting high volume/quantity requirements; limited business
knowledge of suppliers; and other constraints.

181. At the same time, the number of local content initiatives in Uganda to alleviate these
constraints is rather large and content diverse. It is rewarding to see that the GoU, the IOCs
and other stakeholders have made a significant effort to ensure that Ugandans can participate in
the oil and gas industry. Table 9 below provides mapping of constraints identified for participation
of Ugandans in the oil and gas sector against ongoing initiatives.




                                                69
    Table 9. Mapping of Constraints in the Oil and Gas Sector vs. Ongoing Initiatives

#         Constraints           Ongoing Initiatives             Additional Support Required
1   Information                -JVPs initiative to        - PEPD to ensure that information is
    asymmetries (lack of       communicate demand         communicated to suppliers in due course.
    visibility          over   - Working Group on         Establishment of a website with oil and
    projected      demand,     the establishment of       gas opportunities could be quite useful.
    timeline of different      the IEC comprising of      Information could also be sent to mobile
    phases of oil field        the GoU, JVPs and          phones of suppliers who signed up for
    development,         and   international donors       such a service to ensure that MSMEs can
    current opportunities                                 get information quickly
    in oil and gas for local                              - Ensure that the IEC is established and
    suppliers, especially                                 becomes operational
    MSMEs)                                                - Particular attention needs to be devoted
                                                          to making sure that suppliers in the very
                                                          bottom of the supply chain (e.g., MSMEs)
                                                          are aware of opportunities and able to
                                                          participate in the oil and gas industry
2   Challenges with access     - Discussions              - Access to finance challenges of suppliers
    to investment and          regarding the              can be alleviated through establishing
    working capital for oil    establishment of the       risk-sharing facilities, availing credit lines
    and gas suppliers          partial credit risk        for working and investment capital,
                               guarantee fund             carrying our pension system reform,
                               - Efforts of the GoU,      strengthening financial infrastructure, and
                               JVPs and international     capacity-building of enterprises and
                               donors to establish the    financial institutions
                               IEC which would            - Opportunities need to be explored to
                               provide assistance to      assist local suppliers in forming joint
                               suppliers           with   ventures with foreign companies
                               preparation of business    - Opportunities need to be explored for
                               plans to apply for         IFC investments in qualified suppliers
                               financing, among other     meeting IFC investment requirements
                               things
3   High quality standards     - Establishment of         - Capacity of the TC16 members needs to
    of the oil and gas         TC16                       be strengthened to ensure that the process
    industry and lack of       - Efforts of the GoU,      is completed in the near term
    consistency     among      JVPs and international     - Matching grants need to be provided to
    standards of the JVPs      donors to establish the    enterprises in priority sectors for national
    operating in Uganda        IEC                        content     development       to     acquire
                                                          certifications
4   Challenging business Support       provided           More support is needed to improve
    environment          through         CEDP             important      aspects      of     business
                         business environment             environment in order to alleviate
                         and               land           constraints
                         administration reform
                         components

                                                 70
5    Inadequate                Support        provided   - More support is needed to remove
     infrastructure            through the Albertine     bottlenecks throughout the country.
                               Region     Sustainable    - Essential infrastructure needs to be built
                               Development Project       in the Albertine Region
6    Lack of skilled oil and   - Efforts of the GoU,     - IEC needs to be established to provide
     gas workers and low       JVPs and international    capacity-building to enterprises.
     capacity of oil and gas   donors to establish the   - Efforts need to be devoted to attracting
     suppliers                 IEC                       international companies to set up
                               - Skills Development      operations in Uganda and form joint
                               Project                   ventures with local companies to facilitate
                               - Capacity Needs          technology transfer
                               Analysis for the Oil      - Capacity-building needs to be provided
                               and Gas Sector in         to BDS providers (trainers, consultants) to
                               Uganda                    strengthen their capabilities and provide
                               - Establishment of        more practical value to the MSMEs
                               UPIK
7    Award of contracts has    PEPD        undertakes    - Capacity of PEPD for monitoring of
     not always been fair      audits after contracts    contract awards needs to be increased in
     (from the standpoint of   were     awarded     to   terms of both number of staff and
     local suppliers)          determine if there were   robustness of the process
                               any irregularities        - Monitoring needs to be performed at
                                                         different stages of procurement process to
                                                         ensure that appropriate procedures are
                                                         followed and appropriate remedial actions
                                                         are taken in a timely manner

8    Contracts are very -                                - Regulations need to ensure full, fair, and
     large which prevents                                reasonable access to procurement
     smaller local suppliers                             opportunities for domestic suppliers
     from bidding for them                               - Efforts need to be made to unbundle
     (even when they are                                 large contracts to enable more suppliers to
     qualified technically)                              compete

182. As evidenced by the analysis presented in the table, most of the constraints are
currently being addressed but for several constraints significant additional support is
required. For instance, capacity of PEPD needs to be strengthened to perform monitoring of
contract awards, more support needs to be provided to build essential infrastructure in the Albertine
Region, and efforts need to be undertaken to ensure that the industry enhancement center is
designed and operational. Initiatives also need to be undertaken to address access to finance
constraints.

183. It would be important to ensure that access to finance is significantly improved for oil
and gas suppliers in Uganda to enable local enterprises to participate in this sector as
suppliers. The array of instruments to mobilize funding for O&G suppliers, especially long-term,
needs to be considered by the GoU.


                                                 71
184. Given that there are different categories of suppliers in Uganda 60 , it would be
important to structure interventions which would benefit all of them. On the one hand, it
would be possible to channel credit lines through participating banks to provide funding to the
qualified borrowers. These would largely be less risky medium-sized borrowers and some
qualified small enterprises with well-prepared business plans.

185. Although the banking system currently does not have a challenge with funding
qualified borrowers, banks do recognize that the funding they could provide would be only
short-term. The greatest benefit of the credit line for the borrowers would be from the standpoint
of longer maturity, to enable them to make larger investments, for instance in food processing
plants. Another significant benefit would be prioritization of certain sectors for receiving
financing, which would otherwise not be serviced by banks due to multiple reasons (e.g., lack of
knowledge of particular sectors and challenges with assessing the risks of financing).

186. In parallel with these immediate initiatives, additional reforms could be undertaken
to increase the availability of long-term finance. Support can be provided for pension system
reform: a well-functioning pension system remains the cornerstone for the development of longer-
term financing for private investment. The development of capital markets and non-bank financial
institutions would be very important to increase the availability of long-term finance. Finally,
strengthening of the bank regulation and supervision would be essential from the standpoint of
safeguarding the banking system from negative consequences of higher credit growth and
increasing trust of the population in the banking system, which would lead to mobilization of
deposits from the population, including for longer maturity.

187. To address the needs of smaller borrowers, a risk-sharing facility could be set up. It
would provide an opportunity for enterprises which do not have enough collateral to obtain the
funding. As MSMEs usually lack collateral (especially immovable), they would greatly benefit
from this fund. There could be an opportunity to link the risk-sharing facility to the credit line (i.e.,
businesses which benefit from the risk-sharing facility would be able to received financing via a
credit line).

188. The IEC could play a significant role in supporting local enterprises in securing
financing. The center would provide trainings to strengthen the ability of enterprises to apply for
loans and potentially collaborate with financial institutions to provide financing to successful
“graduates” of the program and help to develop a pipeline of clients ready for IFC investment or
credit lines.

189. Besides addressing the general constraints for all oil and gas suppliers (e.g.,
improvement of business climate, enhancement of visibility of demand from the IOCs), it is
also important to identify priority sectors for development of the national content and design
interventions to address their constraints. Vertical interventions which benefit priority sectors

60
   Suppliers could be grouped into 4 main categories: (1) large established companies (for example, large agro-
processors) which meet IOC quantity and quality requirements; (2) medium companies which are well established but
need significant investment to upgrade their equipment to meet IOC standards; (3) MSMEs which have some positive
attributes to perform services and produce goods required by the IOCs but lack management capacity and ability to
produce in large quantities; and (4) MSMEs which currently lack capacity to supply the IOCs.

                                                       72
could help to achieve more impact as they are more focused. These can be infrastructure
investments in certain key areas, enhancement of quality infrastructure for particular industries
and other interventions. IBS has already identified priority sectors for national content
development, and it would be essential to structure interventions which could address their
constraints.

190. It is important to develop a strategy to facilitate labor mobility and development of
intersectoral linkages for the periods after the construction phase comes to an end and
demand from the IOCs significantly goes down. When selecting priority sectors, focus needs to
be on those sectors which can supply other industries (not only oil and gas) and/or other countries.
There will be a number of infrastructure projects in Uganda and other countries in the region, and
there is a high likelihood that these suppliers will continue to operate their businesses successfully
as their goods and services will be competitive. The expectations of the local enterprises will need
to be properly managed to ensure that they realize that IOC demand for products and services will
only be for a finite period of time and they need to diversify their client base as much as possible
from the start.

191. Another imperative consideration is selection of priority regions for national content
development. Overall, we would expect that suppliers from Kampala will play the leading role in
terms of supplying the oil and gas industry, as the range of businesses in this area is quite diverse.
The IEC would be expected to be headquartered in Kampala to accommodate entrepreneurs
located in the capital and nearby districts. At the same time, satellite centers would be set up on
one or several districts of the Albertine Region where oil fields are being developed to ensure
active participation of enterprises in those districts in supplying the oil camps.

192. Similar approach was taken by a number of other countries which set up enterprise
development centers. For example, in Chad the main center was located in the capital N’Djamena
with satellite centers in Doba, Moundou and Sahr in the South. Setting up the main center in the
capital helps to ensure sustainability. Once the demand from the oil sector goes down, the center
can serve other industries, and its location in the capital where multiple industries are present
facilitates this transition. Following the decline in oil related activities, the center in Chad later
became a unit of the chamber of commerce. A similar approach can be pursued in Uganda. In the
beginning, the center will focus on the oil industry but once the demand starts declining, focus can
be placed on other emerging industries.

193. The possibilities for extensively involving the private sector of the Albertine Region
in the oil industry as suppliers need to be explored. The population in the Albertine region is
primarily involved in agriculture and therefore opportunities to involve them need be primarily
explored in supplying food to the oil camps. Interventions need to be designed to alleviate
infrastructure bottlenecks and develop capacity of these suppliers. The next chapter provides a
detailed analysis of constraints faced by suppliers in the Albertine Region and proposes several
approaches to maximize participation of the region in supplying the oil camps.




                                                 73
     CHAPTER 3. VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS OF AGRICULTURE AND
                          FISHERIES
3.1 CURRENT STATE OF THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR IN UGANDA

Overview

194. Uganda is a predominantly an agricultural economy in which agricultural production
comes almost exclusively from millions of rural based smallholders, mostly working on 2-3
hectares of land, using traditional methods of cultivation and family labor. The sector is
central to Uganda’s economic growth and the reduction of poverty, employing more than 70
percent of the total labor force and contributing more than 21 percent to GDP. Although its share
of GDP has been declining, the sector remains vitally important to the functioning of the economy
as it provides the basis for growth in other sectors such as manufacturing and services. It is a source
of food supply and raw materials, a supplier of foreign exchange, a market for non-agricultural
output and a source of surplus for investment61.The sector also has the potential to significantly
increase its contribution to economic growth and poverty eradication, as it is the main economic
activity in which the vast majority of rural households in Uganda are engaged.

195. Global evidence suggests that growth originating from agriculture is more effective
in raising incomes of the poorest third of the population than that from non-agricultural
activities. The reduction in rural poverty from more than 60 to 29 percent between 1992 and 2010
was driven by agriculture62. Further research has revealed that countries may not be able to sustain
a rapid transition out of poverty without increasing agricultural productivity63. For Uganda this
transformation is even more critical since agriculture is the primary source of livelihood for the
majority of the labor force. However, it is a major concern for the GoU that production and
productivity in most of the crop sub-sectors remains low, leading to poor returns to farmers. The
low productivity in the sector has also exacerbated the problem of food insecurity and
malnutrition.64

Food Crops Sub-sector

196. According to the results of the Agricultural Census 2008/09, Uganda grows 17 major
food crops. These crops include cereals (maize, millet, sorghum, rice); root crops (cassava, sweet
potatoes, Irish potatoes); pulses (beans, cow peas, field peas, pigeon peas); oil crops (groundnuts,
soya beans, simsim), and plantain bananas (food, beer, sweet types)65.The total area planted in
2012 for the above crops was 5,729,000 ha. Production volumes of select food crops (per UBOS)
are presented in the Table 10 below.



61
   MAAIF, 2008
62
   WB, Inclusive growth, 2012
63
   Timmer & Akkins, 2008 cited in WB, Inclusive growth, 2012
64
   Ministry of Finance, Planning & Economic Development, National Budget Framework F/Y 2014/15, June 2014
65
   UBOS, 2013

                                                    74
      Table 10. Production of Select Food Crops in Uganda, 2008-2012 (thousand tons)

Crop                                2008              2009              2010              2011               2012
Bananas                            4,229             4,522             4,694             4,699              4,503
Maize                              2,315             2,355             2,374             2,551              2,734
Rice                                 178               206               218               233                212
Millet                               275               250               268               257                244
Sweet potatoes                     1,794             1,943             1,987             1,798              1,852
Irish potatoes                       147               162               167               180                185
Cassava                            2,876             2,952             3,017             2,712              2,807
Beans                                912               925               949               915                870
Ground nuts                          230               258               276               327                295

197. About 49 percent of the food produced in Uganda is marketed or bartered for
subsistence consumption outside the market system. The major cash crops for the economy are:
coffee (accounting for 272,000 ha and generating about US$300 million per annum), cotton
(previously the main export crop, earning up to US$30 million a year), tea (grown on 20,570 ha,
but mostly for export markets earning about US$30 million a year), tobacco (grown on 11,590 ha
and now earning over US$10 million a year), sugar cane (grown almost exclusively for the local
market) and cocoa (which is a relatively new crop).

198. Growing regional export markets, rising incomes and rapid urbanization have
entrenched a large potential for enhancing agricultural production and productivity in
Uganda. However, in spite of the commitment of significant public resources to exploit this
potential, the agricultural sector has continued to perform below expectations growing on average
at 4.1 percentage points lower than the national economy since 2007 66. A major factor in this
disappointing performance according to the GoU is that smallholder farmers who dominate this
sector face many constraints including unpredictable climate, poor quality inputs, pests and
diseases, inadequate storage, lack of relevant knowledge and the use of inappropriate technology,
all of which undermine the quantity and quality of their produce resulting into lack of stability of
their household incomes.

199. The disappointing performance also implies that existing agribusiness arrangements
have failed to expand and invest in more mechanized processing of agricultural commodities,
resulting in low value addition and low output growth in the sector. The proportion of
Uganda’s agricultural commodities that undergo processing is believed to be less than 5 percent67.
Accordingly, there is need to develop well-functioning integrated value chains for agricultural
commodities, which requires structures that facilitate the alignment of agricultural produce at the
local level to the production facilities of agribusinesses. The key policy objectives that the
agricultural sector is seeking to achieve in the medium term include increasing incomes of farming
households; creating on-farm and off-farm employment opportunities; promoting value-addition
to agricultural products and promoting domestic and external trade in agricultural products.


66
  Ministry of Finance Planning & Economic Development, Background to the Budget 2013/14, June 2013
67
  Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Agricultural Sector Development Strategy Investment
Plan: 2010/11 – 2014/15, July 2010

                                                       75
Horticultural Sub-sector

200. With increasing demand in both the local and export markets, fruit and vegetable
production in Uganda has been increasing over the years, and has reached a level where the
country is the second largest producer of fresh fruits and vegetables (FFVs) in SSA,
producing more than 1.1 million tons per year. Most fruits and vegetables are grown by
smallholder farmers under rain-fed conditions and, as the result, the seasonality in production
sometimes affects supply. Due to good soils and a favorable climate, Uganda has the potential to
produce a wide range of fruits and vegetables for the larger part of the year.

201. At present, fruit production is purely in the hands of smallholder farmers in the
Southern, Central and Eastern regions. Pineapples are by far the most developed and widely
grown commodity in the fruit crop range and value chain in Uganda.

202. Most of Uganda’s FFVs are exported to the EU, in particular to Belgium and the
Netherlands. The variety of value added fruits in Uganda include pre-cut, sliced, proportioned,
pre-packed and juice processing fruits which are most preferred in European markets. The key
players in the export of fruits and vegetable from the country include Flona Commodities; Fruits
of the Nile; Envalert Uganda; Amfri Farms and Jali Oganic (U) Ltd. Amfri Farms exports both
fresh and dried fruits and vegetables while the other four exporters mainly deal with dried fruits.

203. There are a number of challenges faced by the sector. They include unpredictable
weather, poor transport infrastructure, weak pest and disease control, and lack of appropriate
packaging facilities.

Livestock Sub-sector

204. The livestock sub-sector makes a significant contribution to the agriculture sector and
the Ugandan economy as a whole, contributing 5 percent to the GDP and 18 percent to the
agriculture GDP. While the agriculture sector as a whole has been declining overtime, the
livestock sub-sector has maintained a steady growth at around 3 percent per annum. According to
the UBOS, the sector is comprised of cattle, poultry, goats, sheep and pigs with an estimated
population of 12.8 million cattle, 45.9 million poultry, 14.0 million goats, 3.8 million sheep and
3.6 million pigs.

205. Cattle farming, which is largely subsistence, is the largest livestock enterprise in
Uganda for both diary and meat production. It supports an estimated 1.7 million households as
a source of food as well as household income.

206. Most of the meat consumed in Uganda is sold through roadside markets and market
stall butcheries, which handle about 130,000 tons accounting for about 80 percent of all retail
sales of meat in the country. There is a general consensus that the quantities of beef demanded
in Uganda are much higher than what the market is supplying. Consumption of beef in Uganda is
estimated at 6 kg per person per annum, which is very low compared to other countries in the
region like South Africa (14 kg), and Kenya (12 kg).



                                                76
207. The formal market selling processed meat is dominated by a single company, Fresh
Cuts. It offers a full range of meat products including prime cuts, plastic packed retail cuts,
sausages, ham, and minced meat all products being available in both chilled and frozen form. Fresh
Cuts controls about 85 percent of Kampala’s processed meat market68. The other firms dealing in
processed beef are Sausage King and Your Choice, with about 15 percent of the market share.

208. The dairy industry is based largely on smallholder farmers who produce for home
consumption selling to the market the little surplus that remains (estimated at 1.3 billion
liters in 2011). The dairy industry has maintained an impressive growth of 8 to 10 percent per
annum over the last several years, which could have been higher had it not been for the barriers
inhibiting productivity enhancement.

209. Up to 90 percent of the milk traded in Uganda is handled by the informal sector
making unprocessed milk the most commonly consumed dairy product in the country.
Processed milk which is mainly traded in urban centers is distributed through supermarkets and
grocery shops, and is dominated by pasteurized milk accounting for more than 80 percent of all
processed milk products sold.

210. The main actors in the formal sector include Sameer Agriculture & Livestock Ltd
(SALL), JESA and GBK producing 375,000, 30,000 and 20,000 liters per day respectively.
Their installed capacity significantly exceeds production (for instance, for Sameer Agriculture &
Livestock Ltd, installed capacity is 550,000 liters per day and production is only 375,000)69.

211. Chicken rearing is the main type of poultry production in Uganda, accounting for 95
percent of all poultry. The enterprise is an active source of livelihood for about 3.2 million
households. The major actors among the large scale chicken producers include Ugachick,
Biyinzika, Bukomo and Kagodo who among themselves control 80 percent of the market. There
is only one commercial slaughter house in Uganda owned by Ugachick in Kampala.

Fisheries Sub-sector

212. The fisheries sector is the second most important foreign exchange earner after coffee,
with investments estimated at US$ 200 million and more than US$100 million worth in
exports annually (Table 11). More than 15 percent of Uganda’s surface area is covered by open
water dominated by five major lakes namely Victoria, Albert, Kyoga, Edward and George. These
lakes are home to the country’s main fishing grounds supporting a population of more than 1.2
million (UBOS, 2013).

           Table 11: Exports of fish & fish products during the period 2009 – 201270

                Year                    2008      2009      2010      2011      2012
                Value (USD Millions)   128.7     111.2     127.7     136.2     128.3


68
   Agriterra, 2012
69
   Ibid
70
   UBOS

                                               77
213. Lake Victoria, the largest tropical lake and second largest fresh water lake in the
world contributed 46 percent of the annual catch in 2012, followed by Lake Albert with 38
percent of the catch (152,600) (Table 12). There are more than 350 fish species in the national
waters, dominated by Nile perch and Tilapia. The fishing activity is artisanal, mainly based on
small vessels and the traditional dug-out canoe.

       Table 12: Fish Catch by Water Body, during the Period 2009-2012 (tons ‘000s)71

            Lake                                         2009     2010       2011    2012
            Victoria                                    221.3        0      169.8   185.2
            Albert                                       56.5        0      163.6   152.6
            Kyoga                                          60        0       63.7      44
            Edward, George & Kazinga Channel              8.8        0        6.7     5.2
            Other Waters                                   20        0       17.8    16.5
            Total                                       366.6        0      421.6   403.5

214. Although fish exports from the national waters enjoyed a steep rise in the 90s, from a
modest 1,664 tons in 1991 to a high of 39,201 tons in 2005, the trend has since peaked and a
worrying downward trend set in, dropping to a low of 24,965 tons in 2008 . The downward
trend has been blamed on illegal fishing gear catching fish that is too immature for commercial
processing. A survey of the informal fish trade by the Bank of Uganda and UBOS in 2007 72
indicated that fish worth US$33 million was exported informally to the neighboring countries of
DRC, Sudan, Kenya and Rwanda in 2006 alone. Fish was ranked highest (14 percent) among all
informally traded goods from Uganda in that year (National Development Plan (NDP), 2010).

215. Uganda has a number of fish processing factories. There are twenty approved and
certified fish processing factories, out of which eighteen process chilled and frozen fish products
for export, while two process cured fishery products (smoked, salted and sun dried) for export.
There are also five registered small scale processing units that handle fish by products, mostly
dried fish maws destined mainly to Asian countries and the Middle East. There are also two cold
stores at the airport offering cold chain facilities just before freight or shipment.

216. Due to declining fish stocks, financial constraints and other factors, out of the twenty
certified fish processing factories, three have completely closed down while the remaining
processors are operating at 30 percent of installed capacity73. Some of the key players in the
fish processing sub-sector include Byansi fisheries Co. Ltd.; Fish Ways (U) Ltd.; Fresh Water Fish
Industries Ltd; Gomba Fishing Industries Ltd.; Greenfields Uganda Ltd; Icemark-Africa Ltd.; and
Tropical Fish Industries Ltd.

217.    The main barriers inhibiting competitiveness in the sector include:

     a) Trade in immature fish, which creates demand for under-age fish, exerting pressure on
        the resource.
71
   Ibid
72
   UBOS and Bank of Uganda (BOU), Informal Cross Boarder Trade (ICBT), Nov 2008
73
   Department of Fishery Resources Annual Report, 2010/11

                                                   78
     b) Dwindling catches: As a result of over-fishing among other issues, the catch from the
        national waters has been declining over the years.

218. Since 2003, some actions have been taken to address these constraints. Fisheries
management has shifted from a “command and control” mode by the center to a system based on
recognizing the role that communities can play. In this regard, co-management institutions have
been put in place. Such institutions include Lake Management Organizations established on Lakes
Kyoga and George and some 630 Beach Management Units established and legally recognized on
the lakes.

Aquaculture
219. Despite its long history dating back to the early 1950s, fish farming in Uganda has not
developed beyond the small subsistence scale. Smallholder farmers are still the most important
actors in the aquaculture sub-sector in Uganda. While 80 percent of them started fish farming after
the year 2000, most of the farms are earthen pond based, with the vast majority of the ponds
covering an area of 100-500 square meters 74 . The Department of Fishery Resources (DFR)
estimates that there are 25,000 fish ponds in the country, covering about 10,000 hectares with an
annual production of ~100,000 tons 75 . According to the NDP and the Agriculture Sector
Development Strategy and Investment Plan (DSIP), fish farming presents immense opportunities
for the country’s socio-economic development in terms of livelihood, income and employment.

220.     There are several barriers to enhancing competitiveness of the sub-sector:

        Use of inefficient production systems: According to data collected at the Kajjansi
         Aquaculture Research Centre, while cage farming was found to yield up to 100 kg per cub
         meter, the yield of pond farming was only 0.2 kg per cub meter76. While ponds are still
         widely used in many parts of the world and can be productive if they are well constructed
         and well managed, in Uganda, ponds tend to be scattered and are far from each other
         making it difficult to disseminate new knowledge, and coordinate production and
         marketing.
        Lack of knowledge: Modern aquaculture is a high-technology activity and investors must
         get the right advice before starting fish farming. In the past, fish farmers in Uganda have
         fallen in the trap of believing ‘consultants’ and newspaper reports that indicated that fish
         farming requires little investment and results in huge profits.77
        Subsistence production: The current mode of aquaculture production is smallholder-
         dominated and non-market oriented, leading to low production and low productivity.
         Consequently, despite its existing potential, the current level of aquaculture production is
         not able to meet the local as well as the external market demand78.


74
   Aganyira Kellen, Aquaculture: A Tool for Sustainable Development in Uganda. A Case study of Kigoowa
Catholic Women’s Development Association in Kampala District, 2005
75
   DFR Annual Report, 2010/2011
76
   Rutaisire, et al., African Journal of Tropical Hydrobiology and Fisheries 12: 74-77, Lake Victoria Fisheries
Organisation, 2009
77
   USAID FISH Project, Manual for pond production of Catfish, Dec 2009
78
   National Investment Policy for Aquaculture Parks in Uganda, 2013

                                                         79
221. Aquaculture parks are a possible model for improving this situation and they could
be employed to achieve a critical level of production capable of meeting market demand .
Under this approach, farmers are encouraged to own fish farms individually but in the same
location in order to achieve economies of scale, synchronized programing and well planned and
predictable production.

222. There have been some recent initiatives to promote aquaculture in Uganda. Under its
Agriculture Sector Development and Investment Plan, GoU has set a goal of meeting the country’s
fish requirements through increased aquaculture production from the current level of about
100,000 tons to a projected 300,000 tons by 201679. As part of the roadmap for achieving this
target, GoU intends to create ‘concentrated aquaculture production areas’ known as Aquaculture
Parks (APs). This will create production thresholds that are required to overcome the major
constraints and challenges that have resulted in under performance of the aquaculture subsector,
including lack of requisite input supply industry and markets. The existing policy framework
recognizes the PPPs as the most viable vehicle to move predominantly subsistence aquaculture
production to commercial production. The Aquaculture Parks Investment Policy is based on the
projected local, regional and international market demand for fish in the context of increasing
market share of Uganda’s fish.

3.2 CURRENT STATE OF THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR IN THE ALBERTINE REGION

Overview
223. The economy of the Albertine region where the oil discoveries have been made
depends on agriculture, tourism and fishing. The region’s economy is heavily reliant on
agriculture (involving over 90 percent of the population). The region, like most of the country, is
endowed with a good climate, good soils, and favorable rainfall patterns able to support two crops
a year. The map of the region is presented in Figure 6 below.

224. As is the case in the rest of Uganda, the majority of the region’s farmers are
smallholders. They are growing tobacco, cotton and tea as the dominant cash crops, and maize,
cassava, beans, groundnuts, and bananas as the dominant food crops that are also often sold for
cash income. Compared to the national average of 31 percent in 2005, poverty levels in the region
are rather high. Kibaale, Hoima, and Buliisa districts have 35.8 percent, 35.2 percent, and 33.8
percent of their populations respectively living below the poverty line. The total population for the
five districts in the sub-region was estimated at 2.08 million in 2013 (Table 13).




79
     Mugabira, M., et al, National Investment Policy for Aquaculture Parks in Uganda, 2013

                                                         80
                                      Figure 6. Map of Bunyoro Sub-Region80




     Table 13: Bunyoro Sub-region Mid-Year Projected Population for 2011, 2012 & 201381




80
     Source: http://www.bunyoro-kitara.org/5
81
     UBOS

                                                    81
Food Crops Sub-sector
225. By Ugandan standards, the districts of the Albertine region produce a significant
volume of food. While Kibaale appears to be the largest producer of food in the region, leading
the other districts in the production of crops like bananas, beans, groundnuts and Irish potatoes,
the other districts perform much better in the production of other crops, e.g. Masindi with maize,
Hoima with cassava and rice (Table 14)82.

     Table 14. Food Produced by the Districts of the Albertine Region – 2008/9 (metric tons)83

     Food crop              Buliisa             Hoima               Kibaale         Masindi         Total
     Maize                             12,952            38,372            60,529          61,715        173,568
     Rice                                 -              10,911             2,917             811         14,639
     Cassava                           27,748            60,932            48,094          39,515        176,289
     Bananas                              114             9,846            64,217           2,967         77,144
     Sweet potatoes                       837            26,838            15,239          14,786         57,700
     Irish Potatoes                       -               2,024             4,165           1,131          7,320
     Beans                                856             2,751            36,608          20,045         60,260
     Groundnuts                            56             3,778            12,473           7,708         24,015
     Total                            42,563           155,452           244,242         148,678        590,935
     % of total                            7%               26%               41%             25%          100%

226. The performance of the region’s districts compares well with the other districts both
in the Western region and at the national level. According to the 2008/09 Agricultural Census,
the districts of Hoima and Kibaale were ranked 1st and 2nd largest producers of rice, and at the
same time, Kibaale and Masindi districts were ranked 1st and 2nd largest producers of ground nuts
among all the 19 districts of the Western region. Under the same census, Hoima, Kibaale and
Masindi were ranked 1st, 4th and 5th largest producers of cassava, and in addition, Kibaale and
Masindi were ranked 2nd and 3rd largest producers of maize in the Western region.

227. Food production in the Albertine region is mainly in the hands of smallholder
farmers. Their primary focus is production for home consumption, taking to the market the little
surplus, if any that remains, to raise funds with which to finance other household needs that have
to be paid for in cash.

228. Some NGOs as well as Government programs such as the National Agricultural
Advisory Services (NAADS), have over the years tried to instill in the community the need
to undertake farming as a business with a view to encouraging communities to not just be
content with meeting home consumption needs but to aim at expanding the acreage under their
food crops in order to increase their surplus and ultimately their household incomes. As a result of
these efforts, some households within the communities covered by these programs have undergone
a paradigm shift and have increased the acreage under their food crops. In addition to expanding

82
     In this table, Kiryandongo district is covered under Masindi
83
     UBOS

                                                            82
the acreage under their food crops, some farmers endeavor to add value to their produce by
engaging in some form of primary processing before taking it to the market. However, the vast
majority are happy to sell their produce in its raw form, in some cases selling the produce when it
is still in the field before it is harvested, leading to very low returns, thereby compromising the
opportunity to maximize their household income. A review of the sector’s existing value chains is
presented in Annex 7.

229. The main barriers to enhancing competitiveness in the sub-sector include:
unpredictable weather; low use of improved seed; low use of fertilizers both organic and inorganic;
lack of access to tractor hire service; lack of access to finance; poor transport infrastructure; poor
pest and disease control and lack of suitable storage facilities.

230. There are a number of ongoing initiatives aimed at addressing barriers to enhancing
competitiveness. These include the following:

          Irrigation: GoU has invested in a number of major irrigation schemes across the country
           and is setting up 30 small scale irrigation demonstration sites in different parts of the
           country, including one in Buliisa.
          Use of improved seed: GoU supports the use of improved seeds and has been trying to
           ensure availability of improved seed through NAADS.
          Use of fertilizers: GoU supports the use of fertilizers and is in the process of finalizing the
           fertilizer policy and regulations; procurement of fertilizer laboratory analytical equipment;
           conducting field trials of different fertilizers; developing fertilizer user guidelines.
          Other production and post-harvest handling related barriers: GoU supports the
           improvement of post-harvest handling and mechanization of value addition processes for
           strategic cereals and legumes, root crops and tubers.
          Lack of power: The Rural Electrification Strategy (2013-2022) plans to extend energy
           supply to rural areas and small towns. The increase in energy supply will significantly
           enhance the growth of rural agro-processing industries which are currently affected by
           insufficient availability of power.
          Lack of access to markets: GoU has taken measures to address the constraints to market
           access. For example, through CAIIP (Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement
           Program), GoU has increased community and district roads in 68 sub-counties of 31
           districts across the country.
          Improving storage infrastructure: In order to improve the impact of price fluctuations,
           improvements in postharvest handling, particularly access to storage facilities, have been
           prioritized by supporting private-sector solutions to develop both domestic granaries and
           commercial warehouses.84
231. In addition to the initiatives mentioned above, the GoU plans to further strengthen
interventions in the sector in the financial year 2014/15 and beyond . Some of the planned
initiatives include encouraging smallholders to aim at producing a surplus so as to increase returns
to small holder farming; encouraging large scale crop production and value addition among
medium and large scale farmers; and leveraging and facilitating agriculture using the value chain


84
     Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, Background to the Budget 2012/13

                                                       83
approach to ensure that agribusinesses create productive jobs, enhance export diversification and
increase household incomes.85

Horticulture Crops Sub-sector
232. As is the case with the food crops sector, the growing of FFVs in the Albertine region
is largely the occupation of smallholder farmers. The performance and prospects for the
horticulture sub-sector were best summarized by a member of the Nalweyo farmers forum during
a focus group meeting when he stated that “… anything can grow here, we just grow what is
demanded by the market”. True to the statement by the Nalweyo farmers forum, due to the fertile
soils and the good climate in the Albertine region, and in particular the favorable rainfall patterns,
the region can produce vast quantities of fruits and vegetables if there is a guaranteed market and
the roads are passable. The vast majority of these farmers sell their fresh produce in its raw form.

233. In order to help small business grasp business opportunities coming from the oil
exploration and production in the Albertine region, Tullow Oil, in partnership with UIA,
provided support to Traidlinks. Traidlinks is an NGO in the Hoima district supporting enterprise
development and agriculture supply chain activities. Traidlinks has provided support to the Hoima
District Farmers Association (HODFA), and as a result of its efforts, a number of farmers who are
members of HODFA have gained a rare opportunity to build up their capacity to supply Tullow’s
camps with fruits and vegetables.

234. Traidlinks has shown some good results in building up farmers' associations and
connecting them with oil companies. Under this project, member farmers receive inputs
including improved seedlings as well as approved fertilizers on favorable credit terms. In addition
to improved access to inputs, the project has put in place a system of collection centers that provide
storage services within easy reach. The project also provides extension services to participating
farmers.

235. According to Ernst & Young report, by December 2013, the Traidlinks project had
provided over 25 tons of fresh produce to Tullow oil camps, 10 collection centers had been
established, new products were being developed, and around 600 farmers had been trained
in business skills and quality assurance86. Given the relative success of its agricultural activities,
Traidlinks is now supporting a new enterprise development project which aims at linking suppliers
of non-agriculture related products and services to the oil camps, including laundry, cleaning,
compound maintenance, and others. Please see Annex 8 for more information on Traidlinks.

236. So far, Traidlinks remains the sole initiative in Uganda aimed at linking Albertine
region suppliers to oil opportunities in a systematic manner. Originally it was meant to be a
pilot to be scaled up to other districts of the Albertine region. As described above, different districts
in the Albertine Region lead in the production of different food types, and therefore it would be
highly beneficial to establish similar centers in other districts besides Hoima. Kibaale is the overall
leader in food crop production in the region (and leader in terms of population), so having a center
there would be quite desirable. Unfortunately, due to the lack of funding, the scale up did not take

85
     Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, Background to the Budget 2012/13
86
     Agricultural Supply Chain Project- Hoima, Uganda. Ernst and Young Report. December 2013

                                                       84
place and Traidlinks was not able to expand activities. As the result, the organization has been able
to achieve only a modest impact.

237. At present, Traidlinks has only been able to link farmers to the Tullow oil camps
(which is not surprising given that Tullow is partly funding the initiative). Although there has
been some recent progress made in negotiations with CNOOC’s catering service to start supplying
some food for their camps, negotiations with Total so far have not been successful. Even with
Tullow, only the most basic food products have been supplied (e.g., vegetables, fruits), while there
has been no success yet in its attempts to venture into supplies of meat, dairy, fish etc. due to a
number of obstacles (e.g., absence of adequate supporting infrastructure, inadequate standards).
The situation is complicated by the fact that the IOCs’ procurement departments themselves are
not involved in procurement of food supplies for their camps, and this function is outsourced to
their catering service contractors. Although IOCs ensure that contracts with catering companies
include clauses providing for domestic procurement, there approaches so far do not appear to be
very effective.

238. Apart from the few farmers mobilized by HODFA, the range of fruits and vegetables
produced by the local private sector in the region for the market is still very narrow . While
the subcounties accessing the oil camps market may appear to be performing better than the others
in terms of quality and quantities produced, it does not mean that the other subcounties are not able
to perform to that standard if they are provided necessary training. Smallholders participating in
the HODFA arrangement have been equipped with the knowledge and skills needed to perform to
a reasonable standard and have also been receiving extension support during the process of
growing their produce. As a result, their produce is presented to the oil camps at a much higher
standard than is the case with the produce coming from non-participating farmers.

239. Some of the challenges faced by smallholders in the FFVs sub-sector are similar to
the ones experienced under the food crops sub-sector, albeit, with varying degrees of impact.
The main barriers to enhancing competitiveness in the sector include low use of improved seed
and seedlings; low use of fertilizers; lack of access to tractor hire service; lack of access to finance;
unpredictable weather; poor transport infrastructure; poor pest and disease control and lack of
suitable storage facilities.

Livestock Sub-sector
240. The districts of the Albertine region appear to be performing well with regard to
numbers of livestock kept. Communal grazing and agro-pastoralism are the main livestock
production systems used in the region.

241. Masindi, followed by Kibaale, is leading the other districts in terms of cattle and goats
kept (Table 15). With regard to piggery and poultry, Kibaale and Masindi respectively lead the
other districts followed by Hoima in both cases. According to the 2008/09 Agricultural Census,
the districts of the Albertine Region performed best in the Western region in the production of
chicken and pigs with Masindi, Hoima and Kibaale attaining a rank of 1st, 2nd and 3rd largest
producers of chicken respectively, and at the same time Kibaale, Hoima and Masindi attaining a
ranking of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd largest producers of pigs in the region. According to recent projections,
the region’s numbers of livestock kept have continued to grow since the 2008/09 Census, with the

                                                   85
number of cattle in Hoima and Kibaale growing by 13.8% and 29.3% to 125,200 and 226,114 in
2004 respectively. Similarly, since the Census, the number of chicken kept in Hoima and Kibaale
has grown by 69 percent and 13 percent to 1,595,543 and 995,941 birds in 2014 respectively.
Value chains for beef, dairy and poultry subsectors are presented in Annex 7.

            Table 15. Livestock Kept by the Districts of the Albertine Region (2008/09)87

        Livestock             Buliisa            Hoima             Kibaale        Masindi
        Cattle                          34,801           109,998         174,926         213,402
        Goats                           43,326           187,128         199,572         233,423
        Sheep                            3,884            25,593           24,329         24,943
        Pigs                               849           104,669         153,512          87,616
        Chicken                         99,932           942,843         879,032       1,007,182
        Ducks                           18,542            26,898           34,194         39,362
        Turkey                             115             2,677            2,140          1,843

242. There are no large scale commercial beef and poultry farmers in the region. Beef and
poultry farming activities are mainly carried out by small scale farmers. The main barriers to
enhancing competitiveness in the beef sub-sector include production constraints such as disease
and poor quality breeds; lack of improved bulls; lack of on-farm herd books for animal event
recording e.g. births, deaths; lack of good herdsmen; inadequate pastures during certain periods of
the year; inadequate water in some periods of the year; and inadequate advisory and veterinary
services. The most significant barriers to enhancing competitiveness in the poultry sub-sector
include an inadequate supply of day old chicks; poor quality of the day old chicks supplied by
local small scale breeders; lack of quality feeds; irregular feed supplies due to the seasonality of
maize, the main ingredient in the production process; lack of commercial feed producers in the
region; lack of commercial breeders in the region; lack of electricity making it difficult to develop
cold chain infrastructure; and lack of poultry specific policy and legislation.

243. As is the case elsewhere in the country, the dairy industry in the region is based largely
on smallholders producing for home consumption and offering the market the little surplus
that remains. The most significant barrier to enhancing competitiveness in the region’s dairy sub-
sector is lack of good diary breeding stock. The other barriers include low use of quality inputs,
mainly due to farmers’ lack of information about associated benefits; undeveloped distribution
channels for dairy inputs; lack of milk collection centers (MCCs) which inhibits production and
productivity; low animal productivity due to low genetic potential, poor feeding and animal health;
low adoption of improved management practices and technologies; inadequate extension services,
and business development services; inadequate access to financial services and other production
constraints such as endemic disease, inadequate feed and water.

244. The region does not have any formal milk processor and the number of MCCs is
inadequate. There is one informal processor in Hoima who packs milk in 1 liter units. MCCs are
the main distribution centers for milk in the region, serving both household and institutional
consumers. Transporting raw milk from the farmer to the MCC is mainly performed by the bicycle

87
     UBOS

                                                   86
trader, or the farmer or the collection center trader. The present number of MCCs is inadequate
and there is a need for more. For example, Kibaale, with the second biggest herd in the region after
Masindi, has only one MCC located at one extreme end of the district where it is accessible by a
few farmers. Buliisa also has one MCC while Hoima district has four.

Fisheries Sub-sector
245. According to UBOS, Lake Albert, the main water body in the region, was second to
Lake Victoria in fish catch in 2011 and 2012. During these years, Lake Albert registered catches
of 163,600 and 152,600 metric tons against Lake Victoria’s 169,800 and 185,200 metric tons
respectively.

246. Nevertheless, the current production of fisheries in the region is very low, as a result
of large scale illegal fishing. Fishing on the lake is in the hands of small scale fishermen who use
the outboard engine, and the fishnet to trap their catch. The value chain of the region’s fisheries
sub-sector is presented in Annex 7.

247. No formal processing is currently taking place in the region. Due to the widespread use
of illegal gear on the waters, and the illegal trade in immature fish, commercial processing is no
longer attractive to investors. In this regard, the only commercial fish processing plant established
on the lake to process Nile perch some years ago closed down recently due to lack of fish supplies.
Even the refrigerated trucks that come to procure Nile perch at the lake’s shores have to wait for
up to three weeks before they can fill up (with up to 3 tons). Consequently, the only processing
going on is the primary processing that takes place immediately after the fish is landed and the
traditional sun-drying and smoking (hot smoking) mainly of the silver fish. The primary processing
carried out includes cleaning and packing fish in clean containers as well as gutting and scaling
the fish depending on customer specifications.

248. Some other pressing barriers for this sector include: lack of information about the fish
stocks in the lake on the basis of which to establish sustainable levels of fishing; inadequate
facilities for seed multiplication and artificial propagation for restocking and stock enhancement;
breeding and nursery grounds are not identified, mapped and gazette; inadequate capacity of Beach
Management Units in fisheries management; lack of species-specific management plans;
prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the fishing communities; and inadequate mechanisms for fishing
communities to save and invest.

249. To reverse the declining fortunes of the industry, interventions to halt illegal activities
and to exploit existing opportunities are urgently required. According to the DSIP, GoU
proposes to focus on strengthening controls of illegal fishing, promoting and supporting
aquaculture and cage farming, especially of tilapia (currently at negligible levels but with clear
potential for export to neighboring countries), and stocking of small water bodies including dams,
with particular emphasis on ensuring fish quality at all levels. GoU is also keen to develop
infrastructure for commercial fish farming (aquaculture) including supporting the establishment of
aquaculture parks and cages in Lake Albert inter-alia.

3.3 PROSPECTS OF SUPPLYING FOOD TO THE OIL CAMPS BY THE ALBERTINE REGION



                                                 87
Overview

250. Given that thousands of people are expected on site in oil camps during the
development of oil fields, opportunities for food supply to the camps by the local private
sector appear quite viable and need to be pursued. Procurement of food in the oil camps is the
responsibility of catering firms contracted by the IOCs. The types and quantities of food demanded
by the oil camps are determined by a number of factors, including the choices and preferences of
workers, the number of workers residing in the camps and the availability of the various food items
demanded.

251. For some time following the opening of oil camps, most of the food required to feed
workers in the camps was procured from Kampala based market leaders, such as Fresh
Cuts. The fact that domestic suppliers were selected is very beneficial from the standpoint of
national content development. Nevertheless, while we would expect that a lot of the food (and
other supplies in general) would come from Kampala, achieving some participation of the
Albertine Region in supplying the oil camps is also desirable. Unlike Kampala, where suppliers
work in a large number of sectors and can supply different types of goods and services to the IOCs,
the prospect of supplying food to the oil camps is a major opportunity for the Albertine Region’s
private sector. For smallholder farmers of the Albertine Region, the development could be their
gateway out of poverty liberating thousands of households currently living below the poverty line.

252. In a bid to promote participation of the Albertine Region, Traidlinks commenced
work in Hoima to organize smallholder farmers to supply food to the camps, as discussed
earlier. To its credit, the project has performed reasonably well, and presently, smallholder
farmers organized by the NGO are supplying a wide range of food items to the camps, mainly
FFV.

Current Requirements and Sources of Supplies
253. Presently, the number of workers residing in the camps has been less than 500. This
is relatively low compared to the numbers expected to be resident in the camps at the peak of the
construction phase in 2017/18. According to the catering firm responsible for the oil camps, their
food requirement consists of a range of items, including meats (30 items), fish (3 items), local
staples (7 items), pulses (3 items) as well as FFV (about 40 items).

254. Since the number of workers in the camps is still low, the quantity of food required is
also small, so is the number of suppliers needed to provide the food. In this regard, the number
of regular suppliers contracted to supply various food items to the camps currently has been four,
namely: Fresh Cuts, Emarat, Rwenzori and HODFA. Table 16 below shows the firms that have
been supplying food to the camps by food type handled.




                                                88
            Table 16: Current suppliers of food items to Kisinja & Buliisa Camps88

            Category                                       No of items/types         Supplier(s)
            Beef                                           7 cuts                    Fresh cuts
            Poultry                                        6 cuts                    Fresh cuts
            Mutton                                         4 types                   Fresh cuts
            Pork                                           4 cuts                    Fresh cuts
            Fish                                           3 types                   Fresh cuts
            Sausages & cold cuts                           5 types                   Fresh cuts
            Diary & chilled spreads                        13 types                  Fresh cuts
            Beverages & Juices                             8 types                   Fresh cuts
            Frozen vegetables                              7 types                   Fresh cuts
            Condiments, spices & ingredients (a)           38 types                  Fresh cuts
            Condiments, spices & ingredients (b)           53 types                  Emarat
            Water                                          1 type                    Rwenzori
            Fresh fruits & vegetables                      46 items                  HODFA89

255. The fact that large Kampala-based companies are able to easily meet the
requirements of the IOCs reduces potential opportunities for Albertine Region based
suppliers. As evidenced by Table 16, apart from the Hoima based Traidlinks/HODFA project, all
the other firms contracted to date have been Kampala based. Fresh cuts, the company contracted
to supply meats and other food products is the market leader for packaged retail cuts and processed
beef in Uganda controlling 85 percent of Kampala’s processed meat market90. Rwenzori Bottling
Company, the firm supplying mineral water, is the market leader for bottled mineral water in
Uganda, and Emarat is a Kampala based business enterprise, which was contracted to supply
assorted imported condiments, spices and ingredients that could not be supplied by Fresh Cuts.
256. A detailed matrix showing the food items supplied by the smallholder farmers
through Traidlinks during the month of May 2014 is contained in Annex 8 (Table 1). A
review of the food items supplied reveals that the most highly supplied item is Irish potatoes, for
which the total quantity supplied during the month came to 1,850 Kg, accounting for more than
6.7 percent of the total quantity of food supplied by the farmers to the camps during the period.
However, while they are able to supply reasonable numbers of cattle, chicken, and pigs,
smallholders were not contracted to supply any of these livestock because catering firms buy
processed meat, which smallholders are not in a position to supply. Consequently, since the
Traidlinks project was not able to handle this line of supplies, catering firms have been procuring
processed meats from Kampala based suppliers who buy cattle from the region and process it into
various cuts, before shipping it back to the region for consumption in the camps.

257. With the exception of unpredictable weather and poor information flow from oil
camps, key barriers to enhancing competitiveness among smallholder farmers are related to
lack of access to finance. The barriers include lack of equipment for processing rice to the

88
   Source: Supreme Catering Services
89
   HODFA is Hoima District Farmers Association under which the Hoima based smallholder farmers are contracted
90
   Agriterra, 2012

                                                     89
standard required by oil camps; lack of refrigerated transport, necessary to preserve the quality of
fresh produce during transportation from the village collection point to the central collection
center; reluctance by the banks to extend working capital finance to this market segment for fear
that they are too small to borrow large amounts; lack of equipment necessary to spray fruit farms
against fruit flies; and lack of funds to finance the acquisition and installation of green houses
where certain types of fruits and vegetables required by oil camps grow best.

258. Overall, access to finance has been presented as a common challenge among
participating smallholder farmers. While one microfinance institution has been assisting
smallholders with small loans, its maximum loan size is UGX 1.0 million. In a few cases where
smallholders applied for loans from commercial banks, they were turned down either because the
amount they wanted was too small (the amounts were less than UGX 5.0 million), and when the
loan size was not the problem, the farmers did not have acceptable collateral. In other cases, the
effect of drought on farmers’ ability to supply FFVs all year round has been a serious challenge.
While irrigation technology could help mitigate the challenge, it remains out of reach for
smallholders due to lack of access to suitable financing arrangements.

259. These arrangements, as well as the other related barriers, are well beyond the current
means of the NGO to contain. They could be more competently contained by a large scale
investor, with the capacity and interest to establish a large scale FFVs farm, supported by a sizable
network of outgrowers including smallholder farmers. Under such an outgrower system
smallholder farmers would receive the support necessary to be able to supply the fresh fruits and
vegetables demanded all year round. Among other things, such support would include an effective
extension service, an appropriate irrigation scheme, and access to appropriate chemicals spraying
equipment and or services.

Projected Requirements & Possible Share of the Region’s Private Sector
260. According to the results of the IBS, the population of workers in the camps is expected
to rise rapidly from the current level of less than 500 to an estimated 13,000 at the peak of
the industry’s construction phase during the period 2017-2018, before receding to a plateau
of about 3,000. Table 17 below shows the average number of workers in the camps during the
initial years of the development phase.

     Table 17: Projected number of workers91 in the oil camps during the period 2015-201992

Category                  Y1                       Y2                       Y3                      Y4                  Y5                  Y6
                          Expats Total
                   Nationals               NationalExpats   Total    Nationals
                                                                            Expats Total            Expats Total Nationals
                                                                                             Nationals                                      Expats
                                                                                                                        Expats Total Nationals       Total
Engineers               3      57     60       37 703          740       65 1,226 1,290          54 1,017 1,070      43 817 860          43 817         860
Technicians           -      -      -         350 1,050      1,400      550 1,650 2,200         400 1,200 1,600 250 750 1,000 250 750                 1,000
Craftsmen           1,080 720 1,800         2,160 1,440      3,600    2,940 1,960 4,900       3,282 2,188 5,470 720 480 1,200 660 440                 1,100
Unskilled labour      465    -     465      1,435     -      1,435    2,098    -     2,098    2,035    -     2,035 765     -     765 740       -        740
Total               1,548 777 2,325         3,982 3,193      7,175    5,652 4,836 10,488      5,771 4,405 10,175 1,778 2,047 3,825 1,693 2,007        3,700



91
     All numbers are averages for the years they relate to
92
     Adopted from the International Oil Companies’ Industrial Baseline Survey (IBS), 2013

                                                                          90
261. The projection recognizes that the population of workers in the camps will fluctuate
as workers come and go, staying for varying periods of time, depending on the skills they
possess, and the need for them. Accordingly the numbers indicated in the table are averages for
the period they relate to. For example, if the population of workers in the camp at the beginning
and at the end of a typical year was 1,900 and 2,100 respectively, the projected population of
workers for the year would be 2,000. Furthermore, according to the IBS report, in addition to the
core oil workers residing in the camps, there will be other jobs created in the industry through
indirect as well as induced business activities bringing the total number of workers at the peak of
the construction phase to between 100,000 and 150,000.

262. Based on the planned gradual build up in the numbers of workers, a projection of the
food requirements for the camps has been made. A detailed matrix showing the quantities
required for the period 2015 to 2019 has been carried in the Annex 9. The assumptions about the
mix of food consumed in the camps have been provided by the catering professional from the
Makindye Country Club which caters for national and expatriate workers in Kampala. The team
has contacted the catering company for the IOCs, Supreme, to obtain projections of food
requirements for the camps but was not able to obtain such projections. As such, it was decided to
contact a similar provider, Makindye Country Club, to obtain the data about the food mix. This
Club is a recreation facility, membership for which was previously reserved for American citizens
as well as diplomats and expatriates of other nationalities working in Uganda, until 2012 when
membership was opened to nationals. The Catering professional provided food mix assumptions
for 100 people (75 expats and 25 nationals) and the team scaled them up to match the number of
workers expected in camps in a given year (obtained from IBS).

263. Review of the mix of food shows that most of the food required by the oil camps grows
well in the Albertine region. However, since most of the food produced hits the market in its raw
form, it is likely that much of it may not be acceptable to the oil camps and as the result, will not
be procured. In this regard the most affected food items will be meats and dairy products for which
processing facilities are either non-existent or the standards available are much lower than what
would be acceptable to the camps. Table 18 shows the estimated proportion of the total food
requirements that the local private sector could be able to supply, given the strict quality
requirements of the IOCs.

  Table 18: Proportion of Food that the Local Private Sector Could Supply to the Camps

Food Item           Acceptable   Remarks
Staples                80%       Quality of milling facilities availableis likely to be inadequate
Pulses                 80%       Quality of milling for groundnuts is likely to be inadequate
Meats                   0%       There is no modern abattoir
Fish                    0%       There is no functional fish processing plant in the region
Milk                    0%       There is no milk processing plant in the region
Fresh Fruits and       50%       (a) Lack of cold chain facilities affects quality and the quantity produced
Vegetables                       (b) Lack of irrigation means that farmers can not supply all year round

264. Leaving quality aside, in terms of pure volume, a review of the projected food
requirements and the current levels of production in the region suggests that the private
sector in the region has the potential to supply the quantities of food needed by the oil camps.

                                                   91
The review indicates that apart from chicken and Irish potatoes the requirement for the other food
items is well below 3 percent of the region’s current levels of production (Table 19).

Table 19: Comparison of Projected Annual Food Requirements with the Region’s Current
                         Production of Selected Food Items93

        Comparing Projected Annual Food Requirements (DD) with Current Production (Pdn) of food in the Albertine Region
Food Item                        Current       Year 1          Year 2            Year 3            Year 4           Year 5
                          Unit Production   DD    DD/Pdn    DD     DD/Pdn    DD      DD/Pdn    DD      DD/Pdn    DD     DD/Pdn
                                (2008/09)           Ratio            Ratio             Ratio             Ratio            Ratio
Average population in camp (No)             2,325           7,175            10,488            10,175            3,825
MEATS
  1 Beef (Cattle)         Tons     53,313     90     0.2%    278      0.5%     407      0.8%     394      0.7%     149     0.3%
  2 Chicken               Tons      5,858     95     1.6%    283      4.8%     412      7.0%     403      6.9%     147     2.5%
  3 Mutton (Sheep&Goat) Tons       15,238     48     0.3%    149      1.0%     218      1.4%     212      1.4%      80     0.5%
  4 Pork                  Tons     17,332    105     0.6%    327      1.9%     478      2.8%     463      2.7%     176     1.0%
FISH
  1 Tilapia fillet        Tons                36             110               161               156                  58

OTHER FOOD ITEMS
  1 Bananas (Matooke)    Tons     77,144     392     0.5%   1,083     1.4%    1,556     2.0%    1,555     2.0%     522     0.7%
  2 Rice                 Tons     14,639      73     0.5%     224     1.5%      327     2.2%      317     2.2%     119     0.8%
  3 Maize flour          Tons    173,568      78     0.0%     213     0.1%      305     0.2%      306     0.2%     101     0.1%
  4 Cassava flour        Tons    176,289      33     0.0%      91     0.1%      130     0.1%      130     0.1%      43     0.0%
  5 Millet flour         Tons      5,947      33     0.6%      91     1.5%      130     2.2%      130     2.2%      43     0.7%
  6 Sweet potatoes       Tons     57,700      67     0.1%     185     0.3%      266     0.5%      266     0.5%      89     0.2%
  7 Irish potatoes       Tons      7,320     254     3.5%     782    10.7%    1,142    15.6%    1,109    15.1%     416     5.7%
  8 Dry beans            Tons     60,260      46     0.1%     130     0.2%      187     0.3%      186     0.3%      64     0.1%
  9 Groundnuts           Tons     24,015      46     0.2%     130     0.5%      187     0.8%      186     0.8%      64     0.3%
Total (Metric tons)


265. The table shows current food production in the Albertine region (based on 2008/9
data), annual food requirements for a particular food category (DD) and the ratio of required
food volume to production in the region. For example, the projected requirement for beef and
beef products when the number of workers in the camps is at its peak in Years 3 and 4 is 407 and
394 metric tons respectively, which translates into about 4,070 and 3,940 heads of cattle, which is
less than 1 percent of the region’s current herd of 533,127. In the case of maize, cassava and sweet
potatoes, the projected requirement is less than 0.5 percent. The ratio of projected food
requirements for the peak years 3 and 4, is 7.0 percent and 6.9 percent respectively for chicken,
and 15.6 percent and 15.1 percent respectively for Irish potatoes.

266. However, if the projection takes into account all workers (i.e. the workers resident in
the oil camps, as well as workers engaged in indirect and induced business activities) and
assuming similar consumption levels among all workers, there could be shortages. To account
for all these workers, the total food requirement is likely to rise by a factor of more than 10. This
result would imply that the region’s current levels of production in some food items may fall short
of the quantity needed to feed all the workers in the industry. Moreover, even where the levels of
production appear sufficient, the position could change due to unexpected changes in the weather,
pests and other plant as well as animal diseases. Finally, there are other factors that are likely to

93
  We note that quality requirements are not considered here. The objective of this table is to show that the region is
able to supply the quantities of food demanded. If quality requirements are considered (Table 15), meat, fish and
milk products would automatically not be eligible

                                                            92
affect food production in the region. There have been incidences in the past when some areas in
the region produced a lot of food but because the roads were impassable the food could not be
transported out of the surplus zone. Consequently, while the food may be available in the quantities
needed, it may not be possible to deliver the same at the time and shape required, due to these
barriers.

267. For the region to participate in this market effectively, key barriers need to be
addressed in time. Otherwise, catering firms may find themselves left with no choice but to
procure from Kampala and beyond, when the same could be procured from the region had the road
infrastructure been upgraded.

268. In order to conduct an initial assessment of the capacity of large agro processors in
Uganda to supply the oil camps with food during the peak period (construction phase), a
number of interviews were conducted as part of this study. It was determined that large scale
agro processors are aware of the imminent oil and gas sector demand boom, and have made plans
to expand their production capacities to accommodate the increase in demand from the new
market. Because of their experience accumulated from years of supplying food to export markets
that are bigger and more distant from Kampala than Hoima, large scale agro processors expect to
supply the new market from their current premises.

269. In case of fish processors, the only challenge foreseen is the shortage of fish from the
national waters, as a result of which more than half of their export orders cannot be supplied.
Otherwise, their installed processing capacity is more than enough to supply all the fish that is
needed and because they deal in frozen products, they are able to supply the quantities demanded
to any location without having to build new plants near the oil camps in the Albertine region.

270. In the case of large processors of poultry and poultry products, there is also adequate
capacity to supply all the chicken required. According to Ugachik, by far the leading supplier
of poultry and poultry products in the country, there was provision in its strategic plan to increase
installed capacity to more than double the current capacity by the end of 2014. The firm deals in
frozen chicken and is already supplying large quantities to its export markets in Rwanda, Southern
Sudan and DR Congo using its refer trucks. Similarly, the firm expects to supply the quantities
required by the oil industry from its Magyigyi Plant, (Kabanyolo, near Kampala), using its refer
trucks. The firm has a fleet of small and medium sized refer trucks with a capacity of 10 and 20
tons. Based on their experience, they estimate that a workforce of 13,000 will use 10 tons of
chicken per week. This means that the population in the camps, can be served by the firm’s 10 ton
truck comfortably since it is less than the quantity they produce in one 8 hour shift daily (before
the planned expansion). Similarly one of the largest dairy processors indicated that they had plans
to double their current capacity to accommodate the anticipated demand boom.

271. Overall, it appears that there are a number of large players based outside of the
Albertine Region that are able and willing to supply food to the oil camps. The capacity of the
Albertine Region’s private sector is much lower and there is a high likelihood that large players
will get the contracts to supply the oil camps as the case has been to date.

272. Support would need to be provided to the Albertine Region’s private sector to improe
its competitiveness and increase chance of supplying food to the oil camps. Moreover, if the
                                                 93
Albertine Region were to participate in the supplying food to oil and gas camps, it would also be
important to design the strategy for the periods following the completion of construction. When
the construction phase comes to an end, the population of workers will shrink from a high of 13,000
at the peak of the phase to a low of nearly 3,000. Since the demand for food is directly dependent
on the population in the camp, the reduction in the number of workers will lead to a massive fall
in demand for food in the camps. This development can be devastating to the local economy and
the national economy in general. In order to minimize the impact of this development, it is
important that the strategies used to organize farmers to improve food production in the region
should have the capabilities necessary to produce high quality food that can satisfy the standards
of export markets both regionally and internationally. This way, it should be possible to find
alternative markets abroad when the demand boom from the oil camps begins to fall.

Possible Approaches to Maximize Participation of the Albertine Region’s Private Sector in
Supplying Food to the Oil Camps

273. There are three possible approaches that can be used to achieve high quality
standards of the farmers’ produce and to maximize participation of the Albertine Region in
the supplying food to the oil camps. These include the NGO approach, the large scale investor
approach, and the Agro Industrial Park approach.

   (1) THE NGO APPROACH

274. The NGO approach, such as the case of Traidlinks, is driven by the NGO which
lobbies IOCs and other agencies to finance its operations as well as the capacity building
services and extension services rendered to smallholder farmers. This model has worked well
in the exploration phase, the missed opportunity to supply meat and other processed foods
notwithstanding. However, apart from the small volumes handled during this phase, it may well
be that this approach was probably the best possible under the circumstances.

275. When the numbers in the camps increase sharply, Traidlinks will face a challenge of
mobilizing the resources necessary to scale up the volumes handled to the levels demanded .
While existing arrangements have worked in the current phase, the sharp rise in the population of
workers under the construction phase may require additional funding or a new approach.

276. The NGO has already felt the pressure of both insufficient funding to scale up the
initiative and lack of bargaining power to obtain favorable terms with the catering
companies for the IOCs. The payment terms offered were quite unfavorable (payment to be
received within two months from delivery), and only Tullow camps were willing to receive
supplies of food items from Traidlinks. At the time the study was conducted, Traidlinks held
discussions with CNOOC and there appeared some possibility to supply food to them at some
point, while there seemed to be no progress at all in discussions with Total camps.

   (2) THE LARGE SCALE INVESTOR APPROACH

277. The large scale investor approach would be driven by the investor targeting a
particular product or a group of products. The investor could be attracted by a business

                                                94
opportunity and some government incentives tailored to cushion the investment against the hazards
involved in setting up in a new location lacking a whole range of infrastructure such as roads,
water, and electricity among others. There would also need to be cooperation from the IOCs in
terms of making their projected demand known well in advance and potentially “pre-qualifying”
the investor for a contract in case operations are set up in a satisfactory manner and agreed-upon
food items are supplied in the right quantity and of the right quality.

278. The investor would develop and set up a production system that uses smallholder
farmers as outgrowers, or contract farmers, to supplement his own production from a large
scale nucleus farm, supplying the investor’s processing plant, on a continuous basis all year
round. If the right investor(s) is found, this approach could mobilize the resources required to
commence operations and to raise production to the levels necessary to satisfy demand. In addition,
this model is able to match the quality standards of export markets both regionally and
internationally, which would satisfy the need to achieve sustainability of the production levels
attained during the boom period for many years to come. Given the fact that most food groups are
already produced in the Albertine Region but no formal processing is taking place, opportunities
for investment would be very large (e.g., beef plant, chicken farm, fish plant, and milk plant). From
the government standpoint, it would be important to ensure that priority is given to projects from
which more population could benefit.

     (3) THE AGRO INDUSTRIAL PARK APPROACH

279. The experience of other countries shows that the establishment of an agro-industrial
park, the third approach discussed in this study, could potentially help Uganda to achieve
the much needed transformational impact. The high cost of modern technologies, equipment
and infrastructure makes it difficult (sometimes almost impossible) for most small-scale initiatives
in developing countries working in isolation to keep pace with change.

280. Shared facilities are a means of meeting this challenge, and may provide both the
critical mass and the catalyst that will enable small-scale processor to compete. Many
governments have therefore been pursuing the idea of creating facilities that can be shared within
the framework of agro-industrial parks. A well designed agro-industrial park with all the requisite
facilities including power, water, and waste disposal, has considerable potential for commercial
success. Nevertheless, stories of failure of industrial parks in developing countries abound: empty
parks, subsidized land speculation and tax erosion, and often no parks at all. As such, while such
initiatives have potential for success, they also have high chances of failure when set up incorrectly
and there is no interest on the side of private sector to participate.

281. The establishment of an industrial park has been proposed in the National Content
Policy for the Petroleum Sector of Uganda, currently under development94. The government
has earmarked 29 square km of land for the construction of the refinery and infrastructure, and 2-

94
   Section 4.3.3, To facilitate clustering of petroleum related companies of the National Content Plan suggests that
relevant governmental bodies should organize and plan for development of a central geographical area in which
existing and future petroleum related companies and institutions are stimulated to co-locate. This could be organized
as an industrial park in which IOCs, foreign suppliers, Ugandan companies and supporting institutions such as
Association of Uganda Oil and Gas Providers are stimulated to establish by means of incentives and attractive terms

                                                         95
3 km could be available for housing of agro-processing enterprises within this area. On the
agricultural side, such facilities could include processing of fruit and vegetables, milk, meat and
fish, among others. With confirmed demand coming from the IOCs, this park could attract
investors from other parts of the country and even overseas to establish farms and plants and supply
the camps with high-quality food products.

282. Annex 8 contains the summary of considerations for the establishment of the Agro
Industrial Park. Some of the plants which could be set up include:
    Meats: Plants for beef, chicken and pork, including facilities for slaughter and freezing
      with options for canning depending on identified demand;
    Dairy: Milk processing plants able to handle a range of processed milk products;
    Fish95: Fish processing plants able to produce a variety of fish products including chilled
      and frozen products with options for smoking Tilapia and Cat fish, the most prominent
      species in the aquaculture sub-sector;
    FFV: The region has the capacity to grow a wide range of these products;
    Maize, Cassava and Beans: The crops are so widely grown in the region that industries
      based on these products would be able to involve highest number of households.
283. Although an Agro Industrial Park approach can be considered, significant caution
needs to be exercised with this endeavor. Uganda already has negative experiences with the
establishment of industrial parks, and lessons learned from these initiatives need to be accounted
for. Nevertheless, if the Park is set up appropriately and with buy-in of the major players, these
plants and factories could benefit the local population as they would provide contract farming and
employment opportunities. But more importantly, these plants would make a significant
contribution to national content in the agriculture sector, adopting modern technology and
increasing value addition in the sector. In future, when the oil sector enters production phase and
demand from the IOC starts going down, these plants would be sufficiently viable to continue in
business producing food for hotels in the area as well as supermarkets throughout the country and
for export markets both regionally and internationally.

3.4 OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

284. Various approaches and views regarding managing and facilitating participation of
smallholder farmers of the Albertine Region in the supplies of food to oil camps have been
discussed in this chapter. They all need to be considered carefully by the government as they
have their pros and cons.

285. The NGO approach, which is currently used, is useful in assisting local farmers to
supply food to the oil camps, but the impact of this type of initiative on the economy of the
region has so far been small. The current efforts of Traidlinks are commendable but the range of
food items supplied to the camps is limited. Given the lack of processing in the region currently
and the lack of cold chain facilities, possibilities for supplying meat, fish and milk products to the


95
  Fish farming is one of the priority sectors for development in Uganda. The GoU has set a goal of meeting the
country’s requirements for fish through increased aquaculture production from the current approximately 90,000 tons
to a projected 300,000 tons by 2016. As part of the roadmap for achieving the set aquaculture production targets,
government will create ‘concentrated aquaculture production areas’ known as Aquaculture Parks.

                                                        96
camps with the current level of funding are limited. Traidlinks also has a somewhat limited
outreach having managed to mobilize only a few hundred farmers from around Hoima town.

286. With increased funding, this initiative could achieve much more impact. The project
could be scaled up, with centers opening in other districts of the Albertine Region (e.g., Kibaale,
Buliisa, Masindi) to target many farmers throughout the Albertine Region. With the increase
number of oil workers on site and potential addition of other oil camps (besides Tullow) to the list
of potential customers, the demand for FFV from HODFA would increase twenty-fold or even
more. Several hundred farmers currently mobilized would likely not have the capacity to produce
such volumes, and the number of participating farmers would need to be increase to several
thousands of farmers. There would also be a need to increase the number of staff who are
performing sorting/grading of the produce, proving training, as well as the number of collection
centers. Additional funding could also be used to alleviate some of the constraints the initiative is
currently facing to supply items other than FFV (acquisition of refrigerated transport, irrigation
technologies, establishment of refrigerated storage facilities).

287. Implementation of the other approaches discussed in this study, large investor
approach or the Agro Industrial Park approach, have potential to make a significant
contribution to the economic development of the region. These approaches could help to
organize and empower smallholder farmers, who are key partners in the transformation process
both during and beyond the demand boom and for many years to come.

288. The large scale investor approach would mean attracting several large scale investors
to establish processing facilities relevant to the agricultural activity in different parts of the
Albertine region. For example, if Masindi is leading in terms of cattle kept, opportunities would
be promoted to large investors to establish beef processing facilities there.

289. Agro Industrial Park approach should be explored given high potential benefits, but
some caution needs to be exercised as there have been some negative examples in Uganda
previously. A detailed feasibility study would need to be undertaken to establish the level of
demand and justify the investment. Based on their negative experience with Kampala Industrial
Business Park, popularly known as Namanve Park, a number of stakeholders have expressed
reservations about the successful implementation of the proposed park. According to the views
expressed by processors, it is possible to obtain their buy-in and maximize their appetite for
participation in the Park if they are brought on board early during the planning stages.

290. Overall, it is also important to note that even if a portion of food gets supplied to the
oil camps by local producers based outside the Albertine Region (such as Kampala), this
would still be a positive development from the standpoint of development of national content
in the oil and gas sector. As long as the food does not come from other countries, Uganda will be
able to enable its agriculture sector to benefit from the development of the oil and gas sector.

291. Nevertheless, there are several important reasons for providing support to maximize
participation of the Albertine Region in supplying food to the oil camps. On the one hand, this
would help to alleviate social tensions. The population in the region already has expectations that
they would somehow participate in the sector and benefit from it. Given that most of the people
are engaged in agriculture, it would only be natural to look for opportunities to link these
                                                 97
smallholders with the oil camps. Moreover, a lot of people were negatively impacted by the
resettlement in the Hoima area, and the poverty levels of the region are already higher than the
average for Uganda, so they need support. On the other hand, from a purely economic standpoint,
it would be beneficial to support the development of this fertile region which already has
significant potential to produce major food groups both for domestic consumption and export, but
is not able to achieve the right quality due to lack of processing facilities. With the demand for
processed high quality food coming from the oil camps, there appears to be a business case for
investments in the processing facilities in the region, as well as alleviation of major infrastructure
bottlenecks.




                                                 98
       CHAPTER 4. OIL AND TOURISM- CO-EXISTENCE OF THE TWO
               KEY DRIVERS OF UGANDA’S ECONOMY
4.1.UGANDA TOURISM IN CONTEXT

Linkage of Uganda Tourism to Economy

292. Tourism is a critical player in Uganda’s economy. The economic analysis of tourism in
Uganda shows that on average, each dollar of expenditure by a foreign tourist generates 2.5 dollars
of the gross domestic product (GDP) – the total impact includes the indirect value added along the
supply chain, plus the induced effects of household spending of wages earned. This figure
compares with 2.3 dollars of GDP generated by one dollar’s-worth of traditional exports 96 .
Although Uganda’s tourism sector faces serious competitors in the region as Table 20 shows
below, the forecasted growth rate for Uganda’s tourism indicates great potential.

  Table 20: The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Index, Tourism Arrivals and Direct
                                 Contribution to GDP97
 Country The Travel & Tourism International             Direct        Travel & Tourism
            Competitiveness Index,      tourist     contribution to Industry GDP growth
             Regional rank, 201398   arrivals, 2010 GDP, 2012, %     forecast, 2013-2022
 Kenya                             8     1,470,000              5.0                    3.7
 Rwanda                            9       619,000              3.1                    5.4
 Tanzania                        12        754,000              4.8                    5.5
 Uganda                          13        946,000              3.7                    5.2

National Parks in Uganda

293. Uganda is rich in tourism resources, which are essential to establish a tourism
industry that can compete internationally and sustainably. Its main resources include
renowned national parks and wildlife. The national parks are the backbone of the leisure tourism
sector in the country and offer a wide range of tourism products including nature guided hikes,
village walks and rare fauna and flora species. Annex 10 profiles ten national parks in Uganda and
their diverse tourism offerings. Among these ten national parks, three parks make up the major
attractions tourists are coming to see: Bwindi, Queen Elizabeth, and MFNP. MFNP is where some
of the biggest oil reserves are found. This park also attracts the largest number of visitors.
According to the data collected by the Uganda Wildlife Authority, the number of MNFP visitors
reached 60,803 in 2012 the number of visitors to national parks increased 33 percent between 2008


96
   Economic and Statistical Analysis of Tourism in Uganda. The World Bank, June 2013
97
   Source: Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Rankings, World Economic Forum, 2013; Tourism Highlights,
UNWTO, 2012; Travel and Tourism Economic Impact, World Travel and Tourism Council, 2013
98
   The rankings for Sub-Saharan Africa region are calculated among 31 countries in the region. The highest rank is 1
(Seychelles) and the lowest is 31 (Chad). Uganda has the regional rank of 13, behind Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania.
Competitiveness is determined based on the assessment of travel and tourism regulatory framework, business
environment and infrastructure, and human, cultural and natural resources.

                                                        99
and 2012. Notably, the number of visitors to MFNP saw a notable increase of 72 percent99 over
four years and reached 60,803 in 2012.

294. Leisure tourism is one of the top segments in Uganda’s tourism. Economic analysis of
tourist expenditures found that leisure tourists spend 30-100 percent more per visit than other types
of tourists such as business tourists. Spending by leisure tourists stimulates more GDP per dollar
spent than the average traditional export in Uganda. Leisure tourism is strongly linked to the
Ugandan economy through formal sector employment and the generation of government
revenues 100 . To develop a sustainable and competitive tourism sector, strategic planning and
conservation is paramount.

Uganda’s 10-year Tourism Development Strategy

295. Uganda’s 10-year tourism masterplan was prepared by UNWTO in 2013. Making
sustainable use of natural assets was highlighted in the vision of this plan. As Figure 7 and Table
21 show, the identified development areas in the strategy focus on key existing attractions, national
parks and protected areas, as anchors and key visitor attractors. In addition to the nature resources,
strengthening of the wildlife product in the main national parks is recognized as an effective way
to diversify tourism products. The strategy also recommends that visitors’ experience be upgraded
to reflect the iconic nature of attractions, particularly in MFNP where the overall tourism image is
already being negatively impacted by oil exploration activities. Figure 8 illustrates how the current
oil exploration areas highly overlap with the north-western tourism development areas where
MFNP is located.

Figure 7: The Structure Plan of Tourism                              Figure 8: Oil Exploration Areas in
       Development Area101                                                  the Albertine Graben102




99
   Visitors to National Parks (Citizens and Foreigners) 2008-2012, Uganda Wildlife Authority
100
    Economic and Statistical Analysis of Tourism in Uganda. The World Bank, June 2013
101
    Uganda Tourism Development Master Plan 2014-23, UNWTO, 2013
102
    Developing the Lake Albert Upstream Resources, Total, 2013

                                                      100
                   Table 21: Tourism Development Areas and Tourism Products103

      Tourism Development Area (TDA)                                  Tourism Products

 The Central TDA                             “Cultural Heartland”, which focuses on Kampala as the capital city and
                                             main tourism service hub as well as Entebbe as the air gateway to
                                             Uganda. In addition, this TDA incorporates the Sesse Islands and the
                                             Mabira Forest.
 The South-Western TDA                       “Gorilla Forests”, covering The Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and Lake
                                             Mburo National Parks.
 The North-Western TDA                       “Safari and River”, incorporating Murchison Falls National Park as
                                             well as Bugungu and Karuma Wildlife Reserves and the north east
                                             shoreline of Lake Albert.
 The Western TDA                             “Lakes and Mountains of the Moon”, in the central area of Uganda,
                                             western frontier. This TDA focuses on the Queen Elizabeth, Rwenzori
                                             Mountains and Semliki National Parks. It also incorporates the Kigezi,
                                             Kyambura, Katonga and Toro Semliki Wildlife Reserves.
 The North-Eastern TDA                       “Tribal Cultures and Open Plains”, lying along the bor ders of South
                                             Sudan and Kenya. The TDA focuses on the Kidepo Valley National
                                             Park extending southwards to the Matheniko and Bokora wildlife
                                             Reserves
 The South-Eastern TDA                       “Nile and Adventure”, emanating from Jinja and covering the Mount
                                             Elgon National Park. This TDA also incorporates a section of the
                                             Victoria Niles as well as the Pian Upe Wildlife Reserve and RAMSAR
                                             sites on Lakes Nakawa, Opeta and Bisino.

Challenges in Uganda’s Tourism Development

296. The Uganda Tourism Sector Situational Assessment 104 identified several key
challenges in the development of the tourism sector. It noted that, moving forward, the
increasing oil exploration activities may bring more challenges for the tourism sector.

297. One major challenge identified is that local governments do not have adequate
capacity in policy development and strategic planning. As oil exploration and tourism will
coexist, the tourism sector needs to have effective policies and integrated planning to address the
current infrastructure gaps and minimize the negative impact from oil extraction. There is a serious
shortage of skilled tourism planners and managers within the government and related bodies and
this will have an impact on the overall quality and image of Uganda’s tourism. Future complex
interactions between the oil industry and tourism industry require higher qualified workers. The
conservation of tourism resources, such as natural resources and wildlife, need to be enhanced
given the declining numbers of wildlife and increasing human-wildlife conflicts in national parks.
Unlike other competitors in the region, Uganda is yet to build an effective destination brand and
develop an efficient marketing mechanism. As the competition moves forward, the tourism
products in Uganda need to be diversified.

298. Another broader effort required is improved coordination within the tourism sector
and with multiple stakeholders in the oil industry. An oil and tourism communications unit

103
      Uganda Tourism Development Master Plan 2014-23, UNWTO, 2013
104
      Uganda Tourism Sector Situational Assessment: Tourism Reawakening . The World Bank, June 2012

                                                        101
needs to be established to help coordinate between different groups and coordinate planning and
implementation efforts in a number of areas. This unit would need to be government endorsed but
it would not necessarily need to be within the government structure.


4.2. THE IMPACT OF OIL EXTRACTION ON TOURISM

299. Oil fields development is a rather long and complex process which involves different
activities at each phase. The entire oil exploration and production cycle spans about 20-50 years.
During this period, oil will play a significant role in the Ugandan economy. However, the economy
of the Albertine region where oil has been discovered also depends on agriculture, fishing and
tourism. These sectors not only diversify the economy during the oil extraction period, but also
contribute to the sustainability of the regional economy and prosperity of local community. A
holistic plan and systematic monitoring mechanism should be in place to minimize the negative
impact produced by each phase of oil fields development.

Current Oil Exploration Activities in the Murchison Falls National Park

300. The Lake Albert region, where oil has been discovered, contains many parks and
protected wildlife and forestry areas; some 40 percent of the known oil resources are found
in the MFNP105. At present, Total operates in two exploration areas which are mainly located in
the northwestern part of MFNP. As of May 2014, Total had completed exploration and appraisal
activities which included drilling, testing wells and carrying out seismic surveys. Next, Total will
start the construction phase in MFNP and new wells will be drilled. It is estimated that around 750-
800 wells will be needed. Development drilling activity will span over 13 years, with a maximum
of 8 rigs operating simultaneously, of which up to three rigs could be drilling simultaneously in
the park106.

301. While carrying out its operations, Total has committed to respecting the natural and
human environment. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments are conducted prior to all
activities and this process includes stakeholder consultations. Specific actions have been taken to
(i) ensure effective waste management, (ii) develop an oil spill contingency plan and (iii) restore
the locations after activities are concluded. In addition, Total has developed a tourism stakeholder
strategy. The company has consulted and engaged extensively with tourism stakeholders on an
ongoing basis to ensure continuity of activities in a sustainable manner. The company has two
Tourism Liaison Officers (TLOs) based at MFNP to address day-to-day concerns. Total maintains
an email list of the tourism stakeholders. It is used for regular updates on Total Uganda’s upcoming
activities and plans, such as movement of the rig at MFNP. Total hosts regular meetings with
interested tourism stakeholders, in the Park and in Kampala. These meetings are used to update
stakeholders on activities, review any changes to the longer-term plans, and discuss current issues.




105
    Besides MFNP, oil reserves were reportedly discovered under Queen Elizabeth National Park (QENP). QENP is
not part of any licensed discovery area at this stage, so no exploration is currently taking place. There is a possibility
that a block covering QENP will be tendered in the next round
106
    Total Tourism Sector Information Pack. July 2013

                                                           102
Furthermore, Total has adopted the horizontal oil drilling method as a way to reduce impact on the
environment and wildlife in MFNP107.

302. On the public sector side, the UWA has provided operational guidelines for oil and
gas exploration and production in protected areas. These guidelines were developed to regulate
the behaviors of oil companies operating in the park. Given that oil E&P involves multiple sectors
and authorities, roles and responsibilities could be better defined in the guidelines. The current
guidelines mainly focus on the private sector activities and enforcement procedures were not
specified. In addition, the activities identified in the guidelines were very general and only for
exploration and production. More emphasis should be put on the construction phase when there is
maximum intrusion. To be more practical, the guidelines could be organized by phases of oil field
development in sequence, identify activities and stakeholders involved in each phase, so
stakeholders can easily refer to the roles and responsibilities at each phase. Another important
aspect missing in the operational guidelines is the oil spill contingency plan which prepares the
public and private sectors to respond to the potential disaster quickly and minimize the negative
impact. Currently the preparation of a national oil spill contingency plan has been initiated by
PEPD with the support from Norwegian government.

303. Besides its wealth of oil reserves, Albertine region also harbors important geothermal
and hydropower reserves. Uganda is facing a huge electricity supply deficit; as a result, there is
great pressure to harvest these resources. Also in the MFNP are the Karuma Falls, the location of
the 600 MW Karuma Power Station, which is currently under construction and will be the largest
hydropower station in Uganda when the construction is completed. Road construction, hazardous
waste contamination, and other consequences of poor management will also add pressure to the
precious tourism assets in and around the park. While there is a lot of scrutiny around oil fields
development, less attention is devoted to the co-existence between tourism and other projects in
the Albertine region while equally important.

Potential Opportunities for Tourism

304. Even with strategic planning and day-to-day management, the ongoing oil-related
activities will bring challenges as well as opportunities to the tourism sector and the local
communities. Full-scale oil operations require improved access and upgraded infrastructure which
will benefit the development of the tourism sector in the region. The World Bank has recently
approved the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project which is designed to improve
regional and local access to infrastructure, markets and skills development. This project can be
leveraged to support infrastructural interventions in the Albertine Region which would strengthen
supply chains and enable local suppliers to participate in the oil industry. In component 1, the
project will finance the first 100 km of road from Kyenjojo to Kabwoya as shown in Figure 9.




107
      Total Tourism Sector Information Pack. July 2013

                                                         103
                      Figure 9: Albertine Region Project - Location and Scope108




305. This road will form part of the link between the Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls
National Parks and will enable tourists to significantly reduce driving time between these
two parks. The upgrade of this road will directly benefit the oil sector, promote the co-existence
of oil and tourism sectors and provide direct benefits to the local communities.

306. This sustainable development project is also designed to finance planning and
development of infrastructure in the region. It will focus on rural and urban roads, markets and
storage facilities. In addition, there are eight key urban centers in the Buliisa and Hoima Districts
to be invested for development. These key urban centers anticipate growth from the oil
development and they are likely to contribute to the future development of the region. The
improved infrastructure will directly and indirectly benefit the tourists and local communities in
rural and urban areas.

307. To accommodate the increasing business travelers for oil operations and related
conferences, the region has already attracted significant investments in hotels. Protea
Hospitality Group is planning to open a new hotel in the town of Hoima in 2014. The manager at
the Hoima Resort Hotel indicated that most of their visitors came for oil related activities and 65
percent of the workshops they host are on oil109. As the oil sector moves from exploration phase
to development and eventually production, there is growing opportunity for local supply for
services such as accommodation and transport. Business travelers and service providers for the oil
sector are also likely to travel to other parts of the country. With more effective planning and a
regulatory system, local communities could be expected to benefit more from the growing
hospitality industry.

308. Since the full-scale oil production in the Albertine region is not expected to begin
before 2018, the exact impact on Uganda’s tourism is difficult to fully estimate at present .
The following section features case studies illustrating oil extraction and tourism activity in other
countries and implementation of risk mitigations to minimize negative impacts. Both good practice


108
      The Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project, Project Appraisal Document, World Bank, March 2014
109
      Atuhairwe, R. Uganda: Oil-Cost of Living Explodes in Hoima, All Africa, July 8, 2012

                                                       104
and potential crisis are considered. These can assist stakeholders in Uganda’s tourism and oil
sectors to understand the potential impact and manage the challenges strategically.

309. Increased anti-poaching efforts in the national parks represent another potential
opportunity for the tourism sector arising from oil activity. Due to increased scrutiny over oil
activities in the park, there has been significant progress in the fight against poaching: UWA has
discovered hundreds of snares targeting animals in the park, which otherwise would not have been
discovered.

Challenges between Conservation and Development

310. For some developing countries, the extractive sectors represent one of the most crucial
sources of investment and income in their economies. Therefore, they would take risks to have
exploration activities in protected areas where the ecosystem is fragile. These operations have the
potential to drive economic growth, yet poor planning and governance can lead to increased
macroeconomic instability, conflict and negative environmental and socio-economic impacts.

311. Uganda is not the only country to discover oil reserves in the national parks . Several
developing countries around the world are also facing the challenge of balancing extractive
activities and tourism activities in protected areas.

312. In the Amazon basin area, both Ecuador and Peru have announced that oil
exploration will start in their National Parks. In Ecuador, an estimated 850 million barrels of
petroleum was discovered beneath the Tasuni National Park which is a fragile Amazonian park
inhabited by nomadic tribes. This area is not only home to indigenous people but also one of the
most biologically diverse places on the planet. Oil production could begin as early as 2016.
Biologist Kelly Swing, a professor at the Universidad San Francisco de Quito, evaluated the
environmental impacts of various oil operations in Ecuador, and he cited cases in which oil
companies planned to damage no more than two percent of their concessions, but because loggers
and settlers used oil roads to enter the area, as much as 20, 30 or 50 percent of the forest was
damaged or destroyed. In the 1980s and 90s, the Amazon already suffered from an oil spill and
the toxic waste is still there. There will also be potential oil exploration activities in Manu National
Park which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

313. In Peru, the government approved expansion plans in 2012 for the Camisea gas
project in the heart of a reserved area for isolated indigenous peoples110. The expansion plans
also has indicated that it is likely to span the eastern section of the reserve incorporating the
headwaters of the River Serjali and the River Manu in the neighboring Manu National Park which
is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The potential negative impacts will not only threaten the fragile
ecosystem, but also the indigenous people who rely on the forests and are extremely vulnerable.
In 1980s, the Nahua, one of the indigenous peoples of the Reserve, offered a tragic example of
such vulnerability. When Shell started first oil exploration in the area, the Nahua population was
reduced by almost 50 percent due to outbreaks of respiratory infections to which they had no
immunity. The surviving Nahua also expressed concerns that the impact would even spill over to


110
      Tickell, O. Peru: Amazon Tribes Sacrificed to Gas Project, Ecologist, January 27, 2014

                                                          105
neighboring areas and would mean that other isolated groups living in areas like Manu National
Park will also be affected.

314. In the DRC, oil exploration activities have been permitted in Virunga National Park
which is Africa’s oldest national park and home to critically endangered mountain gorillas .
Although according to the laws of DRC, activities harmful to the environment are prohibited in all
protected areas, including national parks, around 85 percent of the park has been allocated as oil
concessions by the DRC. Soco is the only company moving forward with the exploration plans.
Other companies, such as Total, have committed not to explore within Virunga. Soco explained
that the oil exploration activities would be separate from the mountain gorilla habitat and has
planned to work in partnership with locals to help conserve the park while ensuring economic
development. Several organizations have raised concerns regarding the potential negative impact
of oil exploration activities. The World Wildlife Fund criticized that Soco is putting the livelihoods
of local communities at risk and UNESCO indicated that the oil exploration would breach
Virunga’s World Heritage Site agreement. In addition, Soco’s own environmental impact
assessment showed that exploratory drilling could lead to air pollution, lung diseases, water
contamination, invasive species or habitat loss in the fragile ecosystem. In June 2014, Soco
announced it would withdraw from Virunga after concluding its current operational activities.

315. The problem of co-existence between mining and tourism around the globe has also
received attention recently. The Zambian government has allowed mining in the environmentally
sensitive Lower Zambezi National Park. In Asia, Mongolia’s tourism sector is facing competition
for the limited resources from the mining industry. Mining companies have acquired land-use
rights in several places of interest; attracted young people to move from hospitality jobs to mining
jobs; and received increasing support for transportation services. Although the development of
the mining industry could lead to an increase in the number of business travelers, there is an urgent
need for integrated and enhanced land protection laws to protect tourism products.

316. Due to the national economic interests, the challenges between protected areas and
the extractives industry are not unique to the developing countries, developed countries are
also working to identify the best practices. Although many companies do not make explicit and
public no-go commitments to protected areas, it is common practice for governments and
companies to employ impact mitigation responses to safeguard biodiversity both within and
outside of protected areas.

317. Within the extractive industry there are a number of examples of oil and mining
companies supporting improvements in protected areas systems. Support is provided through
contributing to the creation and extension of protected areas to include biodiversity values
identified through project site assessment; providing direct financial assistance or non-monetary
resources to unfunded parks; and supporting the development or implementation of protected area
management plan111. For example, in Sable Island National Park, Canada, Exxon Mobil developed
a code of practice to guide all personnel working on aspects of the project concerning human
interactions with the Sable Island environment. Parks Canada, Canada’s national parks agency, is
also working on its vision for Sable and a management plan to facilitate opportunities for
Canadians to connect with Sable Island in a sustainable way. In Queensland, Australia, natural gas

111
      Protected areas and the extractives industry: challenges and opportunities, UNEP, December, 2014

                                                         106
companies have put joint effort to establish a 15.5 km² national and regional park in the project
area on Curtis Island in response to Queensland law that requires impacts to be offset.

318. In order to better understand how the oil, mining and tourism industries can coexist
in nature reserves and protected areas, a number of examples in other countries have been
studied in detail. These case studies are contained in Annex 11. They aim to illustrate some good
practices implemented in a variety of locations applicable to Uganda, as well as some negative
experiences, such as oil spill disaster in the Gulf Region of the United States.

4.3.MFNP SURVEY - RESULTS AND FINDINGS

Tourists’ Views

319. To better understand current tourists’ experience in the MFNP, a survey was
conducted by the team from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the World
Bank in MFNP in 2014. The goals of the survey were to provide insight into the potential impact
of oil activities on tourism and the possible mitigation measures to ensure the beneficial
cohabitation of oil and tourism in the park. This survey was designed to follow up on the pilot
survey of 40 respondents at 4 lodges (Paraa, Murchison River Lodge, Sambiya, and Red Chilli),
conducted in March 2014, which indicated that a number of tourists had suggestions as to the
improvement of their experience in the park. It was decided to expand the number of respondents
and also the number of lodges where survey took place to obtain more representative results.

320. The survey was conducted during the high season utilizing face to face interviews and
self-enumeration methods to collect data. A total of 129 valid questionnaires were gathered at 6
lodges (Paraa, Chobe, Murchison River Lodge, Red Chilli, Budongo, and Yebo Park), with a
response rate of 96 percent. In addition, 38 guides and park rangers and 6 tour operators were
interviewed. The complete data collection instrument and methodology are presented in Annexes
12-15.

321. The tourists’ survey results captured the profile of tourists visiting MNFP. The sample
indicated that the majority of the tourists were under 45 (79 percent) and visited MFNP for the
first time (52 percent). The primary purpose of visiting Uganda was for vacation (58 percent).
When asked about the main source of information for MFNP, 42 percent of the sample reported
that they relied on travel guidebooks and travel agencies. Overall, respondents were satisfied with
their experience at MFNP. Ninety-eight percent of the respondents rated their experience in the
park as good to excellent and 88 percent of them would come back to the park or advise a friend
to visit the park.

322. It is important to note that at the time when the survey was conducted, Total had
already completed exploration and appraisal activities and there were no oil exploration
activities ongoing. Nevertheless, 45 percent of the sample still reported that they noticed some oil
activities in the park. They saw workers, tracks, oil rigs, and no entry signs etc., and 39 percent of
respondents reported that oil activities had some negative impact on their experience (see Figure
10).



                                                 107
Figure 10. Tourists’ Experience at MNFP and Impact of Oil Activities on their Enjoyment




323. In comparison, during the pilot survey which took place several months earlier, Total
was still wrapping up its activities in the park and activity was more visible. At that time, rigs
were already moved out of the park, but 58 percent of respondents still reported that they noticed
oil-related activities and the majority stated that these activities negatively impacted their
experience in the park.

324. When activities in the park re-start at a much higher scale during the construction
phase, there will be much more visibility and noise (which was not the case during the time
when both the pilot and the full-scale survey were undertaken). As mentioned previously,
Total estimates that there will be 750-800 wells drilled and up to three rigs could be drilling
simultaneously in the park. There will also be a lot of congestion in the park and surrounding areas
coming from the oil workers and movement of machinery.

325. The ratio of oil workers to tourists in the park can become quite high when there will
be several rigs drilling in the park simultaneously. Assuming that 60,000 tourists visit MFNP
in a year (based on UWA 2012 numbers), on an average day we would expect less than two
hundred tourists in the park. If three rigs simultaneously operate within the park (~80 workers per
rig), we would expect 240 workers. This would make the ratio of workers to tourists higher than
1. The ratio would fluctuate during the course of the year based on the number of rigs operating
inside the park and the number of tourists at the park on a given day. It would be important to take
into consideration seasonality of activities in the park and coordinate activities of the park and the
oil sector to the maximum extent possible in order to at least partially mitigate the impact on
tourists’ enjoyment.

326. When asked about the improvements which could be done to enhance tourists’
experience at the park, the majority of the full survey respondents agreed that improvements
were desirable. Tourists were largely in favor of separating oil and tourism activities as much as
possible, including utilizing separate tracks, entrances and ferries (see Figure 11).




                                                 108
                        Figure 11. Improvements Suggested by Tourists




327. Qualitative comments provided by the tourists reflected many concerns. A number of
comments indicated that some of the tourists were particularly disturbed that the ferry was being
used by both oil workers and tourists, which made it quite congested and created a rather
unpleasant experience for tourists (see Figure 12). It is important to keep in mind that the issue of
the ferry is less pressing now when oil activities in the park are minimal, but it will become
particularly serious when construction phase commences. During this phase significant numbers
of workers and equipment will be moved via the ferry, and tracks inside the park will also be
utilized extensively by the oil trucks.

 Figure 12. Ferry across the Nile in the MFNP during Appraisal Phase in January, 2014 -
                    Oil Workers and Tourists Travelled Side by Side




                                                109
328. Answers also indicated that tourists need to be provided more information on oil
exploration activities than is currently being provided. The completed interviews showed that
the majority of tourists (72 percent) were not aware of oil activities in the park before they arrived
and 84 percent of them reported they would want information to be provided. Some of the
qualitative comments indicated that many tourists were deeply concerned about the consequences
of oil exploration in the park for animals and nature in general, and did not see how the benefits
outweighed the costs. A number of tourists were wondering whether exploration should even be
undertaken in the park given potential negative impact on wildlife and wondered if the park will
be ruined as the result of oil activities. One tourist wrote: “It is awful to have an oil company in a
national park. It must be strictly forbidden!” Another tourist wrote: “This is alarming! We are not
being told the truth! Animals will leave and there will be no park! ...”

329. Overall, it appeared that lack of provided information on oil issues made some of the
tourists perceive oil-related activities in the park very negatively and be completely unaware
of the efforts which are being undertaken by multiple stakeholders. The situation could be
quite different if visitors were provided all of the details as to how environmental impacts are being
mitigated through the significant efforts of both the government and the IOCs and that the goal is
to leave the park in an even better state than when oil exploration started.

330. At present, information is provided only when tourists specifically ask for it. While
the team noted that some lodges had a Total flyer pinned to the wall in the lobby, it was not very
noticeable. Other lodges did not even have such a flyer. Since most tourists only spend 2 nights at
MFNP, they would hardly have time to look for information on oil-related activities and leave with
the impression they formed on their own. It is important to emphasize that the information should
come from the government and not from the IOCs to ensure its objectivity.

331. The team also explored whether there was any evidence of decline in the sightings of
animals due to oil activities in the park. Seventy-seven percent of the sample reported not having
seen all the species of animals they wanted to see. Two main reasons the respondents reported
included: (i) not right timing and (ii) they did not to expect to see the animals all the time. The
respondents were also asked to report the source of these explanations, 71 percent reported from
the guides and 17 percent was informed by the park officials.

Guides’ and Rangers’ Views

332. In addition to the tourists, the team interviewed 38 guides and park rangers to
understand what oil-related comments usually came from tourists and particularly gain
insights into the changing patterns of some species of animals. The interviews yielded a number
of important observations. From the guides’ perspective, 87 percent of the guides who completed
the interview reported their belief that decline in sightings of animals was due to oil exploration in
the park. One guide noted: “The challenge is about many cars in the park especially in the areas
where we find most of the Game (animals)”. Another guide stated: “Noise, light, dust, extra trucks,
and more human activity scares away some animals”. To complement these findings, the results
of a study on the impact of oil exploration on wildlife in MFNP showed that elephants, buffalos
and giraffes were most negatively affected and activities at the oil pads led to lower densities of



                                                 110
the large mammals and birds in MFNP 112 . Guides also frequently mentioned that cat family
sightings were lower due to increased activity in the park. It was also apparent that some guides
did not appear informed on the oil field development cycle and had very limited idea as to what
kinds of oil-related activities can be expected in the next several years.

333. When asked about the tourists’ comments, guides and rangers reported comments
similar to the ones gathered as part of the tourists’ survey. The most common complaints they
received from tourists related to congestion at park gates and ferry, trucks moving on the same
road with tourists, low sightings of interesting species, as well as fear that the park’s beauty will
be destroyed as the result of oil-related activities.

Tour Operators’ Views

334. The team also conducted a number of discussions with tour operators in Kampala to
seek their views on the oil activities in the MFNP and impact on tourism. The discussions with
tour operators confirmed that MFNP was essential for Uganda’s tourism due to its unique nature.
MFNP offers tourists an opportunity to see the spectacular falls, go on game drivers and boat rides
(this unique combination is not available at many parks) and the park is also not very far from
Kampala. The park has historically been highly popular among the tourists.

335. All of the interviewed tour operators were well aware of oil activities taking place in
MNFP. Some of the concerns highlighted by them included visual intrusion, presence of large
numbers of oil workers and trucks, lack of adequate restoration of sites, and use of the same ferry
by the oil workers and tourists. Some tour operators also voiced fears about an increase in poaching
activities at MNFP due to presence of a large number of workers in the park, as well as migration
of people from other areas closer to the oil fields development area in search of jobs.

336. Tour operators argued that it was crucial to ensure that MNFP does not lose its
attractiveness due to potentially lower sightings of animals and visual intrusion as the result
of oil activities. Negative experience at MFNP could even impact the tourists’ overall impression
of Uganda as a tourism destination. One important point for consideration, however, is that rather
few international tourists book tours to Murchison Falls exclusively; most go on a safari circuit
tour which includes several parks. Even if the tourists were to experience some small issues during
the safari ride at MFNP, they would still have several other parks to visit and improve their overall
impression of Uganda’s safaris. Another important point is that once construction phase is
completed, oil activity in the park will be much more limited during the production phase. Finally,
MNFP offers a lot of other activities besides safaris, which are not affected by oil exploration.
These can be leveraged to the maximum extent to compensate for any temporary visual intrusion
during the construction phase.

Restoration Sites

337. During the visit to MFNP, the survey team also examined some of the sites within the
park which were restored by Total after oil exploration was over. It was noted that some

112
  S. Prinsloo, P. Mulondon, G. Mugiru, and A.J. Plumptre, Measuring Response of Wildlife to Oil Operations in
Murchison Falls National Park, September, 2011

                                                      111
restoration sites needed more effort to mitigate the potential negative impact. For example, similar
vegetation that was found on the site originally needs to be planted for animals to come back.
Figure 13 shows that only grass has been planted but not the trees. It also shows that water ponds
are present in previous oil rig areas that could be a health hazard to wildlife. Comments about
inadequate site restoration were also voiced by several tour operators.

                             Figure 13: Restoration Sites in MFNP




4.4. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Lessons Learned

338. The cases studies presented in this chapter and Annex 11 provide examples of the
cohabitation of oil extraction and tourism, in order to foster economic development through
growth in both the oil and tourism sectors, continuous collaboration between different stakeholders
is critical to optimize growth while identifying, avoiding, and mitigating risks.

339. Oil field development is a long and complex process which involves different activities
at each phase. The impacts on tourism are different in each of these phases. The impact on tourism
will not be limited to natural capital, but also human capital, services and the regional economy.

340. In a disaster scenario, the scope of impact can go beyond the geographic area where
the accident takes place. In addition to the direct impact on travel demand, there is the more
extensive impact on the regional economy and livelihoods of local communities. The duration of
impact can last long, particularly in terms of the damage to a destination’s brand and its ability to
attract future investments and tourists. Tourists’ perceptions towards a destination are difficult to
manage and the recovery efforts require extensive resources and technical assistance.




                                                112
Policy Recommendations

341. Based on the results of survey and the lessons learned from other countries’
experiences, Uganda’s stakeholders and policy makers need to develop a strategic
framework to protect and promote the co-existence of oil and tourism sectors during the
lifecycle of oil fields development. There are three main stages in managing such cohabitation
strategically:

                             Table 22: Strategic Management Framework113

                                   Crisis Prevention and Planning
           Proactive planning and strategy formulation:
               o Identify relevant stakeholders and establish coordination/consultation
                   framework and communication system
               o Assess potential disasters and their probability of occurrences; develop
                   scenarios and analyze the impact of potential disaster
               o Educate public and private sector, members, communities and visitors

           Develop disaster contingency plans:
               o Identify potential negative impact and groups at risk
               o Assess capacities of communities and visitors to cope with negative impact
               o Identify actions necessary to avoid or minimize negative impact at each stage
               o Agree on, and commit to activation protocols

                                                          ↓
                                      Strategic Implementation
           Evaluate strategy and control strategically
               o Select appropriate strategy and make effective decision quickly
               o Influence or control crisis
           Understand and collaborate with stakeholders
               o Understand the needs of stakeholders
               o Collaborate between stakeholders at different levels to resolve disaster
           Manage resources
               o Establish responsive organizational structure and empower employee
               o Redeploy financial resources
           Communicate crisis to public
               o Develop crisis communication strategy including a public relations plan
               o Proactively manage crisis communications
               o Develop long term communication strategy


                                                        ↓
                                   Resolution, Evaluation and Feedback
           Recover and restore

113
      Adapted from: Richie, B.W., Crisis and Disaster Management for Tourism, 2009

                                                       113
            o Restore destination to pre-crisis situation
            o Use crisis as agent of change
        Evaluate and provide feedback
            o Evaluate the effectiveness of strategies and responses
            o Reassess the destinations


342. Currently, Uganda is at the prevention and planning stage which is the most critical
stage to foster the desired development in both oil and tourism sectors. Besides the national
oil spill contingency plan which is under preparation, the table below summarizes some specific
recommendations to address the identified potential negative impacts.

                          Table 23: Issues and Policy Recommendations

        Main Issues                                 Policy Recommendations

Potential deterioration        Develop integrated landuse plan. It is critical to assess the diverse
of natural and wildlife         activities in the national parks and develop an integrated landuse
assets                          plan for the entire oil extraction project cycle. Areas with high
                                tourism value (for example, where animals are sighted most
                                frequently) should not be subject to oil extraction activities. At the
                                same time, areas inside the park where animal sightings have
                                historically been low could be less valuable for tourists and
                                activities could be conducted there. Such an assessment and landuse
                                plan would minimize the negative impacts on animals, tourists’
                                experience and for Ugandans linked to the sector.

                               Intensify restoration efforts in the areas where exploration has
                                finished. It is important to ensure that vegetation is restored and
                                trees are planted in these areas for the animals to come back to them.
                                Water accumulation around old rig areas needs to be removed.

                               Continue monitoring the migration and sightings patterns of the
                                key animal species. During the construction phase, there will be
                                extended disturbances for animals, and changes in their behavior
                                will need to be monitored.

Disruption of tourism          Separate oil activities from tourism activities as much as
activities                      possible and focus on tourism offerings which are not affected
                                by oil. Some of the possible suggestions include using separate
                                entrances, tracks, and ferries for oil workers and tourists in the park.
                                Moreover, more weight needs to be given to the development of
                                tourism activities in the park which would not be impacted by the
                                oil. For example, bird watching, walking safari market in other



                                                 114
  locations of the park, boat rides can be very attractive for tourists
  and at the same time not impacted by the oil activity.

 Provide sufficient information to the tourists and
  guides/rangers in the park to ensure they possess up-to-date
  information on the oil-related activities in the park. Based on the
  results of the survey, the majority of tourists, guides, and tour
  operators wanted to be provided more information. The information
  should not come from the IOCs but the government to ensure its
  objectivity.

 Conduct periodic surveys of tourists’ and guides’/rangers’
  perceptions once oil-related activity re-starts in the park during
  the construction phase. The results of the current survey can be
  used as the baseline, as exploration and appraisal activities were
  finished by the time the survey was administered. It will also be
  beneficial to make projections of the ratio of oil workers to tourists
  in the park during the upcoming construction phase and make
  appropriate changes into the oil-related activities plans if the ratios
  are expected to be very high at some point in time.

 Engage cross-sector stakeholders. It is crucial to engage with
  multiple stakeholders and local communities at the early stage of
  development to enable full understanding of the two industries and
  foster collaboration. At present, the multiple agencies in the tourism
  sector still lack of coordination. Moving forward, a greater scale of
  consultations and coordination is needed to manage the risks and
  ensure the growth in both industries.

 Establish operational guidelines and legislation. One policy
  priority to promote the combined growth of the oil and tourism
  sectors is to enhance the existing operational regulations in national
  parks to mitigate the risks. A priority is to provide training and clear
  guidelines for the workers involved in oil extraction in the parks.
  The public sector needs to provide adequate supervision to ensure
  the operational guidelines are fully complied with by the oil
  companies. At the national level, legislation needs to be in place to
  specify enforcement procedures for the guidelines, as well as
  identification of areas that should not be subject to exploration
  activities and of endorsement of the conservation strategy.

 Improve community readiness and capacity building. It would
  be essential to provide effective training to the local communities,
  lodging and park staff in the national parks regarding ongoing oil
  activities, engage local Ugandans during the consultations and
  provide updated information regularly, as well as make sure that

                   115
                        local communities understand the benefits of diverse tools for local
                        economic growth and have the necessary resources for them to
                        adopt the changes. Given that there will be more population moving
                        to the park areas, it is also critical to ensure the distance between the
                        human settlements and the limits of the park. Communities need to
                        be educated about the potential environmental and wildlife issues.
                        At the same time, training should also be provided to the oil workers
                        in the national park to understand the tourism. Improving capacity
                        for planning and management in the public sector is also critical.

Threat of negative     Develop communication strategy. Communication strategy is
destination brand       critical both internally and externally. Tourists and stakeholders
                        need to be informed about activities in the parks to limit the
                        misperceptions and mitigate negative impact on the destination
                        brand.

Threat of oil spill    Require IOCs to put up an environmental bond. An
disaster                environmental bond needs to be issued to pay for environmental
                        damages in case the spill occurs and can be a valuable complement
                        to other regulatory approaches. It covers environmental damage and
                        restoration of the affected environment. With the bond in place, the
                        oil producer has some of its own money at stake, and is further
                        motivated to make good choices to improve environmental
                        protection.

                       Implement disaster prevention mechanism. Since the process of
                        oil extraction is lengthy, a disaster prevention mechanism is
                        important to manage the risks in each phase. Monitoring and
                        assessing the impact of each phase is also an effective way to
                        minimize the likelihood of disaster. Effective prevention and
                        preparation can also enable a faster and more effective response to
                        the potential disaster.

                       Develop disaster response strategy and action plans. Fast
                        response to the disaster can minimize the negative impacts on
                        tourism and speed up the recovery. The existing institutional
                        infrastructure gaps need to be addressed in order to provide the
                        capacity to respond to the disaster as fast as possible.




                                        116
                   CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR NATIONAL CONTENT DEVELOPMENT

343. Discovery of oil resources offers a unique opportunity to Uganda to leverage these
resources for the development of the economy. Even before oil production commences and oil
revenues start coming in, local private sector can participate in supplying the oil industry and grow
their business and national economy in general. The majority of suppliers in Uganda would not be
expected to become prime contractors for the IOCs and would often fall in the bottom of supply
chain, which has implications for the national content policy design. In order to achieve maximum
impact for the economy, some of the considerations to be kept in mind by the policymakers in
Uganda include importance of encouraging FDI into the oil and gas sector, addressing constraints
faced by domestic oil and gas suppliers, and ensuring sustainability of national content
development programs.

  I.   Encouraging FDI in the oil and gas industry of Uganda

344. Policymakers need to encourage FDI in the oil and gas industry of Uganda. This industry
is very new for Uganda and local capacity in many sectors needed to supply the IOCs is quite low.
While it might be possible to develop local capacity in some sectors to reach the level of quantity
and quality required by the IOCs, it might not be feasible in others.

345. In sectors which are too complex to develop locally in a short period of time, few joint
ventures would be expected to be established due to limited local capacity, and MNCs need to be
encouraged to set up subsidiaries in Uganda. By setting up operations in Uganda, MNCs would
greatly benefit Uganda’s economy from the standpoint of technology transfer, employment and
sourcing of local goods/services to carry out production. As mentioned above, in most cases,
domestic suppliers would not be expected to become prime contractors to IOCs anyway, so the
opportunities to become sub-contractors of subsidiaries of foreign market leaders would be quite
valuable for them.

346. For those sectors which already exist in Uganda or capacity can be easily developed, there
would be more feasibility to establish joint ventures, and they should be greatly encouraged. Each
individual deal would be structured depending on unique circumstances and requiring a specified
percentage of local ownership is not recommended.

347. National content needs to be defined in terms of value addition in Uganda, as opposed to
ownership of the company performing the value addition. This is essential to recognize the benefits
of FDI in Uganda.

348. Some of the countries which offer useful lessons to Uganda in balancing “localization” and
“nationalization” include Malaysia and Brazil. They understood higher benefits of FDI compared
to the benefits of mandating local ownership, and focused on attracting foreign firms to the country
so that know-how could be transferred to the nation gradually.




                                                117
 II.   Developing competitive local industries

349. For Uganda’s private sector, significant opportunities are opening up in supplying goods
and services demanded by the oil industry. Given the highly entrepreneurial culture of Ugandans,
this channel of transmitting benefits of the oil industry into the economy seems very promising.
Unfortunately, many emerging opportunities for Ugandan suppliers might not materialize due to a
number of constraints which local private sector is presently facing.

350. It is essential to address the constraints which the private sector is facing in supplying the
oil industry in a timely manner. Given that the construction phase when the majority of contracts
will be tendered is expected to commence in a couple of years (assuming the FID is made), support
to the private sector needs to be provided as soon as possible. The earlier private sector receives
support, the more time enterprises will have to build their capacity.

351. Interventions can be designed and implemented to address general constraints for all
suppliers, but can also be more focused, targeting specific sectors and regions to achieve more
impact. In addition, strategies need to be designed for the periods following the scale-down of
procurement by the IOCs when the construction phase is over.

    (a) Addressing general market failure

352. All oil and gas suppliers in Uganda, especially MSMEs, face a number of constraints,
including lack of information on opportunities in the oil and gas sector; business environment
unconducive to private sector growth; challenges with access to credit; inadequate infrastructure;
difficulties with meeting IOC quality standards; difficulties with meeting high volume/quantity
requirements; limited business knowledge of suppliers; and other constraints.

353. Interventions can be designed to address the general market failure and alleviate these
constraints for all the suppliers of the oil and gas industry. Such interventions include
establishment of the IEC to build the capacity of local suppliers in a number of areas, including,
inter alia, quality standards, bidding on contracts, preparing business plans, financial statements
and loan applications; implementation of business environment reforms; assistance with
improving access to finance for suppliers; and alleviation of infrastructure bottlenecks.

    (b) Promoting specific sectors for national content development

354. In addition to alleviating constraints common for all oil and gas suppliers in Uganda,
additional support can be provided to priority sectors for national content development. Such
interventions have the potential to solve bottlenecks in a focused way. The IBS identified twenty
five sectors with high potential for local content (transportation and logistics, food supply,
domestic waste management, facility management, manpower agency, work safety products, road
construction and others). These are the sectors which are less technical and where local capacity
exists. Unfortunately, there are only two sectors (security and cement manufacturing) among the
twenty five which are meeting O&G standards and have a quantity gap of less than 10 percent.
The remaining twenty three sectors face either quantity, or quality gap, or both. Without support,
national content in these sectors will be much lower than it could be. Support can be provided


                                               118
through matching grants for technology improvement, quality certification, infrastructure
interventions benefitting these sectors, dedicated financing programs.

   (c) Promoting specific regions

355. Additional support can also be targeted to specific regions of the country to improve
competitiveness of the private sector there. Due to the importance of Kampala for national
economy and availability of many businesses which could serve the oil and gas industry there, it
is strongly recommended that Kampala become the center of national content initiatives. Further
strengthening of the capacity of enterprises in Kampala would be the priority. The IEC would be
expected to be headquartered in Kampala.

356. The possibilities for involving the private sector of the Albertine Region in the oil and gas
sector as suppliers also need to be explored. The prospect of supplying food to the oil camps
appears a major opportunity for the region given that most of the population is involved in
agriculture. Achievement of high level of participation of the Albertine Region is highly desirable-
both from the social and economic standpoint. The GoU has several approaches to choose from,
such as NGO, large scale investor, or agro industrial park. Furthermore, in order to build the
capacity of the private sector in the Albertine Region, one or several satellite IEC could be set up
there. These centers would facilitate the inclusion of local suppliers in the supply chain of the
IOCs.

   (d) Ensuring sustainability of national content interventions

357. When designing national content development programs in Uganda, it is important to keep
in mind that the ultimate goal is the creation and development of the competitive and sustainable
local businesses which would be successfully operating well beyond the construction phase of the
oil and gas industry. Promotion of inefficient businesses which are given contracts with the IOCs
solely to meet national content targets would breed unproductive practices and only increase the
costs. Both the authorities and the businesses need to keep in mind that the high demand from the
oil and gas sector will be very short lived. After the demand of the O&G industry declines,
businesses which benefitted from the IOC contracts will be expected to continue serving other
industries in Uganda and abroad, and for this they need to be competitive.

358. A labor mobility strategy (e.g., redeploying skilled professionals from O&G industry to
other fields) needs to be carefully thought through. Strategies for redeploying suppliers to other
industries also have to be developed. When selecting priority sectors for national content
development, it would be particularly important to consider possibility of using products of these
sectors in other industries in Uganda and/or overseas.

359. The GoU, the IOCs, the local private sector and the development partners all have a
role to play in supporting the development of national content in Uganda. Some of the
interventions which could help to alleviate these constraints are presented in Table 24 below.
Multiple national content support initiatives are already underway. These include, inter alia, the
establishment of the IEC, documentation of O&G quality standards, and simplification of
processes of business registration and licensing.


                                                119
                 Table 24: Key Interventions to Enhance Participation of Uganda’s Suppliers in the Oil and Gas Industry
       Challenge        Desired Outcomes/                                     Roles of Key Stakeholders
                            Timeframe              IOC/EPCs          Government Authorities (MoFPED,   Private Sector Development Partners
                                                                                                         MEMD, BoU, MTIC, local                  (e.g.,associations,
                                                                                                            governments)                               banks)
ADDRESSING GENERAL MARKET FAILURE
1. Lack of information on      All interested local suppliers,    -Submit their procurement        -Enforce the requirement to                   -Raise awareness         -Provide capacity-
opportunities in the oil       including MSMEs, have              plans to the government          communicate demand by IOCs                    among their              building to the
and gas sector for local       access to information on the       showing projected demand         -Ensure access to procurement                 members on               authorities on M&E and
suppliers                      pipeline of procurement            for goods and services           opportunities for all suppliers; make         upcoming                 approaches of engaging
                               opportunities with the IOCs        -Conduct workshops with          effort to involve small suppliers and         opportunities and        vulnerable groups of
Vulnerable groups (small       through a public website and       suppliers on a regular basis     women                                         how to apply for         suppliers
businesses, women…) have       IEC. “Connection” to               to communicate upcoming          -Monitor numbers of MSME applications         them (private sector
even less information than     IOCs/EPCs is not needed to         opportunities                    per bid and require both IOCs and EPCs        associations)
others                         obtain information.                -Create a supplier register      to report on the national content
                               12-18 months                                                        -Support the establishment of an IEC
2. Business environment        Environment created for            -Communicate challenges           -Implement reforms to create an              -Communicate             Provide support to the
unconducive to private         smooth business operations         faced in the business             environment for smooth business              challenges faced by      authorities with the
sector growth                                                     environment to the                operations (e.g., simplification of the      enterprises to the       implementation of the
                               24-36 months                       authorities                       process of business registration,            authorities (private     business environment
                                                                                                    business licensing, obtaining                sector associations)     reforms
                                                                                                    construction permits, paying taxes,
                                                                                                    registering property etc.)
3. Challenges with             -O&G suppliers can access           -“Pre-qualify” suppliers,        -Implement reforms to strengthen             - Build awareness        -Provide funding for
accessing credit for local     credit at financial institutions    making them more likely          financial infrastructure (e.g., credit       among their              credit lines, risk sharing
suppliers:                     -Counseling is available at a       to obtain financing from         reporting system, insolvency, secured        members of the           facilities, and financial
-Low financial literacy of     centralized location on             financial institutions.          transactions framework, implementation       available programs       infrastructure
suppliers                      bookkeeping, how to prepare         -Expedite invoice payment        of collateral registry)                      (private sector          -Build capacity of the
-High perceived risk of        a loan application and a            -Share information about         -Provide support for pension system          associations)            authorities and the
small suppliers to financial   business plan, etc.                 suppliers with financial         reform and capital markets development       -Develop new             private sector (MSME
institutions due to            -IOCs/EPCs modify their             institutions to reduce           -Set up credit lines and risk-sharing        products targeting       and financial
undeveloped financial          procedures to improve               perceived risk                   facilities for O&G suppliers                 O&G suppliers            institutions)
infrastructure                 chances of suppliers to obtain      -Issue more definitive           -Avail training to suppliers to prepare      (financing backed by     -Make investments in
-Lack of long-term             credit where possible               contracts as opposed to          financial statements and loan                IOC contracts)           eligible suppliers (IFC).
resources in the system        12-18 months                        “framework” contracts            applications (through the IEC)               (financial intuitions)
4. Inadequate                  Infrastructure is adequate for     - Communicate challenges          -Alleviate major infrastructure              -Communicate             Provide funding for the
infrastructure:                businesses to operate              faced to the authorities          bottlenecks (access to electrical            challenges faced by      key projects and
- Poor road infrastructure     smoothly                                                             networks, water).                            enterprises to the       capacity-building of
-Lack of electricity access                                                                         -Explore possibilities for establishing an   authorities (private     authorities
                               24-36 months                                                         industrial park with shared facilities       sector associations)



                                                                                                 120
5. Difficulties meeting      -Standards are harmonized       -Harmonize the quality         -Complete the documentation of the          -Build awareness       -Provide TA to the
IOC quality standards:       between the IOCs                standards between the IOCs     required standards                          among their            authorities with the
- Differing standards        -Suppliers know what            so that local enterprises do   -Communicate standards to suppliers and     members of the         strengthening of quality
between the IOCs;            standards apply to activities   not need to meet separate      provide capacity-building on them           available programs     infrastructure
- High costs of              -Suppliers can find BDS         standards for each of the      through the IEC                             (private sector        -Provide funding for
certifications;              providers in Uganda             three IOCs                                                                 associations)          matching grants
- Challenges with finding                                                                                                                                      -Provide TA to BDS
service providers            12-18 months                                                                                                                      providers
6. Difficulties meeting      - There are more contracts      -Unbundle contracts where      - Establish a requirement to unbundle       -Build awareness       See #3 above
high volume/quantity         with smaller volume/            possible to ensure that more   contracts                                   among their
requirements                 quantity requirements for       local suppliers can become     -Monitor numbers of MSME applications       members of the
- Contracts are large and    which more suppliers would      eligible to bid                per bid                                     available programs
require suppliers to have    be eligible                                                    -Provide assistance with access to credit   (private sector
significant capacity         -Financing, including for                                      to enterprises (see #3 above)               associations)
-Financing to increase       medium and long term, is                                                                                   -Provide financing
production capacity is       available for eligible                                                                                     (see #3) (financial
difficult to obtain          suppliers                                                                                                  intuitions)
                             12-18 months
7. Limited business          Suppliers have a centralized Establish an IEC which would provide comprehensive local content development programs to facilitate participation of
knowledge of suppliers:      location where they can      local suppliers in the oil and gas sector
-Limited knowledge on        obtain training
how to prepare bids, what
standards to use etc.     12-18 months
DEVELOPING PRIORITY SECTORS AND REGIONS
1. A number of sectors    Support is provided to         -Communicate projected           - Alleviate infrastructure bottlenecks in  - Facilitate        - Provide funding for
have substantial gaps in  enterprises in key sectors to  demand for goods and             key areas                                  supplier business   support of select
meeting quality and       upgrade their facilities to    services                         -Establish dedicated credit facilities     relations,          sectors/regions
quantity requirements of  meet standards, increase       -Pre-qualify eligible            - Provide matching grants for quality      encourage           - Provide capacity-building
the IOCs                  volume of production etc.      competitive suppliers            certifications                             formation of JVs    to enterprises
                          12-18 months                                                    -Establish IEC in priority regions         (private sector
2. Priority regions for   Priority regions identified                                     -For sectors where local capacity cannot   associations)
national content          and their key challenges                                        be easily developed, provide incentives    -Provide financing
development have not yet  addressed                                                       to the foreign companies to set up         (see #3) (financial
been selected             12-24 months                                                    subsidiaries in Uganda                     intuitions)
ENSURING SUSTAINABILITY OF NATIONAL CONTENT INTERVENTIONS
No strategy exists to     A clear strategy to redeploy   -Communicate timelines           -Manage expectations of the enterprises    -Raise awareness    -Provide TA to the
facilitate labor mobility both skilled labor and O&G     for scaling down                 -Develop a strategy for periods            of suppliers of     authorities on possible
and develop intersectoral suppliers after the completion procurement                      following the completion of                short-lived nature  strategies to facilitate labor
linkages for the periods  of construction is developed   -Provide inputs for the          construction                               of O&G demand       mobility and encourage
following the completion  with participation of all key  strategy for periods             -Leverage the IEC to provide capacity-     and  encourage  to  intersectoral linkages
of construction           stakeholders                   following the completion         building to suppliers on re-focusing their expand customer     -Provide capacity-building
                          Within 12 months               of construction                  operations                                 base                to enterprises

                                                                                        121
CO-EXISTENCE BETWEEN OIL AND TOURISM

360. The GoU needs to be conscious of the relationships between the emerging oil sector
and tourism, which is one of the long-term drivers of Uganda’s economy. 40 percent of
Uganda’s known oil reserves are found in the MFNP, one of the most popular parks in Uganda.
When construction phase commences, Total estimates that there will be 750-800 wells drilled and
up to three rigs could be drilling simultaneously in the park. There will also be a lot of congestion
in the park and surrounding areas coming from the oil workers and movement of machinery,
causing disturbance for animals and tourists.

361. To better understand current tourists’ experience in the MFNP, a survey was
conducted by the team from the MoTWA and the World Bank in MFNP in 2014 . The goals
of the survey were to provide insights into the potential impact of oil activities on tourism and the
possible mitigation measures to ensure the beneficial cohabitation of oil and tourism in the park.

362. At the time when the survey was conducted, Total had already completed exploration
and appraisal activities and there were no oil exploration activities ongoing. Nevertheless, the
survey yielded a number of useful observations:
     45 percent of the sample still reported that they noticed some oil activities in the park. They
       saw workers, tracks, oil rigs, and no entry signs.
     39 percent of surveyed tourists reported that oil activities had some negative impact on
       their experience.
     When asked about the improvements which could be done to enhance tourists’ experience
       at the park, the majority of the respondents agreed that improvements were desirable.
       Tourists were largely in favor of separating oil and tourism activities, including utilizing
       separate tracks, entrances and ferries. Answers also indicated that tourists need to be
       provided more information on oil related activities than is currently being provided.

363. In addition to the tourists, the team interviewed guides and park rangers to
particularly gain insights into the changing patterns of some species of animals. 87 percent of
the guides who completed the interview reported their belief that decline in sightings of animals
was due to oil exploration in the park. Guides also frequently mentioned that cat family sightings
were lower due to increased activity in the park. Finally, it was apparent that some guides did not
appear informed on the oil field development cycle and had very limited idea as to what kinds of
oil-related activities can be expected in the next several years.

364. It is essential for the GoU to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to minimize
disruption to the tourism activity at MFNP while oil activities are ongoing and affected sites
are restored following the completion of activities. Based on the results of survey and the lessons
learned from other countries’ experiences, Uganda’s stakeholders and policy makers need to
develop a strategic framework to protect and promote the co-existence of oil and tourism sectors
during the lifecycle of oil field development. Table 25 below shows key interventions to support
the co-existence between oil and tourism at MFNP.




                                                122
                                   Table 25: Key Interventions to Support the Co-Existence between Oil and Tourism
  Challenge                Desired Outcomes/                                         Roles of Key Stakeholders
                              Timeframe                   IOCs           Government Authorities (MoTWA,    Private Sector                                           Development Partners
                                                                                             UWA, UTB, local governments)                   (e.g., lodges, tour
                                                                                                                                           operators, guides)
1. Information on     -An oil and tourism                   -Provide updated             - Establish an oil and tourism                   -Raise significant      -Build capacity of the
oil-related           communication unit endorsed by        information on the           communication unit to enable efficient           issues to the           authorities in monitoring of
activities in the     the government is established to      timeline and extent of       coordination among various agencies              authorities             oil-related activities in the
park is limited and   coordinate between stakeholders.      various oil activities to    -Monitor IOCs’ ongoing oil-related                                       park
mainly provided       -Stakeholders, including tourists     government authorities       activities at MFNP and review                                            -Provide support with the
by the IOCs           and guides, are provided with up-                                  documentation submitted by the IOCs                                      establishment of the oil and
                      to-date information from objective                                 - Provide information on oil-related                                     tourism communication unit
                      sources.                                                           activities in the park to the key stakeholders
                      12-18 months                                                       (e.g., tourists, guides)
2. Potential          -Comprehensive land use plan          -Intensify the efforts for   - Visit restored sites, verify if they have      -Communicate            -Provide support for the
deterioration of      developed;                            sites restoration            been restored appropriately and require          sightings patterns of   continued monitoring of the
natural and           -Sites are properly restored                                       prompt remedial action if necessary              the key animal          changes in vegetation,
wildlife assets                                                                          -Develop and implement an integrated land        species and any         migration and sightings
                                                                                         use plan for the entire oil extraction cycle     concerns to the         patterns of the key animal
                      12-18 months                                                                                                        authorities             species
3. Disruption of      -Oil activities and tourism           -Provide information         -Engage cross-sector stakeholders and            - Collaborate on the    -Build capacity of the
tourism activities    activities are separated as much as   about upcoming activities    foster collaboration                             tourism products        authorities and the private
                      possible                              to the authorities           -Enhance existing tourism offerings              development             sector
                      -Development of new tourism           -Provide training to oil     -Conduct periodic surveys of tourists’           -Provide insights to    -Provide support to tourism
                      offerings in the park which are not   workers regarding            experience in the park                           the authorities and     MSMEs
                      impacted by oil                       tourism activities in the    -Issue legislations and regulations              IOCs regarding any      -Provide funding for
                      -Operational guidelines and           park and implement           -Provide infrastructure in the park              operational             infrastructure
                      legislation issued                    operational guidelines       necessary for separation of oil activities       challenges
                      12-18 months                                                       from tourism
4. Threat of          -Communication strategy               - Provide information         - Increase destination marketing efforts to     -Offer alternative      -Provide funding for the
negative              developed                             about upcoming activities     mitigate misperception                          tourism products        marketing campaign
destination brand                                           to the authorities           -Enhance existing tourism offerings                                      -Capacity-building of
and lower             12-18 months                                                                                                                                government authorities
competitiveness
5. Threat of oil      -Disaster prevention mechanism        -Put up environmental         - Monitor and assess the impact of each         - Raise significant     - Capacity-building of
spill disaster        developed and implemented             bond                          oil field development phase                     issues to the           government authorities
                      -IOCs put up environmental bond       -Follow safeguards            -Finalize oil spill contingency plan,           authorities
                      -Disaster response strategy and       guidelines                    improve institutional arrangement and
                      action plans developed                -Implement disaster           capacity to address the challenges if oil
                      18-24 months                          prevention mechanism          spill disaster were to occur
                                                                                           123
 ANNEX 1: ACTIVITIES AT EACH STAGE OF OIL & GAS VALUE CHAIN - GOODS & SERVICES114




114
      Tordo S, Warner M., Manzano O. and Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil & Gas Sector. The World Bank. 2013
                                                                            124
125
ANNEX 2: STATUS OF LICENSING IN THE ALBERTINE GRABEN OF
                        UGANDA115




                          126
          ANNEX 3. LOCAL CONTENT OBJECTIVES OF THE NATIONAL OIL
                             AND GAS POLICY


    Objective 7: To ensure optimum national participation in oil and gas activities

    Strategies:

   Promote state participation in Production Sharing Agreements with a view of providing better
    opportunities for the state to understand the basis for decisions in exploration, development and
    production, together with acquiring the skills necessary for commercial management of the
    sector
   Promote use of the country’s materials, goods and services in oil and gas sector activities.
   Promote participation of the country’s entrepreneurs in providing goods and services to the sub-
    sector as a way of optimizing the contribution of oil and gas activities to the overall development
    of the country.
   Promote public private partnerships whose benefits outweigh their cost, and whose costs and
    benefits are mutually and fairly shared by the partners.
   Encourage civil society to participate in the building of a productive, vibrant and transparent oil
    and gas sector.
   Promote employment of Ugandans in the oil and gas sector.
   Promote transfer of skills and technology to the country.

    In order to achieve these strategies, the policy specifies several actions:

   Put in place the necessary regulatory framework for state participation and implementation of
    national content.
   Put in place an institution to undertake state participation in oil and gas activities.
   Identify the opportunities for national content in oil and gas activities and plan for its
    implementation.

    Objective 8: To support the development and maintenance of national expertise

    Strategies:

   Identify the training skills required for the sector and plan for their development through both
    formal and industrial training.
   Utilize oil and gas activities in the country to support provision of the necessary training.
   Promote provision of goods and services to the sector by national enterprises and entrepreneurs as
    a way of building national expertise.
   Provide appropriate training to Government personnel in the relevant fields as one of the ways to
    facilitate professional dialogue with oil companies

    115
          Maps and Publications of the PEPD, http://www.petroleum.go.ug/publications.php
                                                            127
   Broaden the national education curricula to prepare the necessary workforce for the growing oil
    and gas sector in the country
   Promote the development of skills during the implementation of oil and gas activities

    In order to achieve these strategies, the policy specifies several actions:

   Train Government personnel in monitoring oil and gas exploration, development and production.
   Review and expand the education curricula in the country with a view of producing the
    workforce required for oil and gas activities nationally.
   Support the development of skills and competitive competencies necessary for the country’s
    entrepreneurs to participate in the delivery of goods and services for the oil and gas sector.
   Require licensed oil companies and their subcontractors to provide training to Ugandans.




                                                     128
 ANNEX 4. ANALYSIS OF ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT CENTERS IN
                     SELECT COUNTRIES

                                            1. Angola
Context

1.      In order to alleviate some of the constraints faced by the local enterprises in Angola,
in 2003 an international NGO- CDC Development Solutions- started working with operators
and the authorities to develop solutions to improve the capacity and competitiveness of local
suppliers so that they could become suppliers and contractors of the oil industry. A gap analysis
of existing SMEs was carried out, and a number of measures were identified to enable local
business development. A comprehensive implementation strategy was developed by CDC, initially
with the support of British Petroleum (BP) and the Ministry of Petroleum.

Enterprise Development Center

2.      A couple of years later, in line with the recommendations, the Centro de Apoio Empresarial
(CAE) was established with the support and funding of the national oil company, Sonangol, BP,
Exxon Mobil, Total, and Chevron. CAE’s support ranged from assisting local SMEs with financial
analysis, the preparation of bids, and training on specific elements associated with the provision
of goods and services to the oil industry. CAE beneficiaries were restricted to wholly owned or
majority owned Angolan companies. A company directory was created including certified local
companies and an assessment of their services and capacity. In 2010, CAE extended its range of
services to include the provision of assistance to qualified SMEs in accessing financing to help
address barriers to local SMEs development and growth (the A2F Program). The program was
successful in raising awareness of financial services, and helped SME to create innovative
investment and lending models. CAE’s inception strategy included a plan to transfer, employ,
train, mentor, and empower Angolan staff, with the ultimate goal of transitioning the program
entirely to Angolan leadership. Angolan staff held all but two key leadership roles.

3.       Since its inception the CAE had the following achievements:
        4,809 job generated;
        Over 100 companies certified in various sectors;
        224 business trainings delivered to more than 3386 participants representing over 2151
         Angolan companies;
        Database established with more than 1490 national SMEs
        Participant SMEs won 348 contracts worth over US$ 241 million.

4.       Lessons learned from CAE’s experience include the following:

        CAE provided a way to catalyze oil companies’ local procurement efforts into a common
         platform, providing uniformity of approach and the scale necessary to make the initiative
         relevant. The approval of the Angolan authorities, and Sonangol’s support was critical to
                                                129
          the success of the program, ensuring the necessary level of coordination among private
          companies’ initiatives and government actions.
         CAE facilitated the exchange of information and ideas between buyers and suppliers on
          ways to streamline supply chains.
         The A2F program was a crucial element of CAE’s success, enabling local SMEs to access
          financing opportunities to support investment in capacity and processes necessary to
          participate in larger oil and gas contracts and become competitive going forward.
         The early involvement of all stakeholders was important to the design of the correct design
          of the program, as well as to manage expectations.
         Although inefficiencies may still cause local suppliers to be less competitive than
          international ones, costs are expected to fall with rising transaction volumes and efficiency
          gains.

Other Local Content Development Initiatives

5.     Besides the implementation of the enterprise development center, there were some
additional initiatives in Angola to support local content development.

         Angolan Enterprise Program. The US$4 million program, financed by Chevron and the
          Spanish International Cooperation Agency, funded the Luanda business incubator that
          provided premises and training on seminars in finance, management knowledge, human
          resource skills, and technology networking.

         Zimbo Fund. Total launched the Zimbo program in 2006 with Angolan bank Banco Totta
          and several NGOs to support the creation and growth of small and medium-sized
          companies. As part of the program, they set up a guarantee fund to facilitate access to loans
          for small businesses. The program minimized the credit risk for Banco Totta, making it
          easier for it to grant affordable loans to small and medium-sized businesses. Zimbo has led
          to the creation of 300 jobs and a dozen local businesses, including a textile workshop, an
          Internet café and a farm cooperative.

                                                     2. Chad
6.      The situation in Chad at the time of the introduction of the enterprise center was
somewhat similar to Uganda: highly informal economy with few existing companies meeting
contractual requirements set by the IOCs; domination of MSMEs as compared to large enterprises,
and lack of the basic technical, public, and financial infrastructure necessary to fully reap the
benefits of the development of oil fields in the region. Corruption perception index in both Uganda
and Chad is rather low, meaning that corruption is widespread116. Nevertheless, there were also
some differences. Chad’s population is much smaller (approximately 10 million people in 2006).


116
   Corruption perception index is set by Transparency International. In 2013 report, Uganda ranked 140 on the
corruption perception index, compared to Chad at 163 (out of 175 countries). In 2006, which is more relevant for
Chad project, Chad ranked 156 (out of 163 countries).
                                                       130
7.      IFC’s program in Chad was designed to go hand in hand with the lending operation.
After the Board approved a US$100 million IFC direct investment in the Chad-Cameroon Pipeline
Project in 2001, IFC developed the accompanying Chad SME Linkages Program.

8.      IFC’s linkages team partnered with the oil consortium, sub-contractors, international
NGOs and Chad’s Chamber of Commerce to support local SMEs and build linkages between
the oil industry consortium and local suppliers. The Enterprise Center in Chad, which became
operational since December 2004, was established by IFC in association with the local Chamber
of Commerce. It has since been positioned as the major vehicle for delivering IFC’s local MSME
development efforts in Chad. The Center had facilities located in N’Djamena, with satellite centers
in Doba, Moundou and Sahr in the South. This Enterprise Center was a one-stop shop for a
spectrum of services, such as local supplier identification and evaluation, training, consultations
on contract management and delivery, information dissemination, and access to finance. In
addition, efforts were begun to increase communication between ExxonMobil and the local
suppliers regarding the company’s procurement procedures to make contracts more accessible.
Counselors were hired and trained locally.

9.     All services to SMEs were available at relatively low-cost to local companies (US$5 -
US$80) because (i) the local private sector had limited financial resources; and (ii) Chad does not
have a market tradition to pay for business development services.

10.    Overall, the program in Chad include the following components:

  i.   SME mapping. A comprehensive survey of local SMEs was conducted to locate SMEs
       and maximize the outreach for the company’s tender announcements. For example, in
       Chad, ExxonMobil had a list of only 117 SMEs, while the Enterprise Center jointly run by
       IFC and the Chamber of Commerce of Chad developed a list of more than 1,300 SMEs.
       Developing a comprehensive database of suppliers went a long way toward making the
       local supplier development program more effective through greater outreach. In Chad, this
       task was conducted by the Enterprise Center staff through on-the-ground surveys.

 ii.   SME rating system. All the SMEs were evaluated according to their level of competency
       and given a rating. Tender announcements publicly specified the prerequisite rating
       required for bid applicants, eliminating the potential for special interest favors.

       Local SMEs were rated according to four star categories and they were able to perform
       certain levels of services based on their rating:

          Zero star contractors. These are suppliers which do not have the adequate level to
           work on the company’s contracts. They lack a structure and border on being in the
           informal sector.
          One star contractors. These are base suppliers which have the attributes to perform
           Level I services. They are established SMEs with proper administration and paperwork,
           but they lack basic form of management tools and practices.

                                               131
              Two star contractors. These are aspiring world class suppliers and they have the
               attributes to perform Level II services. These SMEs are fairly well run, specialize in
               specific sectors, and are managed using modern practices. At the same time, there is
               room for growth.
              Three star contractors. These are world-class suppliers. They have the attributes to
               perform Level III services. These contractors would be expected to perform a lot of
               high-technology services at the same level of quality with international contractors.

 iii.      Public workshops. Open to all, public workshops corrected information asymmetries in
           the market by providing SMEs with access to information regarding the pipeline of bidding
           opportunities over a medium to long term (six months to two years), as well as standards
           demanded by ExxonMobil from its suppliers. As a result of the workshops, applications
           per bid in Chad increased five-fold, from 5 to 25 SMEs.

 iv.       eProcurement system. A transparent system for local contracting was designed, using the
           eProcurement system developed by Ariba software for ExxonMobil. The program was
           implemented by the IFC in association with ExxonMobil and the Chamber of Commerce
           of Chad. Introduction of an eProcurement system ensured that the actual procurement
           process is transparent, as well as free of corruption and error.

  v.       Access to infrastructure. The SMEs were provided access to computers and the Internet.

 vi.       SME capacity building:

          Business development training. Training modules include: launching a business,
           determining legal structure, accessing financing, effective marketing, and e-commerce
          Electronic bidding training. SMEs were offered continuous training and capacity-building
           to use the lead company’s eProcurement system, submit required documentation and tender
           bids, and deliver contracts effectively. One-on-one coaching was available.
          Personalized business consultation. One-on-one meetings with Enterprise Center officers
           were available to assist small business owners in the process of addressing issues in their
           business. The consultations occurred in one of two forms of either short-terms
           consultations (2 hours in a series of three sessions), or intensive consultations (3 half-days/
           month over 3 month periods).

vii.       Access to finance. Strategies and programs were developed in association with financial
           institutions to help SMEs get access to resources and demonstrate their ability to execute a
           contract

11.     Despite the challenging context of the country in terms of security and tumultuous
relations with the World Bank, the Chad Enterprise Center managed to achieve significant
results. Indeed, several months in 2006, 2007 and 2008 marked very difficult periods for Chad:
suspension of the World Bank’s programs, fighting between government and rebel forces, threats


                                                    132
by the Government of Chad to shut down oil operations as a result of tax disputes, staff
evacuations. Despite these obstacles, the EC program did not suffer any major disruptions.

12.     The program yielded a number of important achievements. As of June 2009, 102 local
firms were assisted in electronic bidding. 30 contracts worth over $56 million were awarded. In
2012, the project’s support of Chad and Cameroon’s economies through purchases of goods and
services from local suppliers totaled 88 billion FCFA (US$175 million)117. Since the project began,
its purchases of goods and services from local suppliers in Chad and Cameroon totaled over US$3
billion (with Chad accounting for about two thirds).

13.      In 2010 management of the Chad Enterprise Center was transferred to the Chamber
of Commerce. The center became an integral unit of the Chamber of Commerce, with dedicated
personnel trained in key enterprise training and support services such as electronic procurement
for oil companies, management training, business planning, and access to finance facilitation.

                                                    3. Ghana
14.    Ghana’s Enterprise Development Centre (EDC), inaugurated in Takoradi in May
2013, is the Government of Ghana's initiative spearheaded by the Ministry of Energy and
Petroleum (MoEP) and Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) in collaboration with the Jubilee
Partners (Tullow, Kosmos, Anadarko, Sabre Oil and Gas, and Ghana National Petroleum
Corporation (GNPC). The Jubilee partners are funding the project over the next five years at a cost
of US$ 5 million.

15.     The EDC is commissioned to provide support to Ghanaian SMEs to competitively
position them and take advantage of the numerous business opportunities in the oil and gas
sector. The goal of the center is to ensure that Ghanaian SMEs get a fair share of the investment
in the oil and gas industry. The EDC is consistent with Ghana’s wider strategy of strengthening
the private sector and particularly local SMEs to grow on sustainable basis and to drive the viable
development of the oil and gas industry.

16.     Enablis Entrepreneurial Network Ghana (Enablis) was appointed by the Jubilee
Partners and MoEP to establish the EDC. Enablis is the largest entrepreneurial network in
Africa, and is present in such African countries as South Africa, Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda, and
Ghana. It was founded by the Canadian telecommunications entrepreneur Charles Sirois and global
consulting firm Accenture. Enablis’ goal is to reduce poverty through exponential job creation,
and a unique entrepreneur development model includes identification of promising entrepreneurs
at the SME level; nurturing of their professional and personal development and providing them
with networking, coaching, mentoring, skills acquisition and financing. By 2012, Enablis reached
more than 2,400 accredited members in many industries. Enablis Ghana was established in Accra
in 2009. Given Enablis’ mission, it appears to be an appropriate organization to establish the EDC
in Ghana.



117
      Chad/Cameroon Development Project. Project Update #33. 2012 .
                                                       133
17.    The main functions of the EDC include:

                 Identification of opportunities and facilitating the development of local SMEs for
                  their participation in the oil and gas sector.
                 Identification, review, and communication of required standards for effective
                  participation in the oil and gas industry.
                 Promotion of collaboration amongst the local SMEs.
                 Offering of training and development, business incubation, and consultancy
                  services to SMEs to be competitive. The training modules will include general
                  business skills development as well as skills development in oil and gas-specific
                  areas like contracting processes, terms and conditions, and the fundamentals of
                  offshore environment, health and safety policy
                 Arranging third party support where necessary.

18.      The EDC is an essential part of the local content development in Ghana. As mentioned
earlier in this report, regulations in Ghana set rather ambitious targets in terms of what minimum
percentage of local content needs to be achieved in different categories of goods and services over
the 10-year timeframe, taking into consideration the level of complexity of these services. While
at the start, only 10% of local content in goods and services (in aggregate) needs to be achieved,
after 10 years, local content for goods and services is planned at 60-90% which is rather high. If
local capacity is not developed properly over the years, these targets will create perverse incentives
(e.g., creation of shell companies, increase in costs of operation for IOCs, lower level of quality).
It is critical to build up local capacity to ensure that the targets can be achieved. Laws and the
targets alone cannot guarantee the achievement of local content aspirations unless carefully
planned mechanisms are in place to help achieve them.

19.     The expectation is that the center’s activities would not solely be focused on the oil
and gas sector but would also provide capacity-building opportunities for other sectors such
as mining, aviation, petrochemical and the wider economy with the attendant linkage effects.
Due to this flexibility, as needs develop in certain sectors, certain capacity-building activities can
be easily added to the center’s agenda.

20.     Ghana is also working on the establishment of an Oil and Gas Business Development
and Local Content Fund to support local capability development aspects of the local content
framework. The fund will be used primarily for education, training and research and development
in oil and gas. Sources of the fund will include contribution from Licensed Operators (at amounts
specified in the applicable Petroleum Agreements), Oil and Gas Revenue, levies, grants and other
support from Ghana’s Development Partners.

                                          4. Azerbaijan
21.     The Enterprise Centre in Baku was established as the focal point for BP’s and its
partners’ efforts to maximize local content of their business in Azerbaijan and increase both
the number of companies participating in their contracts and the value of contracts awarded
locally. The Enterprise Centre was launched in May 2002 and subsequently refurbished and
                                                 134
upgraded in 2006118. The Center worked closely with the country’s leading companies, foreign
investors and contractors, trade associations and other groups to support local enterprises and
encourage their participation in BP contracts. The Enterprise Centre coordinated its training
programs with a range of development organizations like GIZ and certification bodies like Moody
International.

22.     Local SMEs received training at no cost in health, safety and environmental (HSE)
policies; tender process participation; technical requirements of oil and gas operators; and
the identification of foreign partners for local projects. In addition, a series of seminars, under
the broad heading, “How to do Business with Oil Companies,” which cover topics ranging from
the IOC bidding process to steps to ISO certification has been offered local SMEs. This targeted
communication with SMEs was critical to developing local firms who understand how to develop
business with international operators. The Enterprise Centre aimed to provide targeted assistance
to individual firms and supports local SMEs by identifying publicly available, yet not widely
known, sources of credit, training and certification. In addition, it maintained a supplier database
tracking firms' activities.

23.      In 2003, the IFC partnered with BP, Statoil, GIZ, and the Baku Enterprise Center to
launch an enterprise development and training program to help local businesses benefit from
investments in the oil industry, including the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. This support was
directed at expanding the local supply and distribution chains to create more opportunities for
smaller businesses and to assist in sustainable community development efforts. The program was
linked to IFC’s proposed investments in the Azeri, Chirag, and Deepwater Gunashli oilfield and
the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline projects. The objective of the program was to better equip Azeri
businesses to participate in business opportunities related to, but not exclusively, the on-going
oilfield developments. The program focused on helping companies overcome obstacles preventing
them from winning contracts related to the projects.

24.    The program centered around three principal areas: (i) Technical assistance to targeted
Azeri service and supply companies; (ii) The development of local consultancy capacity in the
provision of business services; and (iii) The development of new financial products aimed at
improving access to capital for SMEs in Azerbaijan.

25.     Companies taking part in the program came from subsectors that the project team
had identified as providing long-term opportunities when the oilfield projects come on
stream. Each company underwent a “diagnostic” review to establish what sort of technical
assistance was needed. The assistance was then tailored to their needs and provided over a period
of one year, addressing issues such as business planning, assistance with access to capital,
management training, and the attainment of standards required by the international business
community based in Baku. Also included in the linkage program was the generation of an “SME
map”, which described the business environment in which local companies operated, including
access to enterprise support services and finance. All of the partners in the program — BP, Statoil,
GTZ, and the Baku Enterprise Center—provided funds in kind and in cash. GIZ was responsible
for delivery of the program providing expertise to work with local companies. The Baku Enterprise
118
      East Azeri Ahead of Schedule. Azerbaijan International. 2006
                                                         135
Center provided data on the industry as well as individual expertise. A full-time SME coordinator
managed the program on behalf of the partners.

26.      The program achieved a number of results. As the result of the efforts of the program,
1000 companies registered with supplier database since 2007 and participated in development
activities; 93 companies undertook the development process and successfully graduated from the
program; 360 gap analysis and tailored development plans were produced.

27.     In order to provide further support to the suppliers of the oil and gas sector, a supplier
finance credit facility (SFF) of US$15 million was funded by IFC, BP and Micro Finance
Bank of Azerbaijan (MFBA) to provide financing to SME contractors to BP and its affiliates
in Azerbaijan. The project aimed to help increase local content by expanding the participation of
local Azeri enterprises in the supply chain. Insufficient collateral was identified as one of the main
factors that limited access to finance for SMEs and slows their development in Azerbaijan. In order
to overcome this challenge, the SFF was designed.

28.    Loans to local suppliers were backed in part by the local companies’ contracts with
BP and its co-venturers (mainly shareholders in a number of oil and gas projects in Azerbaijan).
IFC and BP each took 40% of the facility’s risk, while MFBA took 20%. IFC’s role in the project
was to design and structure the facility; initiate and facilitate the partnership between BP, IFC and
MFBA; play an active role in the early implementation phase as well as in the supervision and
monitoring of the facility thereafter; and support the growth and development of small and medium
businesses in Azerbaijan. The SFF drew on lessons learned from a 2006 pilot phase that was
funded through grants from the partners.

29.    MFBA was selected for this role as it was already working with over 18,000 businesses
in Azerbaijan and was the leading financing partner of SMEs in the country . MFBA was
founded in 2002 by IFC, EBRD, Black Sea Trade and Development Bank (BSTDB), KfW and
LFS Financial Services (LFS) as the first formal provider of financial services to SMEs in
Azerbaijan. The Bank’s goal is to provide a comprehensive set of financial services to micro and
small business with limited access to finance, using international best practice.

30.    Following the successful completion of the Enterprise Center (2002-2008), the
Enterprise E-Centre was launched in 2009 by BP on behalf of its co-venturers to guide local
enterprises through development process in support of major oil and gas developments in
Azerbaijan. It marked another progressive milestone in offering innovative solutions in
Azerbaijani oil and gas sector.




                                                 136
                          ANNEX 5. IOC BASELINE SURVEY

1.      IOCs have taken important steps in supporting national content. They contracted
Schlumberger to conduct an industry survey to map the Ugandan market and find out what
companies and competencies are available. The baseline survey identified a number of sectors with
high potential for national content. The study started with an initial list of industries (~420), then
narrowed them down to target list of ~40 industries (O&G direct and indirect industries based on
a detailed value chain of O&G activities and industries widely recommended for national content)
and finally, to 25 industries with high potential for national content.

2.     Industries related to O&G projects in Uganda have been classified in terms of
potential for national content development. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the industries were
judged on two dimensions: benefits and feasibility. The 25 industries with relatively high benefits
and feasibility (green and yellow quadrants) were selected for the supply survey. These include
transportation and logistics, food supply, domestic waste management, facility management,
manpower agency, cement manufacturing and others.

           Figure 1: Mapping of Selected Industries on Benefits-Feasibility Matrix




                                                 137
3.      The enterprises in the 25 industries identified above in Uganda were later studied in
detail in terms of their ability to meet quality requirements (strict O&G standards) and
quantity requirements. Questionnaires were sent to 700 companies and their responses used to
estimate the available supply in particular industries in Uganda. At the same time, demand by the
three IOCs was also calculated, and gap assessed for each of the 25 sectors. Figure 2 shows that
there are only 2 sectors (security and cement manufacturing) among the 25 sectors which are
meeting O&G standards and have a quantity gap of less than 10%. The remaining 23 sectors face
either quantity, or quality gap, or, in most cases, both.

                  Figure 2. Mapping of Industries Requiring Future Support




   4.    Main support actions requested by suppliers in the Baseline survey included:
   (1)   Visibility over demand
   (2)   Access to finance
   (3)   Improvement of infrastructure
   (4)   Administration (process of obtaining required approvals)
   (5)   Training of skilled people
   (6)   Reinforcement of O&G certification process
   (7)   Increase capacity of suppliers.

5.       Based on the analysis performed, the Baseline Survey proposes way forward to
support the O&G development in Uganda (Figure 3). The suggested initiatives for support to
enterprises are both horizontal, which would benefit all the local suppliers of the O&G industry in
Uganda (communication of demand by IOCs, creation of an Industry Enhancement Center, and
facilitation of business relations, such as creation of the National Talent Register and National
Suppliers Database) and vertical (support to target sectors).
                                               138
                   Figure 3. High Level View of National Content Initiatives




6.      The Industry Enhancement Center is expected to assist and coach enterprises with a
number of issues: securing funding from investors, HSEQ and compliance standards, accounting
rules, answering to tenders, contractual clauses in large contracts, technical standards and other
issues. Potential actors in the establishment of the center include IOCs, inspection and certification
companies, financial sector players, accounting and law firms, professional associations, investors,
and international donors.

7.     In terms of facilitation of business relations, supplier database is proposed to be
developed to track availability of qualified suppliers and business connections will be facilitated
between Ugandan companies.

8.       The Baseline Survey identifies the following sectors with national content potential:

        Hazardous waste management. Local enterprises do not meet O&G standards in this
         industry due to inadequate training, long certification process, and lack of
         transportation/treatment infrastructure. This could be a promising sector for development
         as hazardous waste is disposed of not only by IOCs but also hospitals, automobile repair
         shops, dry cleaners etc., which opens a rather wide market. Moreover, services could be
         provided in neighboring countries. By extending their capacity beyond local transportation
         and waste disposal, Uganda can leverage their first mover advantage and become a regional
         leader in the sector, retaining key know-how and treatment capacity.

        Operations and maintenance services. There are currently no such services in Uganda,
         while demand will reach 1000+ people at the peak of construction. Short training time to
         start work makes this industry highly promising for local content development, as later
         these skills could be used in many other industries.
                                                 139
      Metal scaffolding. Traditional bamboo/wooden scaffolding used in Uganda scaffolding is
       not compliant with O&G standards. Development of metal scaffolding industry in Uganda
       could be very beneficial as it could be used for sectors other than O&G industry (such as
       construction).

      Protective personal equipment (PPE). Work safety products produced in Uganda are not
       up to standards and most PPE are imported. PPE meeting O&G standards could find a lot
       of applications in Uganda and could potentially be exported to neighboring countries.

      Road safety. The number of accidents is increasing every year, and oil production will
       only intensify traffic between Mombasa-Kampala-Hoima.

      Agriculture. Agriculture is the first employer in Uganda. There are significant
       opportunities for supplying food to oil camps if strict O&G standards are met. The peak of
       workers on site will reach 13,000 (Figure 4).

                  Table 1. High Level View of National Content Initiatives




      Light equipment manufacturing. Currently, Uganda is almost a 100 percent net importer
       for all kinds of light equipment: high-voltage cables from China and India, generators from
       Europe, transformers from Tanzania, and electrical motors from China. Only power cables
       are produced locally. Development of this sector in Uganda could therefore be highly
       promising for import substitution.

9.       IOCs have already commenced work on a number of initiatives recommended by the
IBS. Table 1 below has been provided to the World Bank team by the IOCs and shows the status
of initiatives. As evidenced by this table, several initiatives proposed by the IOCs have been
approved by PEPD and therefore will be implemented. Working group meetings on these
initiatives have commenced.

                                              140
                       Figure 5. JVP National Content Initiatives
        NC INITIATIVES                                                PURPOSE

1. Industry Enhancement Centre         To support capacity development of Ugandan companies to enable them
                                       position to effectively respond to business opportunities on the oil and
                                       gas project.
Facilitation of Business Relations
   a. Talent Register                  To create a record of Ugandan personnel for the Project and for
                                       subsequent projects post oil and gas development
   b. Supplier Database                To create a prequalification framework for Uganda suppliers of goods
                                       and services to the oil and gas project
2. Definition of technical Standards   To document and publish all standards required of goods and services to
   (excluding logistics)               the project.
Support to specific Sub-Sectors
   a. Steel products                   To support the development of specific Ugandan sub-sectors judged to
   b. Hazardous Waste Mgmt             be critical for the project. These sub-sectors are currently weak and yet
   c. PPE                              they can easily be developed to the required standards
   d. Agriculture
3. Education Support: Gap              The identify and develop urgently required skills to enable effective
   analysis of support to vocational   Ugandan participation in the oil and gas project
   training structure
4. Definition of technical             To document and publish all qualifications standards required of
   qualification standards             personnel for the project.




                                                  141
     ANNEX 6. ROUNDTABLE DINNERS ON NATIONAL CONTENT –
                   CROSS-COUNTRY LESSONS

RATIONALE

As Uganda emerges as an important oil player on the global stage, the growth opportunities for
Uganda enterprises and the local labor force increase dramatically. The benefits for the local
private sector are expected through increased employment, value addition and technology transfer.

To maximize the benefits of natural resource extraction to their economies (above and beyond the
direct value added of the extractive sector), many resource rich nations have designed National
Content Policies (NCPs) that foster linkages to other sectors and promote domestic enterprise
development. Policies and regulations have differed widely among countries, and while some of
these policies have stimulated sustainable and broad-based economic development, their impacts
in oil and gas rich countries have been mixed.

In Uganda, a lot of analysis has been conducted on national content development and some
important initiatives are under way. Most importantly, the Government of Uganda is in the final
stages of concluding the “National Content Policy for the Petroleum Sector in Uganda.” This
policy will clarify the national intent, roles and responsibilities, and provide guidance to
subsequent legislative, regulatory and strategic actions both for the Government of Uganda as well
as for the private sector. The development of the National Content Policy is supported by the
Norwegian Oil for Development programme, “Strengthening the Management of the Oil and Gas
Sector in Uganda”, 2009 – 2014. This is a government funded programme that aims to support the
development of Uganda’s emerging oil and gas sector. Through the programme, the study
“Enhancing National Participation in the Oil and Gas Industry in Uganda”, has also been
supported. Another relevant study is the “Constraints and Opportunities for SME Investment in
Uganda’s Oil and Gas Sector” The study was undertaken by the Uganda Investment Authority
(UIA) and Makerere University, and was funded by Trust Africa and International Development
Research Center. Furthermore, the Association of Oil and Gas Service Providers has been formed
with the idea of supporting Ugandans’ participation within the oil industry. International Oil
Companies (IOCs) have also taken steps in supporting national content in Uganda by undertaking
the Industrial Baseline Survey, providing support for education and employment of Ugandans, as
well as enterprise development.

Nevertheless, a number of policy questions still remain on the government’s agenda as the National
Content Policy is being developed.

OBJECTIVE


                                               142
The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the Royal Norwegian Embassy and the World
Bank would like to contribute to the National Content Policy dialogue by organizing a cycle of
roundtable dinners in Kampala for a selected group of key local content stakeholders. Invitees will
include representatives from the Government, the private sector (including international oil
companies), academia, the civil society and donors active in the local content agenda.

The objectives of these roundtable dinners will be:

   Sharing Knowledge: Expert practitioners from other oil and gas producing nations will share
    their deep knowledge of the design and implementation of national content policies.
   Achieving a Common Language: The seminars will promote a common understanding of
    terms, options, opportunities, pitfalls, and best practices.
   Informing the Design and Implementation of national content policies: From knowledge and
    common language gained, these seminars are expected to be an input into the local content
    policy making and implementation process.


FORMAT

The roundtable dinners will be chaired by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and
will benefit from the technical support and practical knowledge of an expert coming from the
country featured at a particular session. Each roundtable dinner will address the following five
questions around one specific country. The final roundtable dinner will act as a capstone that aims
to summarize and integrate the discussions and lessons from the previous sessions.

   What were the objectives of national content policies in these countries?
   What was the content of national content policies?
   How did these countries formulate their national content policies?
   What tools were used to implement the national content policies?
   What was the outcome of these national content policies?

The agenda of the roundtable dinners will be the following:

    -   5.30pm: Arrival of invited guests
    -   6.00pm: Welcome by the Norwegian Ambassador, Mr Thorbjørn Gaustadsæther
    -   6.15pm: Introduction by Hon. Peter Lokeris, Minister of State for Mineral Development
        (Chair)
    -   6.30pm: Presentations
    -   7.30pm: Dinner and discussion
    -   9.30pm: End and closure of the roundtable dinner by Country Manager, World Bank, Mr
        Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye

                                               143
CASE STUDIES (EXPECTED)

The first roundtable dinner will feature the experience of Ghana.

The participants will then have the opportunity to express their preferences for the following
countries in order to feature the ones that raise the greatest interest among local content
stakeholders.

Some of the countries which could be considered for the following dinners include Nigeria,
Angola, Malaysia, Brazil, Oman, Indonesia, Azerbaijan, and Chad.

Keynote Speaker for Ghana

Mr Vincent Yankey is an oil and gas finance specialist, currently, the Director of Finance and
Administration at Petroleum Commission, Ghana. He is a seasoned executive with a blend of
private and public sector experience as well as local (i.e. Ghana) and international track record in
energy investments in Emerging Markets, Corporate Valuations, Financial Management, Risk
Analysis, Project Management and Enterprise Resource Planning.

Past positions held include Management Consultant at PricewaterhouseCoopers Ghana, Country
Manager of E&Co Ghana, a global energy investment company, headquartered in New Jersey and
an Investment professional in a leading private equity fund Manager in Ghana (now Jacana
Ghana). He has very deep knowledge in structuring of debt and equity finance for start-up
companies, particularly, in the energy sector.

As a key member of the Management team of the Petroleum Commission, which is the main
regulatory body of Ghana’s upstream oil and gas industry, Mr Yankey plays a pivotal role in
promoting local content and local participation in petroleum activities for the overall benefit of the
citizens of Ghana.

Mr Yankey holds a Master of Business Administration (MBA) from Manchester Business School
(The University of Manchester) and a first degree in Computer Science and Statistics from the
University of Ghana. He is a Chartered Accountant and a Fellow of the UK-based Association of
Chartered Certified Accountants (FCCA).




                                                 144
      ANNEX 7. SIMPLIED STRUCTURES OF SELECT VALUE CHAINS IN
                      THE ALBERTINE REGION119

                                                                                 Figure 1: Food Crops Value Chain




                                                                                    Figure 2: FFV Value Chain
                                                   Procuring
                VALUE ADDING ACTIVITIES




                                                                             Production                Processing                Marketing            Consumption
                                                    inputs


                                           Seedlings                   Land preparation         Collection                 Wholesaling          Delivery
                                           Labour                      Planting                 Sorting                    Retailing
                                           Tractor hire service        Weeding                  Cleaning
                                           Extension services          Harvesting               Packaging
                                           Finance                     Storage                  Distribution
                MAIN ACTORS




                                           Households                  Households               Traidlinks                 Traidlinks           Oil Camps
                                           Traidlinks                                           Farmer groups              Urban markets        Households
                                           Financial institutions                               HODFA                                           Restaurants and hotels




                                                                                    Figure 3: Beef Value Chain
                                                Procuring
      VALUE ADDING ACTIVITIES




                                                                        Rearing           Trading              Slaughter            Marketing          Consumption
                                                  inputs


                                          Procurement of:          Grazing           Collection         Slaughtering           Butchering         Buying meat
                                          Suitable bulls           Watering          Selling animals
                                          AI                       Geneal care
                                          Vet drugs
                                          Vet services
      MAIN ACTORS




                                          Households               Households        Households         Slaughter joints       Butcheries         Household consumers
                                          NAADS                    Hired herdsmen    Middlemen          Households             Market stall       Institutional consumers
                                          Vets                                                                                 Butcheries
                                          Financial Institutions




119
      Source: WB team’s elaboration
                                                                                                       145
                                                                          Figure 4: Dairy Value Chain
                                       Procuring                                            Transporting
     VALUE ADDING ACTIVITIES
                                                                 Production                                                 Marketing                  Consumption
                                         inputs                                              & Bulking


                                Procuring services viz:   Grazing                    Collecting and             Retailing milk and milk Buying milk and
                                Extension services, AI    Watering                   transporting raw milk      products                milk products
                                services, other Vet       Geneal care                from smallholder farmers
                                services in general,      Administering AI           to Milk Collection Centres
                                Vet drugs                 (Artficial insemination)   (MCCs)
     MAIN ACTORS




                                Households                Households                 Bicycle trader                 MCCs                          Household consumers
                                NAADS                     Hired herdsmen             Collection/bulking Pont                                      Institutional consumers
                                Vets                      Vets                       trader
                                Financial Institutions




                                                                         Figure 5: Poultry Value Chain
                                       Procuring                                            Transporting
     VALUE ADDING ACTIVITIES




                                                                 Production                                                 Marketing                   Consumption
                                         inputs                                              & Bulking


                                Procuring services viz: Feeding the birds            Collecting and                 Retailing chicken       Buying chicken from
                                Extension services,     Watering the birds           transporting live birds        to household and        retailers
                                Chicken feed, Other                                  from smallholders and          institutional consumers
                                Vet services in general                              village markets to urban       both live and dressed
                                Vet drugs                                            markets
     MAIN ACTORS




                                Households                Households                 Households                     Grocery shops                 Household consumers
                                NAADS                     Vets                       Bicycle traders                Urban markets                 Institutional consumers
                                Vets                                                                                Other retailers
                                Financial Institutions



                                                                        Figure 6: Fisheries Value Chain
                                     Procuring
VALUE ADDING ACTIVITIES




                                                              Fishing                Processing              Transporting               Marketing               Consumption
                                       inputs


                               Main inputs include:   Preparing fishing gear   Cleaning, scaling and Collecting & transporting    Retailing fish to       Buying fish from
                               Fishnets               Fishing                  gutting               fish from fishermen and      household and           retailers
                               Outboard engine        Landing the catch        Drying and hot smokingartisan processors at the    institutional
                               Fishing boat                                    Packing               landing to the village and   consumers
                                                                                                     Urban markets
MAIN ACTORS




                               Fishnet manufactures Fisherfolk                 Fisherfolk              Fish traders (pickup       Fish stalls in urban and Household consumers
                               Dealers in outboard                             Artisanal processors    based)                     rural markets            Institutional consumers
                               engines, boat builders,                         Local traders           Bicycle based fish traders
                               Ice makers
                               Fin Institutions



                                                                                               146
     ANNEX 8. APPROACHES TO MAXIMIZE THE PARTICIPATION OF
      THE ALBERTINE REGION IN SUPPLYING FOOD TO OIL CAMPS

                                 (1) TRAIDLINKS ACTIVITIES
                                 Figure 1. Traidlinks Approach




1.       The Traidlinks project uses the approach as presented in Figure 1. First, smallholder
farmers are sensitized about the project, HODFA, and Traidlinks, and the services accessible by
members and the benefits that come with the scheme. Farmers are then encouraged to form groups
of like-minded participants with shared vision and objectives. The groups do not have to follow
Government Administrative Structures. After groups are formed, HODFA carries out a needs
assessment of the newly formed groups and goes on to design training for the farmers on the basis
of the training needs identified.

2.        The training content covers a wide range of topics including the following:
     o   Group dynamics;
     o   Enterprise identification/ selection;
     o   Entrepreneurship;
     o   Quality standards;
     o   Quality management;
                                               147
      o Agronomy/ enterprise management including best practice in planting; use of chemicals;
        organic fertilizers; application of fertilizers; pest and disease control, and post-harvest
        handling.

3.      The project procures and stores approved seed as well as fertilizers which are sold to
participating farmers at affordable rates on credit terms that among other things provide for
payment to be recovered from the farmers’ dues arising from proceeds of sale of farmers produce
which comes from the oil camps through HODFE. HODFA provides extension services and helps
to provide participating farmers with information about the market as well as communicating
purchase orders to the farmers’ groups as and when they are received.

4.      On receipt of purchase orders, Traidlinks passes on the order to HODFE which splits the
order between participating farmers in depending on the nature of enterprise. Individual farmers
in their respective groups then proceed to prepare their produce in accordance with the
specifications given, and when ready, prepare and deliver their produce to their respective
collection centers, from where HODFE transports the produce to the Traidlinks Enterprise Centre
for processing and shipping to the oil camps.

5.     Food items supplied in May 2014 are presented in Table 1 below as an example. Prices
for produce were agreed between HODFE/Traidlinks and Equator Catering (the company which
supplied Tullow camps and has recently been replaced by Supreme Catering) during Phase I of
the ASC project. For the most part, these prices have remained static.

6.      Overall, according to the Ernst and Young report, the project has faced a lot of
challenges. Moving significant numbers of smallholders from subsistence to commercial farming
cannot be done overnight. Farming as a business’ is an alien concept to many of them, as are
notions of profit, loss and long-term contracts. Most farmers lack the skills and information needed
to plan their planting to meet demand, and to increase the productivity of their land. So while there
is undoubtedly potential in the region for agricultural production and export on a vast scale,
achieving this will take sustained focus, investment and patience over many years120.

7.      An important point to emphasize is that the project also supplies other customers
beyond Tullow caterers, including hotels and restaurants in Hoima. As such, there is going to
be a market for these products beyond the oil camps. The produce flow for these customers works
in the same way, except HODFE will deliver the produce rather than the customer collecting it
from the EDC.




120
      Agricultural Supply Chain Project- Hoima, Uganda. Ernst and Young Report. December 2013
                                                       148
   Table 1: Food items supplied by smallholder farmers to Oil Camps in May 2014
  Food Item       Unit    Conv rate    Week 1     Week 2          Week 3      Week 4      Week 5      Total
                            (Kgs)
Apples          Box               12        24               24          24      -               24       96
Avacado         kg                 1      100                80          70          38          70      358
Beans           Kg                 1      -              -           -               30      -            30
Beet root       Kg                 1         5               4            9           4          2        24
Black Shade     Kg                 1      -              -               10      -           -            10
Bogoya          Cluster            2        42               28          28      -               12      110
Broccoli        Kg                 1         4               11          15          15          21       65
Cabbages        Heads              2        54               60          10          20          14      158
Carrots         Kg                 1        70               90          70          30          50      310
Cassava Flour   Kg                 1      -              -           -               20      -            20
Cauli flower    Kg                 1        13               18          11      -               14       55
Celery          Kg                 1         4                1           1           5           1       11
Coriander       Kg                 1         3                4           3           4           4       17
Courgettes      kg                 1        16               12          10          18          16       72
Cucumber        Kg                 1         8               25          10          10          17       70
Dodo            kg                 1        20               35          24      -               25      104
Egg plant       Kg                 1        10               18          14          15      -            57
French Beans    Kg                 1        10               17          25           3          15       70
Fresh Beans     Kg                 1        45               46          50      -               40      181
Fresh Lemon     Kg                 1      -              -           -                2           1        3
Fresh mushrooms Kg                 1      -                  10      -                5           1       16
Fresh Peas      Kg                 1        70               55        60            20          50      255
Garden Egg      Kg                 1      -              -             10             9      -            19
Garlic          Kg                 1         3               6          7             5         8         29
Ginger          Kg                 1         2               2          2        -              3          9
Green Chille    Kg                 1      -              -              1           1           3          5
Green pepper    kg                 1         8             15          10          20          17         70
Irish Potatoes  kg                 1      600            400         250         100         500       1,850
Leeks           Bunch              4         8              8           4           8           8         38
Lettuce         Kg                 1        13             10          11          13          14         59
Mangoes         Kg                 1        30             40          39        -             40        149
Millet Flour    Kg                 1      -              -           -             10        -            10
Mint leaves     Kg                 1      -              -           -              1        -             1
Nakati          Kg                 1        55             50          40          50          35        230
Onions          Kg                 1        60             90          75          70          50        345
Oranges         Box               12        24             24          24          12          24        108
Passion fruits  kg                 1        70             69          40        -             20        199
Paw paws        Pc                 3      125            225           75          75          75        575
Pine apples     Pc               2.0      160            354         200         154           80        948
Pumpkin         Pc                 3        34             27          24          27          41        153
Red Apples      Box                7      -                 7        -           -           -             7
Red cabbages    pc                 1         4           -           -           -           -             4
Red pepper      Kg                 1      -                 1        -           -           -             1
                25g
Solar dried mushrooms          0.001      -              -              0           2           0          2
Spinach         kg                 1        30             20          20          10          20        100
Spring onions   Bunch              2        12           -              2           4           6         24
Sweet potatoes kg                  1      120            100           80          80          60        440
Tomatoes        kg                 1      120            149           60        100           70        499
Watermelon      pc                 2      -              -             60        116           60        236
Yams            Kg                 1        20             40          50        -           -           110
Yellow banana Bunch                6        36             48          30          18          18        150
Yellow Pepper Kg                   1      -                 1        -           -           -             1
                Kg
Yellow/Red pepper                  1         5              3           9        -           -            17
Total                                   2,035          2,227       1,566       1,123       1,527       8,477


                                                 149
       (2) PROSPECTS FOR ESTABLISHING AN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PARK IN THE
                              ALBERTINE REGION
10.     Large scale agro processors interviewed as part of this study considered that the idea
of an Agro Industrial Park in the Albertine region could be viable. Nevertheless, based on
their negative experience with Kampala Industrial Business Park, popularly known as Namanve
Park, they expressed reservations about the successful implementation of the proposed park. Some
players wonder whether it will not end up as another failure unless certain actions are taken to
guarantee its success.

11.   In order to maximize the chances of success, key agro processors recommend that the
park should have a master plan, and should be a fully serviced park and provisions should
be made for the following:

       Infrastructure consisting of a good road network reaching all plots in the park; water;
        drainage; serious electricity; railway system and land. The infrastructure needed should be
        properly planned and implemented to be ready at the same time.
       Tax incentives: Consider giving tax holidays for processors setting up in the park
       Partitioning the Park: Partitioning of the park should be done in such a way as to ensure
        that likeminded industries are in the same division of the park, to avoid the Namanve
        scenario which was haphazard.

12.    Processors interviewed also noted that buy-in of the industry is crucial to makes this
endeavor a success. They recommended that whoever is responsible for setting up the park
should: (a) engage with practicing processors and let them play a key role in the planning of the
park by starting a processors forum /working group (b) engage with UMA (Uganda Manufacturers
Association) to make an input in the master plan, and any other plans for the development of the
park.

13.      Consultations with various stakeholders have yielded three broad views about the
perceived viability of the Park. One view holds that the park is not viable because two years
demand boom is too short to enable processors recoup their investment. Proponents of this view
recommend that we should focus on a small park targeting 3,000 to 5,000 workers (the surplus of
2,000 being a provision for natural growth), suitable for small scale investors with a combined
capacity to meet this demand that is there for a long time. Another view is that the park may not
be viable because it tends to concentrate the action in one central location, recommending that we
should map out agricultural activities in the region and establish processing facilities relevant to
the agricultural activity in particular areas e.g. if Buliisa’s main agricultural activity is fish and
cattle, develop a beef processing plant in the area, and if Masindi’s main activity is grain, then
develop a grain plant in the place. The third, and most frequently held, view is that the park as
conceived is a brilliant idea and is viable.

14.     A wide range of actions were suggested with a view to maximizing viability of the park
if the decision is made to establish it. Following is a summary of the main actions mentioned:

                                                 150
   Support to smallholder farmers:
        o Smallholder farmers supplying food to the processors in the park should be
            supported with effective extension services in order to maximize the quality and
            quantity of the food produced;
        o Organize smallholders into farmer groups and equip them with knowledge and
            skills necessary to enable them embrace modern farming methods so as to increase
            production and productivity;
        o Assure smallholders of a fair return;
        o Support farmers to mechanize agricultural production in order to enable them
            expand acreage under cultivation;
        o Provide appropriate capacity building to farmers as well as technical personnel
            responsible for planning and delivery of agricultural extension services in the
            community;
        o Ease the access of farmers to favorably priced finance for acquisition of inputs such
            as tractor hire service, fertilizers, and labor;
        o Assist farmers to access appropriate irrigation technology to enable farmers engage
            in continuous production of fresh foods , fruits and vegetables all year round;
        o Assist farmers develop and or upgrade storage facilities to maintain necessary
            quality standards of their produce;
        o Processors should be encouraged to engage smallholders under contract farming
            arrangements;
        o Train and equip smallholders in the use of irrigation and green house technologies
            to enable them enhance the range of their products to include certain other fresh
            vegetables that would do much better under those technologies;
   Upgrading Road Infrastructure. Government should provide and or upgrade road
    infrastructure to the communities in the region in order to guarantee speedy delivery of
    perishable foods to the park whether or not it is a rainy season;
   Communication Strategy. Leaders at all levels in the region should be sensitized to
    embrace and support all efforts aimed at increasing food production in the region;
   Land. Government should provide land for the park as well as extending necessary
    incentives for private investors. The park should be fully serviced, with streets in the park
    being fully developed and paved, with water and power accessible by every plot.
   Agriculture Industries to be included: A list of industries that stakeholders prefer to see
    included in the park covers virtually all food produced in the region, but the most frequently
    cited include: (a) fruit processing; (b) fish processing; (c) poultry and poultry products; (e)
    beef and beef products; (f) FFV; (g) piggery products; (h) maize milling; (i) cassava
    processing; and (j) honey processing
   Location of the park: Most stakeholders hold the view that the most appropriate location
    for the park is Hoima district, with others going further to specify Buhimba sub-county in
    the district as being the ideal location, while others indicated Bugambe and Butema sub-
    counties as being most suitable locations. Another view held by a few stakeholders was
    that Kyankwanzi area would be a good location for the park as it is between Hoima and
    Kampala, and has the advantage of being further away from the refinery and associated
    industries and could therefor provide a pollution free environment

                                             151
      Obstacles likely to hinder the success of the Park: In addition to the obstacles mentioned
       by large scale processors, the other stakeholders considered the following as being possible
       obstacles to the success of the Park: (a) procuring suitable land for the park in a suitable
       location; (b) attracting the right investors able to understand and capture the vision for the
       Park; (c) inability on the part of smallholders to access finance for acquisition of inputs
       like tractor hire service, pesticides, postharvest handling associated costs such as
       transportation of produce to the market; (d) lack of public transport; (e) poor infrastructure,
       especially lack of electricity and all-weather roads in the areas producing food for the park,
       and (f) illegal fishing that is depleting fish stocks in Lake Albert.

Summary of Considerations for the Establishment of the Agro-Industrial Park

(b) Viability

15.     Three divergent views have emerged regarding the viability of the concept of setting
up the proposed Agro Industrial Park. While one view dismisses the idea for the reason that the
duration of the demand boom is too short to justify such large scale investments another is not
comfortable with the park idea because it tends to concentrate the action in one location.
Ordinarily it would not be prudent to invest significant resources in a venture whose products may
not have any demand from the targeted market 3 years after plant commissioning. Targeting small
scale investors with an eye on the market that is there to stay after the demand boom is over, may
be a reasonable proposition especially if the venture is expected to produce goods that are not
likely to attract any demand on the export market.

16.     However, for ventures with good prospects for the export market, the demand boom
presents a launching pad, from which to commence production, develop capacity to handle
large volumes at high quality standards, so that when the demand boom is over, the venture
can easily find market abroad. While it is true that an industrial park tends to concentrate the
action in one location, the main objective of this approach is to leverage the large investment in
infrastructural facilities to cover as many agro processing industries as possible in order to spread
the cost and minimize the unit cost per industry covered. If such infrastructural facilities were to
be set up for agro processing industries scattered across the region, the cost per industry would be
prohibitive and difficult to justify, and worse still, it would take very long to mobilize resources
and complete construction of the infrastructural facilities

(c) Location of the Agro Industrial Park

17.     The overwhelming view among stakeholders that the Agro Industrial Park should be
located in Hoima District, which is central to the five districts making up the sub-region, is a
reasonable and safe position which should not give rise to any controversy among the community
in the region.

(d) Industries that should be included in the Park


                                                152
18.    In considering which industries should be given priority in the park, it would be
prudent to consider industries engaged in processing agricultural products which have the
potential to involve the greatest number of households in the region. This would include:

      FFV: The region has the capacity to grow a wide range of these products if there is demand
       for the same;
      Meats: Plants for beef, chicken and pork, including facilities for slaughter and freezing
       with options for canning depending on identified demand;
      Dairy: Milk processing plants able to handle a range of processed milk products;
      Fish: Fish processing plants able to produce a variety of fish products including chilled
       and frozen products with options for smoking Tilapia and Cat fish, the most prominent
       species in the aquaculture sub-sector;
      Maize, Cassava and Beans: Maize, Cassava and Beans, are so widely grown in the region
       that industries based on these products would be able to involve higher number of
       households than any other crop.

(e) Implementation of the park

19.     According to the views expressed by processors, it is possible to obtain their buy-in
and maximize their appetite for participation in the Park if they are brought on board early
during the planning stages so that their concerns and fears are tabled are taken into account.
The example of Namanve (Kampala Industrial and Business Park- KIBP) cannot be ignored. The
large processors that this Park would be targeting are among the same industrialists that were
allocated industrial plots in KIBP. Please refer to Box 1 below for an overview of experience with
KIBP and other industrial parks in Uganda.

                      Box 1. Uganda Experience with Industrial Parks

UIA has been working on developing a portfolio of twenty three industrial parks which would
enable manufacturers benefit from regional comparative advantages, with Kampala Industrial
Business Park (KIBP) the first to be developed. This was considered an ambitious program.

KIBP was expected to be Uganda’s biggest industrial park, one that would enable Uganda’s
industry to immediately leverage production for the local and export market. A WB-funded project
was expected to finance the development of primary external or off-site infrastructure (access
roads, intersections, water and electricity supply facilities, sewerage and wastewater treatment);
capacity building of UIA in investment promotion and facilitation as well as industrial planning;
development of an Implementation Plan for the KIBP, and assistance in the rolling out of the plan;
and other activities.

In the beginning of this project, UIA undertook investment promotion efforts and succeeded in
attracting a substantial number of businesses in multiple sectors; over 300 projects had been
proposed and screened. Despite this marketing accomplishment, serious problems soon emerged.
Decision was made to go for a more ambitious design than originally planned and this significantly
increased costs and had significant environmental implications. The weak capacity of UIA to
                                               153
effectively manage the component, especially related to civil works and environmental
management, created significant challenges for implementation. Addressing these challenges took
a long time, and Government made a decision to cancel this sub-component out of the WB project.

Overall, from 2006, when UIA invited investors to apply for land leases to date, a small number
of investors have established structures and operations and much of KIBP’s land still remains idle.
Pioneers in the park, mainly Roofings Rolling Mills, Hima Cement, Export Trading Company,
Kyagalanyi Coffee and Victoria Seeds have endured transport infrastructure challenges, as well as
other major concerns like inadequate power, lack of water and fiber optic cables, as well as
inadequate drainage and solid waste management facilities. Stakeholders note that they did not
receive what was promised to them, such as serviced land and other ancillary services including
street lighting, garbage collection and security.

A number of lessons can be learned from KIBP experience. First, the design of the park needs to
be commensurate with the capacity of the implementing entity; although it might be tempting to
opt for a more ambitious design to achieve a bigger impact, there is a much higher likelihood that
the project will not take off at all. Environmental implications need to be taken into consideration
during the design as these risks may be very difficult to manage. Second, investors’ needs have to
be met for them to set up their operations in the park. Investors have to be consulted extensively
at different phases and their concerns addressed. Establishment of basic infrastructure in the park
is paramount as without it investors will not be able to operate effectively. Finally, although the
strategy of the country might be to establish numerous parks, it is important to sequence these
initiatives appropriately as these are very complex projects each of which may take a long time to
develop.

(f) Smallholder farmers’ concerns
20.     If this park is to maximise the participation of the local community, it will be
necessary to address any known challenges that are likely to prevent smallholders from
producing to the best of their potential. One of the most important actions to consider is bringing
the processors to understand the benefits of empowering smallholders to produce to their potential,
which may include empowering them in various ways. While in some cases it may mean running
capacity building programs to ensure that they produce the highest possible quality standard, in
other cases it may mean engaging smallholders on contract farming basis, while in other cases it
may call for engaging them on a fully fledged outgrower arrangement.

Special Projects
21.     It is understood that when the necessary arrangements have been finalized, Park
authorities will invite interested Agro processors to apply for space in the park which will be
appraised and a decision communicated. However, while certain areas will be left open, there
are sub-sectors that possess the potential to employ or affect large numbers or large segments of
the population in which Government will need to take particular interest in order to offer guidance
and support where necessary. Such sub-sectors include fisheries, beef, dairy, poultry, piggery,
fresh fruits and vegetables as well as staples. The paragraphs ahead give brief profiles of the
projects which could be considered.

                                                154
(a) Fish farming
22.      According to fish processors, the export orders for Ugandan fish exceed by far the
quantity caught. As a result the installed capacity is grossly underutilized. This situation is not
helped by the declining catch from the national waters, which seems to get worse by the day due
in part to uncontrolled use of illegal fishing gear that has led to the depletion of the fishery stock.
While GoU has put in place a policy to promote fish farming in the country, most of the fish farms
in the region have fallen dormant. As a result while the fish farming industry generated a lot of
interest in the region, farmers who joined and dug ponds have not seen the benefit, due to a number
of factors including lack of advisory services and suitable feeds to sustain production. The
depletion of fish stocks from Lake Albert and the demand boom expected to come from the
construction phase of the Oil and Gas industry calls for a new approach to promoting fish farming.
In this regard it is proposed that the project approach supported by a matching grant mechanism
be introduced to drive the effort to promote the industry.

23.     Interested and able investors could be invited to set up and manage large scale fish
farming ventures with wide networks of ‘outgrowers’, and demonstration fish ponds that
double as collection centers spread across the region, with at least one demo pond for each
of the region’s twelve rural counties. In addition each investor would be expected to establish a
large scale fish processing plant with an intake capacity of at least 15 metric tons of raw fish per
day, producing both frozen and chilled fillet of Tilapia and or Cat fish, at the highest possible
standard. The project would also have a component for producing feed, also by an investor coming
on board.

24.     Expected benefits from this project would include: (a) increased household incomes
through the activity and employment generated by the activity; (b) reduced pressure on Lake
Albert, leading to reduced illegal fishing, and trade in immature fish, resulting in natural restocking
of the lake; (c) increased Nile perch catch, since the domestic market prefers tilapia to Nile perch,
and with the increased supply of tilapia, the need for immature Nile perch would diminish; (d)
increased fish exports, and with time the unfulfilled export orders would be served; and (e) the
project could act as a model for replication within the provisions of the National Investment Policy
for Aquaculture.

(b) Beef project – establishment of a beef plant including a modern slaughter house

25.      While the region produces a lot of cattle, most of it is shipped to Kampala, and some
of it is shipped back to the oil camps as processed meat all because the region does not have
a modern slaughter house. This makes the price of the processed meat in the region more
expensive than it should be due to the double cost of avoidable transportation of the animals to and
from Kampala inter-alia.

26.     The quantity of cattle produced in the region is more than enough to supply oil camps
even during the projected peak period, but the absence of a modern slaughterhouse compels
farmers to sell their animals to Kampala bound trucks who take the animals for slaughter .
If there was an abattoir, smallholder farmers would benefit by receiving a market for the animals
within the region, which would improve their returns from cattle keeping. The cost of the final
                                                 155
product would come down substantially, making the protein affordable by more households who
do not consume enough due to pricing related factors. It is believed that the presence of an abattoir
in the region would also encourage more and more smallholders to join the sub-sector as suppliers
thereby helping contribute to an improvement in the nation’s beef consumption per capita which
is currently lower than most in the region. It is believed, that the quality of beef cattle would also
improve greatly due to the capacity building sessions sponsored by the investor in the slaughter
business.

27.    Accordingly, a modern beef plant could be considered for this region. The plant would
comprise a slaughter facility as well as a freezing line together with modern packaging facilities
with options for export grade canning.

(c) Dairy project – setting up a dairy processing plant and a network of milk collection centers

28.    Although the region has a significant population of dairy cattle, there is no single
processing plant in the region save for a few milk cooling centers. For example, the district of
Kibaale with a herd estimated to be in the region of 250,000 has only one MCC that is located at
one extreme end of the district. The opposite end of the district, which lies in the cattle corridor,
with the biggest concentration of cattle in the district has no cooling plant.

29.      An integrated dairy processing enterprise could be established with the following
components: (a) a network of milk cooling plants, located in areas of high concentration of dairy
cattle across the districts, which would provide a market for milk in the area where located; (b) a
herd improvement component to provide smallholder farmers with improved breeds and equip
them with the necessary knowledge and skills to manage the improved herd; and (c) a milk
processing plant with sufficient capacity to meet a reasonable proportion of the industry’s
requirements. Like the beef project, the dairy project is expected to reach a big segment of the
population, raising their household incomes and lifting thousands out of poverty. Accordingly, it
is proposed that the project be included among projects to be supported with a matching grant
facility.

(d) Other special projects
30.    The other sub-sectors with the capacity to impact the community by raising incomes
for the vast majority of the region’s households are poultry, piggery, fresh fruits and
vegetables, and staples.
Infrastructure and other enabling facilities
31.     One of the greatest barriers to improving competitiveness for most enterprises in the
region is poor infrastructure. While the region is richly endowed with good soils and an enabling
climate and could easily grow a lot of food and a wide range of food types with limited use of
chemical inputs, production is heavily constrained by the poor road infrastructure to the extent that
when it rains some roads are completely impassable. In such situations smallholders are not able
to take their produce to the market, and end up giving the same to the bicycle traders who at times
buy the produce at such a low price that it becomes hard to motivate farmers to increase production
when they are not sure that their labor may not be in vain.
                                                 156
32.    Owing to lack of power, smallholders do not have access to suitable storage facilities
and primary processing of their produce is also limited. Some of the areas in the region are far
from the main water bodies. All these factors inter-alia, are likely to affect the success of the park,
and the prospects for the transformation of the region and consequently the national economy.

33.     Accordingly, infrastructure would need to be improved to support the transformation
process. At the minimum, the project would aim at ensuring that every sub-county is connected
with an all-weather road, and that produce from any sub-county can be transported to the industrial
park even when it is a rainy season. In addition, the project would ensure that each sub-county has
access to power and water both for agricultural production.




                                                 157
    ANNEX 9. Projected Weekly Food Requirements for the Oil Camps during
                           the Period 2015-2019
                                      Source: Makindye Country Club

            Food Item         Unit     Conversion     Year 1        Year 2   Year 3    Year 4    Year 5
                                        Rate (Kgs)    (Kgs)         (Kgs)    (Kgs)     (Kgs)     (Kgs)
A        MEATS
    1    Beef                KG                  1         1,395     4,305     6,293     6,106    2,295
    2    Chicken             KG                  1         1,818     5,441     7,918     7,744    2,827
    3    Mutton/Goat meat    KG                  1           930     2,870     4,195     4,070    1,530
    4    Pork                KG                  1           692     2,115     3,087     3,003    1,118
B        FISH                                                -                   -         -        -
    1    Tilapia fillet      KG                  1           692     2,115     3,087     3,003    1,118
    2    Prawns peeled       KG                  1             93      383       580       529      246
C        SAUSAGES                                            -                   -         -        -
    1    Beef sausages       KG                  1           331     1,042     1,527     1,474      565
    2    Pork sausages       KG                  1           496     1,563     2,291     2,211      847
    3    Bacon               KG                  1           331     1,042     1,527     1,474      565
    4    Cooked ham          KG                  1           496     1,563     2,291     2,211      847
D        DAIRY                                               -                   -         -        -
    1    Milk (UHT)          LITERS                        4,804    14,508    21,139    20,625    7,596
    2    Yoghurt             LITERS                          486     1,488     2,173     2,112      789
E        FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
     1   Bananas (Bogoya)    CLUST               2         1,601     4,836     7,046     6,875    2,532
     2   Cabbages            PIECES              2           889     2,956     4,366     4,160    1,668
     3   Egg plant           KG                  1           320       967     1,409     1,375      506
     4   Onions              KG                  1           930     2,870     4,195     4,070    1,530
     5   Tomatoes            KG                  1         1,622     4,985     7,283     7,074    2,648
     6   Fresh beans         KG                  1           806     2,455     3,582     3,487    1,295
     7   Water melon         PIECES              3           971     2,976     4,346     4,224    1,577
     8   Pineapples          PIECES              2           971     2,976     4,346     4,224    1,577
     9   Carrots             KG                  1           651     2,009     2,937     2,849    1,071
    10   French beans        KG                  1           651     2,009     2,937     2,849    1,071
    11   Couggets            KG                  1           320       967     1,409     1,375      506
    12   Pawpaws             PIECES              2           651     2,009     2,937     2,849    1,071
F        OTHER FOOD ITEMS
    1    Bananas (Matooke)   BUNCH             10          7,537    20,821    29,918    29,909   10,043
    2    Rice                KG                 1          1,395     4,305     6,293     6,106    2,295
    3    Maize flour         KG                 1          1,497     4,090     5,866     5,883    1,950
    4    Cassava flour       KG                 1            640     1,742     2,497     2,507      828
    5    Millet flour        KG                 1            640     1,742     2,497     2,507      828
    6    Sweet potatoes      KG                 1          1,291     3,559     5,112     5,113    1,713
    7    Irish potatoes      KG                 1          4,877    15,030    21,966    21,320    8,003
    8    Dry beans           KG                 1            878     2,497     3,605     3,574    1,239
    9    Groundnuts          KG                 1            878     2,497     3,605     3,574    1,239

                                                     158
            ANNEX 10. NATIONAL PARKS IN UGANDA AND TOURISM
                              OFFERINGS121

                       Table 1: Visitors to National Parks in Uganda, 2008-2012




                      Table 2: Description of Activities at Uganda National Parks
                                  (in the order of the land area size)




121
      Uganda Wildlife Authority
                                                 159
    #                       Areas
                                                  Description                            Activities
             Name           (km2 )
1       Murchison Falls   3,840      Murchison Falls became one of                Birding tours;
        National Park                Uganda’s first national parks in             Cultural encounters include
                                     1952. It is Uganda's largest and              Mubako cultural campfire
                                     oldest conservation area, hosting 76          performances, the villages
                                     species of mammals and 451 birds.             of Kihaguzi and Kigaragara,
                                     The park is bisected by the Victoria          etc;
                                     Nile, which plunges 45m over the             Game drive around the
                                     remnant rift valley wall, creating the        Buligi game tracks;
                                     dramatic Murchison Falls, the                Nature walks through
                                     centerpiece of the park and the final         Kaniyo Pabidi, Rabongo
                                     event in an 80km stretch of rapids.           forests, Nile-Lake Albert
                                     The mighty cascade drains the last            delta, etc;
                                     of the river's energy, transforming it       Launch trips;
                                     into a broad, placid stream that             Sport fishing.
                                     flows quietly across the rift valley
                                     floor into Lake Albert. This stretch
                                     of river provides one of Uganda's
                                     most remarkable wildlife spectacles.
2       Queen Elizabeth   1,978      The park spans the equator lines. It         Birding tours: the park is
        National Park                is home to over 95 mammal species             home to over 600 species.
                                     and over 600 bird species. As well            This is the greatest of any
                                     as its outstanding wildlife                   East African national park;
                                     attractions, Queen Elizabeth                 Cave tours;
                                     National Park has a fascinating              Chimp tracking;
                                     cultural history. There are many             Cultural encounters include
                                     opportunities for visitors to meet the        Leopard village, Kikorongo
                                     local communities and enjoy                   women community, Katwe
                                     storytelling, dance, music and more.          village, Nyanz’ibiri cave
                                     The gazetting of the park has                 community, Kataara village,
                                     ensured the conservation of its               etc;
                                     ecosystems, which in turn benefits           Game drives;
                                     the surrounding communities.                 Nature walks;
                                                                                  The Kazinga channel tours;
                                                                                  Wildlife research tours.
3       Kidepo Valley     1,422      Kidepo is Uganda’s most isolated            Birding tours;
        National Park                national park. It has a profusion of        Game drives in Kidepo
                                     big game and hosts over 77                   valley
                                     mammal species as well as around            Nature walks in Lomej
                                     475 bird species. The park contains          mountains, Narus valley,
                                     two rivers Kidepo and Narus. The             Kidepo river valley,
                                     local communities around the park            Namamkweny valley,
                                     include pastoral Karamojong                  Morungole mountains, etc.
                                     people.
4       Mount Elgon       1,121      Mt. Elgon has the largest volcanic           Birding tours;
        National Park                base in the world. Located on the            Culture encounters include
                                     Uganda-Kenya border it is also the            Sabiny community,
                                     oldest and largest solitary, volcanic         Budadiri community, etc;
                                     mountain in East Africa. The park            Nature walks;

                                                   160
                            is home to over 300 species of               Mountain biking tours;
                            birds, including the endangered              Volcano climbing tours;
                            Lammergeyer. The higher slopes               Nature walks;
                            are protected by national parks in           Rock climbing tours;
                            Uganda and Kenya, creating an                Sport fishing.
                            extensive trans-boundary
                            conservation area which has been
                            declared a UNESCO Man &
                            Biosphere Reserve.
5   Rwenzori          996   The park was gazetted in 1991 and            Birding tours;
    Mountains               was recognized as a World Heritage           Cultural encounters include
    National Park           site in 1994 and Ramsar site in               Ruboni community,
                            2008. Rwenzori Mountains National             Mihunga community,
                            Park protects the highest parts of the        Bulemba-Ihandiro cultural
                            120km-long and 65km-wide                      trail;
                            Rwenzori mountain range. The                 Nature walks;
                            national park hosts 70 mammals and           Mountain/volcano climbing
                            217 bird species including 19                 in the central circuit trail
                            Albertine Rift endemics, as well as           and Kilembe trail.
                            some of the world’s rarest
                            vegetation.
6   Kibale National   795   Kibale National Park contains one           Birding tours;
    Park                    of the loveliest and most varied            Kanyanchu primate walk,
                            tracts of tropical forest in Uganda.         Chimpanzee habituation
                            The Kibale-Fort Portal area is one           experience;
                            of Uganda’s most rewarding                  Cultural encounters through
                            destinations to explore. The park            Magombe swamp wetlands
                            lies close to the tranquil Ndali-            tours;
                            Kasenda crater area and within half         Night nature walks.
                            a day’s drive of the Queen
                            Elizabeth, Rwenzori Mountains and
                            Semuliki National Parks, as well as
                            the Toro-Semliki Wildlife Reserve.
7   Lake Mburo        370   It is a compact gem, located                 Birding tours;
    National Park           conveniently close to the highway            Game drives include a
                            that connects Kampala to the parks            variety of landscape
                            of western Uganda. It is the smallest         features; acacia woodland,
                            of Uganda’s savannah national                 wetlands, grassy hillsides,
                            parks and underlain by ancient                rock outcrops and
                            Precambrian metamorphic rocks                 seasonally flooded valley
                            which date back more than 500                 floors;
                            million years. It is home to 350 bird        Nature walks;
                            species as well as zebra, impala,            Horseback safaris;
                            eland, buffalo, oribi, Defassa               Launch trips;
                            waterbuck, leopard, hippo, hyena,            Sport fishing.
                            topi and reedbuck.

8   Bwindi            321   Bwindi was gazetted as a National           Birding tours;
    Impenetrable            Park in 1991 and declared a                 Cultural encounters include:
    National Park           UNESCO Natural World Heritage                Buhoma community tours,
                            Site in 1994. It lies in southwestern        Nkuringo community tours,
                            Uganda on the edge of the Rift               Nyundo community eco-
                            Valley. Its mist-covered hillsides           trails, Rubuguri village
                            are blanketed by one of Uganda's             walks, etc.
                                          161
                               oldest and most biologically diverse         Mountain biking tours;
                               rainforests, which dates back over           Gorilla tracking tours;
                               25,000 years and contains almost             Six main nature trails
                               400 species of plants.                        include: Muyanga waterfall
                                                                             Walk, Rushura hill walk,
                                                                             muzubijiro loop, the Ivi
                                                                             River walk, the Buhoma-
                                                                             Nkuringo trail, the
                                                                             Habinyanja trail.
9    Semuliki           220    Semuliki National Park sprawls                Birding tours;
     National Park             across the floor of the Semliki               Cultural encounter include
                               Valley on the remote, western side             Batwa community, boma
                               of the Rwenzori. The park is                   cultural village, etc;
                               dominated by the easternmost                  Game drives;
                               extension of the great Ituri Forest of        Nature walks;
                               the Congo Basin. This is one of               Hot springs.
                               Africa’s most ancient and bio-
                               diverse forests; one of the few to
                               survive the last ice age, 12-18,000
                               years ago. It is the only tract of true
                               lowland tropical forest in East
                               Africa, hosting 441 recorded bird
                               species and 53 mammals.

10   Mgahinga           33.7   The park was created to protect the           Birding tours;
     Gorilla National          rare mountain gorillas that inhabit           Cultural encounters through
     Park                      its dense forests, and it is also an           the Batwa trail;
                               important habitat for the endangered          Gorilla tracking;
                               golden monkey.                                Mountain and volcano
                                                                              climbing: Mt. Sabinyo,
                                                                              Mt. Gahinga and Mt.
                                                                              Muhavura.
                                                                             Nature walks.




                                              162
ANNEX 11. CASE STUDIES OF NATURAL RESOURCES EXPLORATION
        IN NATURE RESERVES AND PROTECTED AREAS

Good Practice – Case Studies: Canada, Australia, Namibia

   a) Oil exploration in Sable Island National Park, Canada

1.      Sable Island is located approximately 300 kilometers offshore from Halifax and is an
ecological gem. It is home to wild horses, immense sand dunes, the largest grey seal colony in the
world, and a variety of species-at-risk. However, it is also the first national park in Canada that is
located in the middle of a petroleum field. The Canadian government has estimated US$2.4-billion
worth of natural gas and oil underneath Sable Island. A legal ban on surface drilling on the island,
and out to one nautical mile, is now in place. The legislation attempts to limit oil and gas
exploration activities to only those that are considered as low impact such as sub-surface horizontal
drilling beneath the island and low-level seismic testing on top of the island. In addition to this
new legislation, there is a conservation strategy for Sable Island prepared in 1998 by Environment
Canada’s Canadian Wildlife Services. The strategy defines the environmental limits within which
future activities should proceed and the various conservation priorities.

2.       To protect the uniqueness and integrity of Sable Island, ExxonMobil, which holds the
exploration rights on and around Sable, has developed a code of practice. It provides a guide
for the design, development and implementation of the Sable Island project. It also serves as a
guideline for all personnel working on aspects of the project concerning human interactions with
the Sable Island environment. Parks Canada, Canada’s national parks agency, is also working on
its vision for Sable and a management plan to facilitate opportunities for Canadians to connect
with Sable Island in a sustainable way.

   b) Co-existence of mining and tourism in Broken Hill, Australia

3.     The experience in Broken Hill, Australia has demonstrated that the mining industry
and tourism industry can drive the local economy collectively. Broken Hill is a mining town
located in the west of New South Wales, Australia. The world’s richest lead-zinc ore body was
found on the Broken Hill Ore Deposit.

4.     The world’s largest mining company, BHP Billiton, has roots in the city. The mining
industry has provided the majority of direct and indirect employment in the city. While mining has
declined in recent years, the city has made efforts to promote itself as a tourism destination in order
to become less reliant upon mining as a source of employment. BHP Billiton also manages the
Olympic Dam project which is located in South Australia and is set to be the site of the world’s
biggest mine. The company and the state government are working together to turn it into a man-
made tourist attraction once mining is terminated. One of the plans is to fill the pit with rising
groundwater and create a vast outback lake.

   c) Co-existence of mining and tourism in the Central Namib, Namibia

                                                 163
5.      Namibia’s Central Namib Desert is a valued landscape for diverse h abitats and
people. The region is also rich in mineral deposits and supports a diverse mining industry. By
2007, when the Ministry of Mines and Energy issued a moratorium on uranium exploration, 36
exploration licenses had been granted in the Central Namib, both inside and outside of national
parks, in line with Namibian Policy which allows for mining in Protected Areas under certain
conditions. Exploration and mining activities within Protected Areas must comply with the
environmental and economic regulatory framework.

6.      A Central Namib landscape assessment was carried out to better understand the
ecological, socio-cultural and economic activities within the landscape. A priority was placed
on identifying areas where mining and other development pressures coincided with high tourism
values and managing stakeholders’ impacts on biodiversity to minimize the conflict. The
assessment can serve as a decision support tool for different stakeholders in this region. As
indicated in the findings of the assessment, over half of the Central Namib ecosystems were found
to be of moderate to high vulnerability. The results also documented that multiple landuses
contribute to local livelihoods and the economy outside of the mining industry. Tourism is one of
the key drivers and contributes close to US$70 million per year (2010 value). The growth of the
tourism industry in the area depends on maintaining and protecting the natural capital. In the
Minerals Policy of Namibia, the government has emphasized that short to medium term projects,
such as mining, do not jeopardize the potential for long-term sustainable development in tourism.

7.     In addition to the Central Namib, existing and planned mines are also located on the
edge of or within the Namib Naukluft National Park. In order to mitigate the negative
environmental impacts, Namibia has established a public-private collaboration to ensure that
uranium mining does not degrade the regional environment or adversely affect the health of
employees and has settled populations away from the mines. The government has adopted a set of
wide-ranging environmental compliance targets for the whole area in which either mining or
exploration takes place, not just with respect to individual operations. In the private sector, the
Chamber of Mines of Namibia previously established a Uranium Stewardship Committee to
provide leadership and foster good governance.

Potential Risks – Case Study: Oil Spill Disaster in the Gulf Region (USA)

8.      The Deepwater Horizon oil spill which took place April 2010 in the Gulf of Mexico is
the most significant offshore spill in U.S. history. Given the known risks associated with oil
drilling and the case of the 2010 Gulf spill, Uganda’s tourism stakeholders can learn from this
experience particularly in terms of immediate and longer term impacts.

9.      The total estimated spill ranged from 100 million to 184 million gallons of oil122. The
five states in the Gulf that were affected by the spill include Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana,
Texas and Florida. The spill caused extensive damage to marine and wildlife habitats and to the
Gulf’s fishing and tourism industries.


122
   Ritchie, B; Crotts, J; Zehrer, A; Volsky, G; Understanding the Effects of a Tourism Crisis: The impact of the BP
Oil Spill on Regional Lodging Demand, Journal of Travel Research, 2013
                                                        164
10.     Tourism is one of the top economic drivers of the Gulf region. Research shows that the
tourism sector in the Gulf region generates nearly 400,000 jobs, representing 15 percent of total
private sector employment in the region compared with 12 percent for the entire country. The
visitor economy is a diverse composite of sectors and the total amount of visitor expenditures
exceeded US$34 billion in 2008123.

11.      This oil spill led to significant negative impacts on tourism. First, travel intentions and
demands decreased dramatically. Second, the regional economy has been affected significantly
and such negative impact has lasted for an extended period beyond the period of the oil clean up.
Third, visitors’ misperception and uncertainty led to destination brand damage of the Gulf region.
Last but not least, oil that flowed into the Gulf caused significant and lasting damage to tourism
assets, including marine and wildlife habitats.

      a) Deterioration of Tourism Assets

12.     Since the 2010 oil spill began, this environmental disaster decreased fishery outputs
and harmed ecosystems throughout the fragile Gulf Coast region. It was called the “worst
environmental disaster the US has faced” by the White House energy adviser. Figure 1 is a map
published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration highlighting where the
explosion took place and the probability of shoreline deposits of the toxic oil. One of the most
significant environmental impacts was on marine species. Eight national parks were threatened
and more than 400 species that live in the Gulf islands and marshlands were at risk 124. Other
impacts on tourism caused by environmental constraints include contamination and pollution of
waterways and land. In addition, the clean-up itself caused damage to the overall fragile ecosystem.

Figure 1: Probability of Shoreline                            Figure 2: National Parks Threatened
Threat Deepwater Horizon MC 252125                                   by the Gulf Oil Spill126




123
    Potential Impact of the Gulf Oil Spill on Tourism, Oxford Economics, n.d.
124
    Gulf Oil Spill Responses, National Parks Conservation Association, 2010
125
    National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 2010
126
    National Parks Conservation Association
                                                       165
Implication for Uganda

13.     Nature resources and wildlife are the essential assets for nature-based tourism in
Uganda. The Albertine region has a fragile ecosystem that requires strategic conservation.
Wildlife population numbers have been decreasing due to the conflict between humans and
wildlife. Nature resources and wildlife are key drivers to the sustainability of Uganda’s tourism
sector. The table below illustrates examples of oil exploration activities during the construction
phase and potential impact on tourism assets in MFNP.

        Table 1: Examples of Oil Exploration Activities and Impact on the Tourism Assets

      Example of activities           Example of impact on the                    Tourism offerings in MFNP
                                            tourism assets
 Land clearing                     Loss of habitat, introduction of                Birding tours;
                                   plant disease                                   Cultural encounters include
                                                                                    Mubako cultural campfire
 Construction of                   Habitats loss or fragmentation,                  performances, the villages of
 facilities, roads, camps          road kills, air pollution, noise                 Kihaguzi and Kigaragara, etc;
 and pipelines                     and light pollution                             Game drive around the Buligi
 Digging and hauling               Air pollution, vibration, water                  game tracks;
                                                                                   Nature walks through Kaniyo
                                   pollution, noise pollution,                      Pabidi, Rabongo forests, Nile-
                                   changes in behaviors for                         Lake Albert delta, etc;
                                   wildlife                                        Launch trips;
 Chemical usage                    Loss of species, toxicity, water                Sport fishing.
                                   pollution
 Waste disposal                    Encouragement of pests,
                                   disease transfer, contamination
                                   of groundwater and soil
 Population growth                 Loss of habitat or species, stress
                                   on local and regional resources,
                                   pest introduction

       b) Loss of Travel Demand

14.    An immediate negative impact caused by the oil spill in the Gulf region was the decline
in travel intention and demand. According to the June 2010 survey carried out by the leading
market research provider TNS, 10% of those already intending to travel to the Gulf region had
changed their plans due to the oil spill. Another 22% had decided not to go for unspecified
reasons127. This represents the average for the entire Gulf shore region including areas that have
been untouched by the oil and illustrates that the impact on tourism demand was beyond the
geographic areas where the disaster took place.




127
      Potential Impact of the Gulf Oil Spill on Tourism, Oxford Economics, n.d.
                                                          166
15.     In terms of actual demand and revenue lost, a recent study compared the demand
and revenue for the vacation rental industry across the Gulf’s eight coastal regions in 2010
versus 2009128. Starting in April when the oil spill took place, the demand for vacation rentals
decreased dramatically. The change in demand is significantly related to changes in rental revenue.
Revenue went down for the first month across the region. Once the oil spill began, vacation rental
revenue declined even more sharply, down by an average of 7.9%. The study also shows that the
vacation rental industry in the Gulf region lagged significantly behind their counterparts across
other regions in the Unites States. Although leisure market demand dropped, hotel revenue across
the affected regions benefited from replacement demand generated by the cleanup crews and news
media members.

Figure 3. Change in demand in the vacation                    Figure 4. Change in revenue in the vacation
rental sector by coastal county region in 2010                  rental sector by coastal county region in
versus 2009129                                                              2010 versus 2009




Implication for Uganda

16.     In the context of Uganda’s tourism, the leisure market segment is one of the country’s
largest demand segments. Results from an economic analysis of tourist expenditures indicate
spending by leisure tourists stimulates more GDP per dollar spent than the average traditional
export in Uganda. In addition, leisure and cultural tourists spend 30-100 percent more per visit
than other tourists, such as business tourists. Wildlife safaris and gorilla viewing are the most
popular with leisure tourists followed by adventure activities and backpacking. Local hotels,
inexpensive motels/inns/guest houses, and private homes are top accommodation choices for most
tourists. The data shows private home stays are on average longest. The current budget market
demand is healthy as some sites in the parks are operating at or over 100% whereas accommodation
at the upper end of demand is weak, with occupancy rates at around 20%130.


128
    Ritchie, B; Crotts, J; Zehrer, A; Volsky, G; Understanding the Effects of a Tourism Crisis: The impact of the BP
Oil Spill on Regional Lodging Demand, Journal of Travel Research, 2013
129
    Understanding the Effects of a Tourism Crisis: The impact of the BP Oil Spill on Regional Lodging Demand,
Journal of Travel Research, 2013
130
    Economic and Statistical Analysis of Tourism in Uganda. The World Bank, June 2013
                                                        167
17.     With this context, an oil spill disaster would lead to decreased demand for leisure
tourism and decline in related tourist expenditures which have strong linkages to the local
economy. Another issue that needs to be taken into consideration is the infrastructure and
equipment gaps in the national parks. The current capacity is not sufficient for responding to a
crisis and needs to be expanded in order to accommodate the operations and crew in a disaster
scenario.

       c) Interruption of Local Economic Development

18.     According to the research, the economic impact caused by the oil spill in the Gulf is
expected to last 15 months with a total of US$7.6 billon lost in the tourism revenue. However,
the existing negative impacts indicate the tourism industry will continue to suffer from the disaster
over a period of 36 months, resulting in lost tourism revenues of $22.7 billion as shown in Table
2. Consequently, the scale and duration of this oil spill disaster are significant. The impact is also
expected to be beyond the immediate geographical area and affect the tourism in the neighboring
regions.

Table 2: Total Economic Impact Scenarios on Gulf Region131

                                             Low Impact                                      High Impact
           Months                               15                                               36
          Revenues               US$           % 1 year          % 3 year           US$          % 1 year   % 3 year
                               (billions)      outlook*         outlook**         (billions)     outlook*   outlook**
        Total Region             $7.6            12%               4%               $22.7          25%         8%
           Florida               $6.3            13%               5%               $18.6          27%        14%
         Louisiana               $0.7            17%               6%                $2.0          37%        18%
         Mississippi             $0.4            19%               7%                $1.2          41%        20%
          Alabama                $0.3            19%               7%                $0.8          41%        20%
           Texas                 $0.0             0%               0%                $0.1           1%         0%
*Potential lost revenues in the first 12 months relative to business as usual for coast economies.
** Potential lost revenues over the next 36 months relative to business as usual for coast economies.

Implication for Uganda

19.     There is an alarming potential impact for Uganda as the MFNP is located in the
Albertine region where two tourism development areas have been identified. The tourism
sector offers multiple employment opportunities for local communities. A possible oil spill would
directly interrupt existing tourism activities and future development in this region. Tour operators
have indicated that people who visit Uganda usually go on a 10-14 day circuit safari visiting 4-5
parks and also visit neighboring countries. As a result, tour operators’ income would not be
affected significantly. However, local communities whose income relies on the tourism would be
affected the most. Private sector operators that have increasing lodging investments in the national
parks are also facing the potential risks and the local communities may lose these opportunities to


131
      Oxford Economics, Potential Impact of the Gulf Oil Spill on Tourism, n.d.
                                                          168
upgrade the infrastructure. The negative impacts created by the oil exploration activities will also
extend to the fishing and agriculture sectors which are essential to the local economic development
and are of high ecological and biodiversity significance.

       d) Threat of Negative Destination Brand

20.     Brand damage has a long and profound impact on tourism as it requires multi-year
and high cost efforts to attract tourists back to a region. In the case of the Gulf region, the
destination brand had been established over the years. Across the Gulf region, there are several
destinations which had earned a world-class reputation among the travelers, such as Florida.
However, a US$500 million marketing effort has now been committed to bring tourists back and
stimulate tourist spending, as Table 3 shows. It is expected that the US$500 million in marketing
would generate US$7.5 billion in tourism spending in the regions affected by the oil spill.

      Table 3: Gulf Region Expected Event Impacts (US$ million, three-year cumulative)132

                Tourism Industry Loss
                Low Impact                                                         $ 7,621
                High Impact                                                       $ 22,737
                Difference                                                        $ 15,115

                Suggested Marketing                                                $ 500
                Assumed ROI (Visitor Spend Per Dollar                               15:1
                Marketing)
                Visitor Spend Benefit                                             $ 7,500
                % of High-Low Difference                                           50%
                % of High-Impact Scenario                                          33%

Implication for Uganda

21.     At the time of the Uganda tourism sector situational assessment (2013), there was no
sustainable marketing mechanism and no clear strategy on target markets. An effective
destination brand for Uganda is yet to be established and Uganda is facing competition from
neighbors in the region. Moving forward, it is critical for Uganda to integrate sustainable tourism
into its overall marketing plan, since the oil extraction activities will co-exist with the tourism
industry for the next 20-50 years. Visitors’ perception must be well managed by providing
adequate information about oil activities in the national parks and taking actions to address
tourists’ concerns.

22.     In addition, the overall image of Uganda may also be affected negatively by the oil
extraction activities in the national parks even without a spill. Oil and tourism are both key
drivers of FDI for Uganda. Uganda must manage its brand effectively to ensure the investments in
both oil and tourism grow.

132
      Potential Impact of the Gulf Oil Spill on Tourism, Oxford Economics, n.d.
                                                          169
                        ANNEX 12. SURVEY INSTRUMENT FOR TOURISTS
   LODGE ______________________


                                                      The World Bank
                                                            and
                                        Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
                               Survey of Tourists’ Experience at the Murchison Falls National Park

   Objective. This survey has the goal of assessing the tourists’ experience in the Murchison Falls National Park and
   determining whether the oil exploration activities have an impact on the tourists’ enjoyment of the park. The results of the
   survey will be used to elaborate recommendations on how to ensure that the two economic activities could co-exist. For
   instance, some improvements may be identified to minimize disturbance for tourists coming from oil exploration in the
   park.
   Confidentiality. The information provided on this form will remain strictly confidential.

                                                             YOUR PROFILE
   i. Your Age:
            Below 25 years old             25-45 years old            45 – 65 years old          65 and above
   ii. Your Gender
                                            Female                   Male
   iii. Country you have come from
   ___________________________________________________________________
   iv. Your main purpose of visit to Uganda
Vacation              Visiting friends/relatives          Business             Resident      Other (specify)     ____________

  v. How many times have you been to Uganda?
 Never             Once               Twice                                 Thrice or more        Resident

   vi. How many nights did you stay:               (1) At Murchison? ____________ (2) In Uganda?
   _____________________
   vii. Have you visited any national parks or game reserves in the past?
                                       Yes          No
   If YES, please name countries and parks/reserves
   ____________________________________________________

                          YOUR EXPERIENCE AT THE MURCHISON FALLS NATIONAL PARK

   1. What was your main source of information about the Murchison Falls National Park?

           Internet         Friends/       Travel agent, travel      Newspaper,       TV/radio            Other (specify)
                            Relatives         guidebooks              magazine
                                                                                                       ___________________

   2. How would you rate your overall experience at the Murchison Falls National Park?
                Excellent     Very good        Good           50-50          Poor      Very poor



                                                                     170
3. Did you see all species of animals you wanted to see at the Murchison Falls National Park?

            Of course, yes          For the most part, yes                Probably not                 Absolutely not

If NOT, did you get an explanation as on why you could not see those animals?
                     Yes                  No

If YES, what kind of explanation was provided?                                           Who provided this explanation to
you?

 The time of the day/weather was not right                                                        Guide
 There are fewer animals in the park due to poaching                                              Hotel personnel
 There is oil exploration in the park and animals migrated to other areas                         Other Tourist
 You are not expected to see all animals every time                                               Park official
4. Were you aware of the oil exploration at the Murchison Falls National Park before visiting it?

                         Yes                      No

5. Did you notice any oil exploration related activity in the Murchison Falls National Park during your stay
(i.e. workers, tracks, oil rigs, ...)?

                         Yes                      No

6. Did the oil activities negatively impact your enjoyment of the park and your overall tourism experience?

                    No impact          Minor           Moderate            Major         Very severe      Do not
                                       impact           impact            impact           impact         know


7. In your view, has everything possible been done to minimize disruption coming from the oil exploration in
the park for the tourists?

               Absolutely not      Probably not        May be        Probably yes   Of course, yes                Do not know


8. If you believe that some improvements could still be made, what would you suggest?
                                                                                                Yes       No
 Create separate entrances into the park for oil workers and tourists
 Create separate tourists’ and oil workers’ tracks within the park
 Utilize a separate ferry for tourists and oil workers/vehicles
 Remove “no entry” signs in the park
 Provide much more information to the tourists on the oil exploration

Other ____________________________________________________________________________

_________________________________________________________________________________

9. Have you ever visited any national park where oil, gas, minerals etc. exploration is taking place?
                                                             171
                          Yes                              No
If YES, what lessons can you borrow from there?

__________________________________________________________________________________

10. Based on your current experience in the Murchison Falls National Park, if you were to advise a friend (or
consider yourself) whether to visit a national park/game reserve you would:

 Consider visiting/advise a friend to visit Murchison Falls National Park
 Visit/advise a friend to visit a national park in Uganda, but other than Murchison Falls National Park
 Visit/advise a friend to visit a different country


Please provide any additional comments below:

_____________________________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________________________

_________________________________________________________




                                                          172
ANNEX 13. SURVEY INSTRUMENT FOR GUIDES AND RANGERS

  1. Have you noticed any decline in wildlife environment in MFNP in the recent years?

                  Yes                   No          somewhat

      Please provide any comments __________________________________________________

      ___________________________________________________________________________

  2. Are you aware of oil exploration activities in MFNP?

                    Yes                      No


  3. Do you inform the tourists on game drives about oil exploration at MFNP?

                  Yes                   No         Sometimes

  4. Based on your experience, are tourists on game drives usually aware of oil exploration in the park
     before coming on the game drive?

                  Yes                   No         Sometimes

  5. Have you received any complaints/comments from tourists regarding oil exploration in the park?

                  Yes                   No

      If YES, please provide a brief description of complaints/comments

      _____________________________________________________________________________________

      ______________________________________________________________________________

  6. Based on your discussions with the tourists, does the oil exploration in the park impact their
     enjoyment of the park?

               No impact       Minor         Moderate       Major        Very severe   Do not
                               impact         impact        impact         impact      know


  7. In your view, due to oil exploration in the park, there has been:

      a) An overall decline in sightings of all animal species

                  Yes                   No




                                                  173
        b) Decline in sightings of only certain species animal species

                       Yes                       No

        If YES, please name the species _________________________________________________

    8. In your own view, and based on feedback provided by the tourists, has everything possible been
       done to minimize disruption coming from the oil exploration in the park for the tourists?

               Absolutely not     Probably not        May be      Probably yes   Of course, yes        Do not know


    9. If you believe that some improvements could still be made, what would you suggest?
                                                                                           Yes    No
 Create separate entrances into the park for oil workers and tourists
 Create separate tourists’ and oil workers’ tracks within the park
 Utilize a separate ferry for tourists and oil workers/vehicles
 Remove “no entry” signs in the park
 Provide much more information to the tourists on the oil exploration

Other ____________________________________________________________________________

_________________________________________________________________________________




Please provide any additional comments below: _____________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________________________

_________________________________________________________________________________

_________________________________________________________________________________




                                                          174
   ANNEX 14. SURVEY INSTRUMENT FOR TOUR OPERATORS

1. Number of tourists who booked travel to Murchison Falls National Park (MFNP) through your
   agency in 2011-2014

    2011 ___________

    2012 ___________

    2013 ___________

    2014 ___________

2. Based on your personal experience, how would you rate MFNP compared to all other National
   Parks in Uganda?

         Excellent      Very good          Good             50-50          Poor         Very poor



3. How do the tourists generally rate their experience at the MFNP?

         Excellent      Very good          Good             50-50          Poor         Very poor



4. Have you noticed any decline in satisfaction of tourists with the MNFP in the last several years?

                 Yes                     No

5. Have you received any complaints/comments from tourists related to their experience in the
   MNFP?

                 Yes                     No

    If YES, what did complaints relate to (check all applicable)?

     Tourists did not see all the animals they wanted
     Tourists did not like the disturbance coming from oil exploration (rigs, workers, trucks)
     Tourists did not like the service provided by lodges


    Please provide a brief description of complaints/comments related to oil exploration (if any)

    _____________________________________________________________________________________

    ______________________________________________________________________________

    ______________________________________________________________________________

                                                   175
    6. Based on your discussions with the tourists, does the oil exploration in the park impact their
       enjoyment of the park?

                   No impact         Minor            Moderate          Major       Very severe    Do not
                                     impact            impact           impact        impact       know



    7. In your view and based on discussions with the tourists, due to oil exploration in the park, there has
       been:

        c) An overall decline in sightings of all animals species

                      Yes                        No            Somewhat

        d) Decline in sightings of only certain animal species

                      Yes                        No            Somewhat

        If YES or SOMEWHAT, please name the species

        _________________________________________________________________________________

    8. Do you inform the tourists booking trips to MNFP through your agency about oil exploration?

                      Yes                        No            Sometimes

    9. In your view and based on feedback provided by the tourists, has everything possible been done to
       minimize disruption coming from the oil exploration in the park for the tourists?

               Absolutely not     Probably not        May be      Probably yes   Of course, yes        Do not know


    10. If you believe that some improvements could still be made, what would you suggest?
                                                                                           Yes    No
 Create separate entrances into the park for oil workers and tourists
 Create separate tourists’ and oil workers’ tracks within the park
 Utilize a separate ferry for tourists and oil workers/vehicles
 Remove “no entry” signs in the park
 Provide much more information to the tourists on the oil exploration

Other ____________________________________________________________________________

_________________________________________________________________________________

Please provide any additional comments below: _____________________________________________




                                                          176
         ANNEX 15. SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND LIMITATIONS

1.      Survey data collection was carried out during June 13-16, 2014. Interview dates were
chosen to ensure a convenient sample of tourists during high season. Face to face interviews and
self-enumeration methods were used to collect the data. One hundred and twenty nine tourists were
randomly identified to participate in the survey.

2.      The principal unit of measure of the survey is the tourist and a sample of tourists was
collected in six lodges located within and proximate to the MFNP. Paper questionnaires were
distributed and the goal of the survey and the need for their inputs were explained to targeted
respondents. In most of the cases the team was present for any clarifications while questionnaires
were completed.

          Target Population         Tourists visiting the MFNP
          Sampling Unit             Tourists in six lodges
          Survey Method             Face to face interview
          Instrument                10-question questionnaire
          Survey Date               June 13-16, 2014
          Initial Sample Size       136
          Effective Sample Size     129
          Response Rate             96%

3.     UWA representatives, tour operators and park rangers and guides were interviewed to
obtain additional data and opinions. Conclusions were drawn based upon the findings from the
questionnaire completed by tourists and those meetings with key stakeholders that were held
separately.

4.      Specifically, 38 guides and park rangers, and 6 tour operators were also interviewed.
Guides and park rangers were randomly identified. A sample of guides and park rangers was
collected at the lodges and during meetings with the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Uganda
Tour Guides’ Association.

5.      It is important to note that the survey was conducted when there were no ongoing activities
in the park (as the exploration/appraisal phase was over, and the construction phase had not yet
started). The impact of oil activities on tourists may therefore not be fully captured in this survey.
Results suggest the value of this data collection and the certain value of conducting further surveys
in the park during the construction phase.




                                                 177
                        ANNEX 16. LIST OF REFERENCES

1.       50 Global Firms Target Uganda’s Oil Refinery. New Vision. November 12, 2013
2.       Abdel-Aal H. and Schmeltzer R., Petroleum Economics and Engineering. 1992.
3.       Advocates Coalition for Development and Environment, 2012. History and Development
of Oil & Gas in Uganda [online] Kampala. 2012 ACODE. Available at: www.acode-
u.org/ugandaoil.html [Accessed on May 4th, 2012]
4.       African Development Bank, 2009. Oil and Gas in Africa [pdf] Oxford University Press.
Available at: http://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Publications
/Full%20Document%20-%20Oil%20and%20Gas%20in%20Africa.pdf [Accessed on April 24th,
2012]
5.       African Entrepreneurship. Sub-Saharan African Regional Report. Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor. 2012.
6.       Agricultural Supply Chain Project- Hoima, Uganda. Ernst and Young Report. December
2013
7.       Agriterra, 2012. Identification of livestock investment opportunities in Uganda, Final
Report. Arnhem, Netherlands
8.       Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project, Project Appraisal Document, World
Bank, March 2014
9.       Atuhairwe, R. Uganda: Oil-Cost of Living Explodes in Hoima, All Africa, July 8, 2012
10.      Badagawa, 2011. Uganda needs SME Authority – PSFU. New Vision [online]
Wednesday March 9th, 2011. Available at: http://newvisionuganda.info/PA/a/32/748629
[Accessed on May 21st 2012]
11.      Badgley, C., 2012. Job Woes and Local Content [online] s.l. Pipeline Dreams. Available
at: http://www.pipelinedreams.org/2012/03/job-woes-and-local-content/ [Accessed on April 18th,
2012]
12.    Bakeine, A., 2009. Uganda Country Study: Raising Productivity and Reducing the Risk
of Household Enterprises, Kampala, World Bank. (Also available at: http://www.mtti.go.ug/
index.php/downloads/doc_download/172-uganda-country-study-report.html)
13.    Bariyo N. Uganda Sees Its Firsts Oil Refinery on Stream by 2018. Wall Street Journal.
August 14, 2013
14.    BHP Billiton Partnership, Fauna & Flora International, n.d.
15.    Biryabarema E. and Stoddard E. Oil Hunt in Ugandan National Park Tests Africa's Eco
Defenses. Reuters. June 27, 2013
16.    Biryabarema, E., 2012. Tullow, partners to invest $750 million in Uganda oil find.
Reuters [online], Wednesday May 9th, 2012. Available at: http://uk.reuters.com/article/2012/
05/09/uk-uganda-oil-idUKBRE8480SZ20120509 [Accessed May 10th, 2012]



                                              178
17.    Businge, J., 2012. Local SMEs warned on oil fortunes, The Independent [online] March
  th
11 , 2012. Available at: http://www.independent.co.ug/business/business-news/5379-local-smes-
warned-on-oil-fortunes [Accessed on April 18th, 2012]
18.     Buliisa District Local Government, 2009. Higher Local Government Statistical Abstract:
Buliisa District 2009/2010, Buliisa
19.     Bureau, P; Questions Remain about Sable Island, Our Newest National Park, Herald
News, 2013
20.     Calvin, M., and Linda, J., 2010. Agricultural Value Chain Finance, Rome, FAO
21.     Chemonics International Inc., 2010. Market Assessment And Baseline Study Of Staple
Foods – A Country Report – Uganda, Kampala, USAID
22.     China's CNOOC wins $2bn Uganda oil field contract. BBC News, September 26, 2013
23.     China Ready to Drill Deep on Its Own. Wall Street Journal. May 13, 2013
24.     CNOOC of China Wins Uganda’s First Oil Production License. Bloomberg News,
September 25, 2013
25.     Dalipagi, I., and Elepu , Gl, 2014. Agricultural Value Chain Analysis in Northern
Uganda: Maize, Rice, Groundnuts, Sunflower and Sesame, Kampala, Action against Hunmger/
ACF-International
26.     Davis, L; Bonding Requirements for Natural Gas Producers, February 2014
27.     Department of Fisheries Resources, 2012. Department of Fisheries Resources Annual
Report 2010/2011, Entebbe
28.     Derrick Petroleum Services, 2011. Oil and Gas – Mergers and Acquisition Review
[online] s.l., Derrick Petroleum Services. Available at: http://mergersandacquisitionreviewcom.
blogspot.com/2011/07/uganda-oil-and-gas-exploration-in-2011.html [Accessed on May 3rd,
2012]
29.     Diamond Bank commits N150bn to oil, gas financing. Punch. September 1, 2013
30.     Dudenhoefer, D; Plan to Drill in Yasuni National Park Divides Ecuadorians, Indian
Country Today Media Network, September 22, 2013
31.     East African Business Magazine, 2014. Value-Addition: Taking agriculture to the next
level. East African Agribusiness [online] Available at: http://ea-
agribusiness.co.ug/category/agribusiness/ value-addition/ [Accessed: 10th May, 2014]
32.     East African Business Magazine, 2013. Aquaculture: Fishpond stocking: The right way
to do it-Part I. East African Agribusiness [online] Available at: http://ea-
agribusiness.co.ug/category/agribusiness/ value-addition/ [Accessed: 10th May, 2014]
33.     East African Business Magazine, 2014. Contract farming: How a sugarcane farmer’s life
have turned rosy. East African Agribusiness [online] Available at: http://ea-
agribusiness.co.ug/category/agribusiness/value-addition/ [Accessed: 10th May, 2014]
34.   Economic and Statistical Analysis of Tourism in Uganda. The World Bank, June 2013
35.   Economic Transformation Program. A Roadmap for Malaysia. Chapter 6: Powering the
Malaysia Economy with Oil, Gas and Energy. 2010
36.   Economic Transformation Program. Annual Report. 2013
37.   Energy Ministry Creating Oil Institutions. New Vision (Uganda), September 12, 2013
                                              179
38.     Isyagi, N.A., et al., 2009. Manual for the Commercial Pond Production of the African
Catfish in Uganda, Kmpala, USAID
39.     FAO. 2013. Agribusiness public-private partnerships – A country report of Uganda.
Country case studies – Africa. Rome. Available at: http://www.fao.org/docrep/
017/aq235e/aq235e.pdf [Accessed: 1st May 2014]
40.     Financing the Oil Industry and the Experience of Saudi Arabia. World Petroleum
Congress, 2000
41.     First Bank Stakes $3.3 billion on Oil and Gas Projects. Nigeria News Day, May 10, 2013
42.     Four Oil Wells Revert to Government. New Vision (Uganda), June 9, 2014
43.     Ghana Petroleum (Local Content and Local Participation) Regulations, 2013
44.     Global Witness, 2010. Donor engagement in Uganda’s Oil and Gas Sector: An agenda
for Action. A briefing by Global Witness, October 2010.[pdf] s.l., Global Witness. Available at:
www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/uganda_final_low.pdf [Accessed on May 3rd,
2012]
45.     Gollin, D., and Rogerson, R., 2010. Brief 81: Agriculture, Roads and Economic
Development in Uganda. Rome, IFAD
46.     Government to Lift Ban on Hotels in Parks. New Vision Uganda, September 24, 2013
47.     Gulf Oil Spill Responses, National Parks Conservation Association, 2010
48.     Guloba, M., & Ogwal, F., 2011. Trade opportunities from the EU-ACP EPAs: Prospects
for the Fresh Fruits and Vegetables subsector in Uganda. Kampala, Economic Policy Research
Centre. Available at: http://www.eprc.or.ug/pdf_files/Policy%20Brief%20NO%2011.pdf
49.     Government to Announce Oil Refinery Investor. Daily Monitor. February 25, 2014
50.     Haggai Matsiko. Battle for oil contracts. Independent. April 19, 2013
51.     Hoima farmers seize the moment-with some Irish help. Oil in Uganda, May 20, 2013
52.     Humphrey J., 2006. Global Value Chains in the Agrifood Sector. Vienna, UNIDO.
Available at: http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Publications/Pub_free/
Global_value_chains_in_the_agrifood_sector.pdf [Accessed: 31st May 2014]
53.     IFAD, 2013. Enabling poor rural people to overcome poverty in Uganda, Rome.
Available at: http://www.ifad.org/operations/projects/regions/Pf/factsheets/uganda.pdf
[Accessed: 13th June, 2014]
54.     Increasing Local Procurement by the Mining Industry in West Africa. Report No. 66585-
AFR. World Bank 2012.
55.     International Alert, 2011. Oil and Gas Laws in Uganda: A Legislators Guide [pdf]
Kampala. Int. Alert. Available at: www.international-alert.org/sites/default/files/.../18-Oil-
web.pdf [Accessed: May 8th, 2012]
56.     Izama, A., and Otoa, T., 2011. Status of Uganda’s Oil and Gas Legislation [pdf]Kampala.
ACODE. Available at: www.acode-u.org/documents/oildocs/infosheet_14.pdf [Accessed on
May 4th, 2012]
57.     Investors are borrowing from abroad to finance local expansion. New Vision (Uganda).
September 5, 2013

                                              180
58.     Jacques, H.T., 2011. Agricultural Value Chains in Developing Countries: A Framework
for Analysis, International Food and Agribusiness Management Review Vol.14, Issue 2
59.     Jacob, P; Mongolia; Could Mining Threaten Tourism Potential? Eurasianet, 2012
60.     Kibaale District Local Government, 2009. Higher Local Government Statistical Abstract:
Buliisa District 2009/2010, Kibaale
61.    Kwesiga, P., 2012. Govt bans foreign investors from doing small businesses, New Vision
[online] March 20th, 2012. Available at http://www.newvision.co.ug/news/30218-govt-warns-
foreign-investors-against-small-businesses.html [Accessed May 15th, 2012]
62.    Landscape Level Assessment of Biodiversity Landuse in the Central Namibia, Namibia
Minister of Environment and Tourism, 2012
63.    Legal loopholes emerge even as oil authority, company are set to start. The Weekly
Observer (Uganda), September 11, 2013.
64.    Local Content: Uganda’s Mixed Bag of Oil Fortune. The Observer. December 29, 2013
65.    Luciani, G., 2010. Integrating upstream or downstream of oil and gas [PPT], Dar es
Salaam. Gulf Research Center Foundation. Available at: http://freedownload.is/ppt/integrating-
downstream-or-upstream-of-oil-gas-slide-1-3452843.html [Accessed on April 24th, 2012]
66.     Lule, J., 2010. Internal Affairs Ministry to crack down on quack investors, illegal
immigrants, New Vision [online] June 13th, 2010. Available at: http://www.newvision.co.ug/
D/8/13/722664 [Accessed May 15th, 2012]
67.     Mallén, P; Indigenous Population Agrees Oil Drilling in Ecuador’s Protected Area
Yasuní, International Business Times, September 18, 2013
68.     Market Assessment And Baseline Study Of Staple Foods – A Country Report - Uganda
69.     Minerals Policy of Namibia, Namibia Minister of Mines and Energy
70.     Mining in Africa towards 2020. KPMG. 2013
71.     Mining One Day, Tourism Eventually: BHP, Financial Review, 2011
72.     Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Statistical Abstract 2013,
Entebbe
73.     Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, 2011. Enhancing National Participation in
the Oil and Gas Industry in Uganda: Final Report - The National Content Study in the Oil and
Gas Sector in Uganda [pdf], Kampala. MEMD. Available at: http://www.petroleum.go.ug
/uploads/Final%20Report%20National%20Content%20(September%202011).pdf [Accessed
April 17th, 2012]
74.    Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, 2008. National Oil and Gas Policy for
Uganda [pdf] Entebbe, MEMD. Available at: http://www.petroleum.go.ug/
uploads/NATIONAL%20OIL%20AND%20GAS%20POLICY%20FOR%20UGANDA.pdf
[Accessed on April 18th, 2012]
75.     Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, 2009. Strengthening the Management of
the Oil and Gas Sector in Uganda (An expansion of ‘Strengthening the State Administration of
the Upstream Petroleum Sector in Uganda’ Programme). A Development Programme in
Cooperation with Norway [pdf] s.l., MEMD. Available at: http://www.norway.go.ug/
PageFiles/395519/ PD%20feb%202010%20incl%20maps.pdf [Accessed on May 14th, 2012]

                                              181
76.     Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, 2011. The History and Progress of
Petroleum Exploration and Development in Uganda. [online] Entebbe. Available at:
http://www.petroleum.go.ug/page.php?k=abthistory [Accessed on May 10th 2012]
77.    Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2013. Albertine Region
Sustainable Development Project (ARSDP) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) Volume 1
Final Draft Report, Kampala
78.    Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2013. Background to the
Budget 2013/2014 Fiscal Year, Kampala
79.    Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2012: Background to the
Budget 2012/2013 Fiscal Year, Kampala
80.    Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2013. Background to the
Budget 2014/2015 Fiscal Year, Kampala
81.    Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2014. National Budget
Framework Paper FY 2014/15 – FY 2018/19, Kampala
82.    Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2008. Enhancing the
competitiveness of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in Uganda (Discussion Paper No 15),
Kampala. MFPED
83.     Mugabira, M., et al., 2013. National Investment Policy for Aquaculture Parks in Uganda,
Dakar-Fann, TrustAfrica
84.     Mugerwa, Y., 2010. Bunyoro to receive Shs360b, Daily Monitor [online] May 1st, 2014.
Available at: http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/Bunyoro-to-receive-Shs360b/-
/688334/2299082/-/3ha1qz/-/index.html [Accessed: 1st May, 2014]
85.     Mugerwa, Y., 2010. Uganda: MPs Want Ministry to Stop Issuing Work Permits, Daily
Monitor [online] July 10th, 2010. Available at: http://allafrica.com/stories/201007120400.html
[Accessed May 15th, 2012]
86.     Musasizi S. Oil companies face strict waste management rules. The Observer. May 15,
2012
87.     Mwakali J. and Byaruhanga J., 2011. Local Content in the Oil and Gas Industry:
Implications for Uganda[pdf], Kampala. Makerere University. Available at:
http://news.mak.ac.ug/documents/Makfiles/aet2011/Mwakali.pdf [Accessed on April 17th, 2012]
88.     Nabwiso, S., 2012. SMEs want special oil fund. The Observer [online]. March 13th 2012.
Available at: http://www.observer.ug/index.php?option=com_content&view=
article&id=17649:smes-want-special-oil-fund&catid=38:business&Itemid=68 [Accessed on
April 18th, 2012]
89.    Namatovu et al., 2010. Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, GEM Uganda 2010 Executive
Report, Makerere University Business School, Kampala
90.    Namibia: Monitoring the Central Namib Uranium Rush, Mining, People and the
Environment, n.d.
91.    National Budget Framework Paper FY 2014/15 – FY 2018/19
92.    National Planning Authority, 2010. National Development Plan, Kampala


                                             182
93.     Nigeria: FBN Capital Woos Indigenous Oil Companies On Equity Financing. AllAfrica,
June 6, 2013
94.     Oil and Gas in Africa. KPMG. 2013.
95.     Oil in Uganda, 2012. “How do we make money?” Banyoro ask Oil Information Centre.
Oil in Uganda. [online] Available at: http://www.oilinuganda.org/features/local-content/how-do-
we-make-money-banyoro-ask-oil-info-centre.html [Accessed on May 28th, 2012]
96.     Oil in Uganda, 2012. Bunyoro appeals for special treatment and share of oil revenue. Oil
in Uganda [online] Available at: http://www.oilinuganda.org/features/law/bunyoro-appeals-for-
special-treatment-and-share-of-oil-revenue.html [Accessed on May 28th, 2012]
97.    Oil in Uganda, 2012. Caribbean Cooperation for Uganda’s nascent oil industry. Oil in
Uganda. [online] Available at: http://www.oilinuganda.org/features/local-content/caribbean-
cooperation-for-ugandas-nascent-oil-industry.html[Accessible on May 28th, 2012]
98.      Oil in Uganda, 2012. Tullow: National Oil Company may share in Production but
Government must make up its mind over basin development. Oil in Uganda [online] Available
at: http://www.oilinuganda.org/features/infrastructure/tullow-national-oil-company-may-share-
in-production-but-government-must-make-up-its-mind-over-albertine-basin-development.html
[Accessed: May 28th, 2012]
99.    Oil Pipeline Deal to be Sealed Next Month. The East African. May 2014
100. Oil Producers to Set up an Ammonia Fertiliser Plant. Daily Monitor (Uganda). June 13,
2014
101. Onyango, E., 2012. SMEs demand inclusion in Oil deals. East African Business Week
[online] February 28th, 2012. Available at
http://www.busiweek.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2455:smes-
[Accessed on May 10th, 2012].
102. Operational Guidelines for Oil and Gas Exploration and Production in Wildlife Protected
Areas, Uganda Wildlife Authority, January 2014
103. Page, B., 2012. Hype over East Africa’s Oil and Gas discoveries requires dose of reality.
The East African [online] Saturday May 12th, 2012. Available at:
http://mobile.theeastafrican.co.ke/Opinion/Hype+over+East+Africa+oil++gas+discoveries+requi
res+reality/-/433846/1404624/-/format/xhtml/item/1/-/iw42j3z/-/index.html [Accessed on May
14th, 2012]
104. Peruvian government on brink of expanding oil and gas development in reserve for
isolated peoples and UNESCO world heritage site, Forest Peoples Programme, July 23, 2012
105. Potential Impact of the Gulf Oil Spill on Tourism, Oxford Economics, n.d.
106. Probability of Shoreline Threat Deepwater Horizon MC 252, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), April 22, 2010
107. Rapid Situational Assessment: Uganda Tourism Sector, World Bank, 2012
108. Reserves Based Lending Is Answer To Oil and Gas Financing For Nigeria. Financial
News, Nigeria Oil and Gas Intelligence, Issue 55, June 14, 2013



                                              183
109. Rabiu Ado. Local Content Policy and the WTO Rules of Trade-Related Investment
Measures (TRIMS): The Pros and the Cons. International Journal of Business and Management
Studies. 2013
110. Richie, B.W., Crisis and Disaster Management for Tourism, 2009
111. Rita, L., 2012. Market Scan, Agribusiness in Uganda, Kampala, Embassy of the
Kingdom of Netherlands to Uganda
112. Rognvaldur Hannesson. Issues and Strategies of Oil and Natural Gas Production.
Quorum Books. 1998
113. Ruchita Beri, Uttam Sinha. Africa and Energy Security. Academic Foundation New
Delhi. 2009
114. Rutaisire, J., et al., 2009. Aquaculture for Increased Fish Production in East Africa,
African Journal of Tropical Hydrobiology and Fisheries 11: p74-77 [online] Accessible at:
http://www.lvfo.org/index.php/documents/lvfo-documents/doc_download/65-paper-11-rutasaire-
p-74-77
115. Six Companies to Inspect Oil Wells. New Vision Uganda. March 14, 2014
116. Ssebisubi, Maurice, 2010. The Value Chain of Farmed African Catfish in Uganda,
Kampala
117. Total Tourism Sector Information Pack. July 2013
118. Tickell, O. Peru: Amazon Tribes Sacrificed to Gas Project, Ecologist, January 27, 2014
119. State House of Uganda, 2014. Enhancing agricultural production and productivity.
Available at: http://www.statehouse.go.ug/national-priorities/enhancing-agricultural-production-
and-productivity [Accessed: 28th April 2014]
120. Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of Oil and Gas Activities in the Albertine
Graben, Uganda, June 2013
121. Ritchie, B; Crotts, J; Zehrer, A; and Volsky, G; Understanding the Effects of a Tourism
Crisis: The impact of the BP Oil Spill on Regional Lodging Demand, Journal of Travel
Research, 2013
122. Russian Oil looks to Africa: Rostec Bids for first $3bn Uganda Refinery. RT. November
6, 2013
123. Soco International's oil activity in world heritage park raises tricky questions for
investors, The Guardian, 2014
124. S. Prinsloo, P. Mulondon, G. Mugiru, and A.J. Plumptre, Measuring Response of
Wildlife to Oil Operations in Murchison Falls National Park, September, 2011
125. Ssekika E. Ugandans Await Oil Opportunities. The Observer. July 18, 2013
126. The Brazilian Oil and Gas Industry. PricewaterhouseCoopers Brazil Ltda. 2013
127. The World Bank, 2012. Uganda: Promoting Inclusive Growth. Washington DC
128. Tordo S., Warner M., Manzano O., Anouti Y. Local Content Policies in the Oil and Gas
Sector. The World Bank. 2013
129. Total E&P, Tullow Oil Plc, and CNOOC Uganda, 2013. Industrial Baseline Survey in
Uganda Report, Kampala
130. Total Tourism Sector Information Pack. July 2013

                                              184
131. Towards a Conservation Strategy for Sable Island, Environment Canada, Canadian
Wildlife Service, Atlantic Region, 1998
132. Traidlinks, 2012. Realising Enterprise Potential in Hoima.
133. Tullow 2012 Corporate Responsibility Report
134. Tullow Oil Plc, 2014. Uganda: Overview. 12th Feb 2014. Available at:
http://www.tullowoil.com/index.asp?pageid=282 [Accessed on 5th May 2014]
135. Uganda Bureau of Statistics and Bank of Uganda, 2012. The Informal Cross Border
Trade Survey Report 2011, Kampala
136. Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2013 Statistical Abstract, Kampala
137. Uganda Bureau of Statistics, and Bank of Uganda, 2008. The Informal Cross Border
Trade (ICBT) Survey Report, Kampala
138. Uganda Investment Authority, Invest in Uganda’s Fruit and Vegetable Sector, Kampala
139. Uganda issues first ever oil production license to CNOOC. CCTV News, September 26,
2013
140. Ugandan banks brace for higher loan defaults, drop in profits. The East African.
September 14, 2013
141. Uganda Tourism Development Master Plan 2014-23, UNWTO, 2013
142. Uganda Tourism Sector Situational Assessment: Tourism Reawakening. The World
Bank, June 2012
143. UN agency to advise on Hoima airport Master Plan. New Vision (Uganda). September 8,
2014
144. Visitors to National Parks (Citizens and Foreigners) 2008-2012, Uganda Wildlife
Authority
145. World Bank Data. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FS.AST.PRVT.GD.ZS




                                          185
  ANNEX 17. LIST OF KEY INFORMANTS MET DURING THE MISSIONS

      INSTITUTION/MINISTRY                         NAME                       TITLE

Governmental Agencies
Petroleum Exploration and Production   Mr. Bernard Ongodia        Senior Geophysicist
Department, Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Development                    Mr. Ronald Goboola         National Content Development
                                                                  and Capacity Building Officer

                                       Ms. Betty Namubiru         National Content Development
                                                                  and Capacity Building Officer

                                       Ms. Susan Kateme           Administration and
                                                                  International Cooperation
                                       Ms. Emilly Nakamya         Economist

MOFPED                                 Dr. Peter Ngategize        Coordinator, CICS

Ministry of Trade, Industry and        Mr. Joshua Mutambi         Ag. Commissioner, Department
Cooperatives                                                      of Industry and Technology

NAADS                                  Dr. Sam Mugaasi            Executive Director

Uganda Investment Authority            Mr. Albert Ouma            Director, Small and Medium
                                                                  Enterprises Division
Uganda Wildlife Authority              Mr. Andrew Seguya          Executive Director
Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and      Ms. Grace Mbabazi Aulo     Ag Director Tourism, Wildlife
Antiquities                                                       and Antiquities
                                       Mr. George Owoyesigire     Principal Wildlife Officer
OPM/ Bunyoro Affairs                   Hon Ernest Kiiza           Minister of State
Hoima District Officials               Mr George Ntulume          CAO
                                       Mr John William            District Planner
                                       Byakagaba
                                       Mr Bernard Nuwamanya       District NAADS Coordinator
                                       Mr Kyomuhangi Perez        District Entomologist
Buliisa District Officials             Mr Fred Lukumu             LC 5, Chairman
                                       Mr Agondua Rhoney          Deputy CAO
                                       Mr Kaahwa Robert Mbabazi   District Production Officer
Kibaale District Officials             Mr Vincent Kyaligonza      Ag CAO,
                                       Mr Ssentayi Peter          Production Officer
                                             186
     INSTITUTION/MINISTRY                       NAME                         TITLE

                                    Mr Cornelius Kasaija       District Commercial Officer
                                    Mr Tusabomwe George W.     District Planner
IOCs
CNOOC                               Mr. David Byaruhanga       Community Relations Manager,
                                                               Corporate Affairs Department
                                    Ms. Jessica Kyeyune        Local Content Manager

                                    Cheng Jain                 Logistics Manager

Total E & P Uganda                  Mr. Loic Laurandel         General Manager

                                    Ms. Ahlem Friga-Noy        Corporate Affairs Manager

                                    Mr. Vincent Nicolini       Contracts and Purchasing
                                                               Manager
                                    Ms. Marion Adengi          Head of Stakeholder
                                    Muyobo                     Engagement
                                    Mr. Tony Okao Otoa         Public Affairs Coordinator
                                    Mr. Pierluigi Luppi        Base Superintendant

                                    Mr. Olivier Michel

                                    Mr. Godfrey Byekwaso

Tullow Oil                          Mr. Jimmy Mugerwa          General Manager & Director
                                    Mr. Nelson Ofwono          National Content Manager

Local Companies and Associations
Association of Uganda Oil and Gas   Mr. Emmanuel Mugarura      Secretariat
Service Providers
AXIS International LTD              Mr. Ashaba Aggrey          Business Development and
                                                               Strategy Consultant
Eagle Air                           Ms. Robinah Bwire          In charge Charters
Richflo Lift Services LTD           Mr. Richard Magezi         Managing Director
ICON Industrial Services (U) Ltd.   Mr. Iman Abdul Hamid Al-
                                    Jabry
ICON Industrial Services (U) Ltd.   Mr. Godfrey Kirumira       Chairman
                                    Kalule

                                          187
       INSTITUTION/MINISTRY                       NAME                         TITLE

Threeways Shipping Services Group      Mr. Jeff Bihamaiso Baitwa   Group Managing Director
LTD
Hoima District Farmers Association     Mr. Moses Byenkya           Ag. Coordinator
(HODFA)
Traidlinks                             Mr. John Bosco Kalule       Agri-Supply Project Manager

                                       Mr. Roy Magoba              Enterprise Development Project
                                                                   Manager
PSFU                                   Mr. Gideon Badagawa         Executive Director

                                       Mr. Ogwal Moses Goli        Director, Policy Advocacy

UGACHICK                               Mr. Aga Sekalala Sr         Chairman
JESA Dairy Farm                        Mr. Geoffrey Mulwana        CEO
Uganda Fish Processors & Exporters     Mr. Ovia Katiiti            CEO
Association
Supreme Catering Services              Mr. Franklin Odongo         Camp Manager
Tourism Stakeholders
Safari Investments, Ltd                Mr. Moses Wafula Mapesa     Director

Great Safaris, Ltd                     Mr. Wekesa Amos Masaba      Managing Director
Chobe Safari Lodge                     Ms. Kim Allen               General Manager

Red Chilli Camp                        Mr. Simon Teede             Manager

Murchison River Lodge                  Ms. Liz Wright              Manager

Uganda Travel Bureau                   Mr. Deo Lubega              Tours Consultant

Pearl of Africa Tours and Travel Ltd   Ms. Kelley Mac Tavish       Executive Director

Crystal Safaris Ltd.                   Ms. Christine Mwinike       Managing Director

Global Interlink Travel Services Ltd   Mr. Mohit Advani            Managing Director

Financial Institutions
Stanbic Bank                           Mr. Philip Odera            Chief Executive



                                            188
     INSTITUTION/MINISTRY                    NAME                       TITLE

Opportunity Bank (Hoima Branch)   Ms. Josephine Nyakato     Manager

Standard Chartered Bank           Mr. Herman Kasekende      Managing Director/CEO

Uganda Development Bank           Mr. Daniel Kaggwa         Director Finance
                                  Mr. Patrick Oketa         Director Development Finance
Centenary Bank (Hoima Branch)     Mr. Johnson Galimaka      Manager
International Donors
Royal Norwegian Embassy           Ms. Elin Jensen           First Secretary

                                  Mr. Samuel Kajoba         Senior Advisor

EU                                Ms. Celine Prud’homme     Attache, Programme Officer
                                  Madsen                    Trade/Private Sector
                                                            Development
                                  Mr. Christian Raitz Von   Program Officer, Governance
                                  Frentz                    and Accountability




                                       189
