    Report No: ACS18375
.




    Central America
    6C Central America Urbanization Review
    MAKING CITIES WORK FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

.
    June 1, 2016


.
    GSU10
    LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
.




.
Document of the World Bank
.
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
    The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:

.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
    of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
    Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
  CENTRAL AMERICA URBANIZATION REVIEW
“MAKING CITIES WORK FOR CENTRAL AMERICA”




World Bank – KGGP – SECO
Urban, Rural and Social Development (GSURR)
Latin America and the Caribbean


  The Central America Urbanization Review has been edited by a core team led by Augustin Maria
  (Senior Urban Specialist – Task Team Leader), and consisting of Jose Luis Acero (Urban Development
  Specialist), Ana I. Aguilera (Urban Development Specialist) and Marisa Garcia Lozano (Consultant).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .......................................................................................................... i

ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS .......................................................................................... ii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... iv

CHAPTER 1: HOW URBANIZATION IS TRANSFORMING CENTRAL AMERICA ............................... 1

CHAPTER 2: MANAGING CITIES AND AGGLOMERATIONS: STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS TO
LEVERAGE THE POTENTIAL OF CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES ..................................................... 41

CHAPTER 3: MAKING CITIES INCLUSIVE BY IMPROVING ACCESS TO ADEQUATE AND WELL-
LOCATED HOUSING ...................................................................................................................... 68

CHAPTER 4: MAKING CITIES RESILIENT TO REDUCE CENTRAL AMERICA’S VULNERABILITY
TO NATURAL DISASTERS ............................................................................................................ 103

CHAPTER 5: MAKING CITIES COMPETITIVE TO CREATE MORE AND BETTER JOBS .............. 131




                                                                                                                                        i
Acknowledgements
This Central America Urbanization Review has been prepared by a core team led by Augustin Maria (Senior
Urban Specialist – Task Team Leader), and consisting of Jose Luis Acero (Urban Development Specialist),
Ana I. Aguilera (Urban Development Specialist) and Marisa Garcia Lozano (Consultant). The team
acknowledges the main authors of the report’s chapters: Ana I. Aguilera [Chapter 1]; Mats Andersson
(Senior Municipal Management Specialist) [Chapter 2]; Jonas Ingemann Parby (Senior Urban Specialist)
and David Ryan Mason (Urban Specialist) [Chapter 3]; Oscar Anil Ishizawa (Senior Disaster Risk
Management Specialist) and Haris Sanahuja (Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist) [Chapter 4];
and Albert Solé (Private Sector Development Specialist) [Chapter 5].
The team gives special recognition to Catalina Marulanda (Lead Urban Specialist) for her guidance and
support throughout the several rounds of revision.
The report was enriched thanks to peer review input by Alexandra Ortiz (Program Leader), Nancy Lozano
Gracia (Senior Economist) and Austin Kilroy (Senior Private Sector Development Specialist).
The team also appreciates the important contributions made by Humberto Lopez (Country Director), Anna
Wellenstein (Practice Manager), Christian Peter (Program Leader), Ana Campos (Senior Disaster Risk
Management Specialist), Lizardo Narvaez (Disaster Risk Management Specialist), Rafael Van der Borght
(Consultant), Angelica Nuñez (Senior Urban Specialist), Federico Ortega, Kshitij Batra, Leonardo
Espinosa, Rocio Calidonio, Dmitry Sivaev, Benjamin Stewart, Christoph Aubrecht (Consultants), Luis
Aviles (Operations Analyst), Luis Triveño (Senior Economist) and Tatiana Peralta Quirós (Urban Mobility
and Technology Specialist).
This report reflects several rounds of discussions with the Governments of the six Central American
countries, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama. The continued support
and guidance of each government was critical for this analysis.
The study would not have been possible without the generous financial contribution of the Korean Green
Growth Partnership Trust Fund (KGGPTF) and the Switzerland Economic Cooperation and Development
(SECO)’s “Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Urbanization.”




                                                                                                      i
ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS
AAL        Annual Average Loss
AI         Agglomeration Index
AMG        Metropolitan Area of Guatemala
ANIP       National Authority for Public Income, Panama
AAUD       Authority of Urban and Household Sanitation
BPO        Business Process Outsourcing
CA         Central America
CAPRA      Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment
CDRP       Country Disaster Risk Profile
CEPAL      United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
CINDE      Costa Rican Investment Promotion Agency
COAMSS     Council of Mayors of the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
CRCR       Constitution of the Republic of Costa Rica
CRES       Constitution of the Republic of El Salvador
CRG        Constitution of the Republic of Guatemala
CRH        Constitution of the Republic of Honduras
CRN        Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua
CRP        Constitution of the Republic of Panama
DMSP       Defense Meteorological Satellite Program
DRFI       Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program
DRM        Disaster Risk Management
EM-DAT     Emergency Events Database
EMPAGUA    Municipal Water Company, Guatemala City
ENSO       El Niño-Southern Oscillation
EPZ        Export Processing Zone
EQ         Earthquakes
FDI        Foreign Direct Investment
FODES      Social Development Fund, El Salvador
FUNDASAL   Salvadorian Foundation for Development and Low-Cost Housing
GDI        Gross Domestic Investment
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GFDRR      Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GHSL       Global Human Settlements Layer
GLEAM      Global Economic Activity Map
GMA        Greater Metropolitan Area
HU         Hurricanes
IDB        Inter-American Development Bank
IMF        International Monetary Fund
INIFOM     Nicaraguan Institute for Municipal Development
INVU       National Institute for Housing and Urbanism, Costa Rica
ISDEM      Salvadorian Institute for Municipal Development

                                                                                    ii
LAC        Latin America and the Caribbean
LED        Local economic development
MFI        Microfinance Institution
MIDES      Integral Management of Solid Waste
MIVIOT     Ministry of Housing and Territorial Planning
NOAA       National Oceania and Atmospheric Administration
NTL        Nighttime Lights
OECD       Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
OPAMSS     Planning Office of the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador
PCGIR      Policy for Disaster Risk Management
PPD        Public-Private Dialogue
PPP        Purchasing Power Parity
PSD        Private Sector Development
SAT        Tax Administration Superintendence, Guatemala
SCD        Systematic Country Diagnostic
SEDLAC     Socio-Economic Data Base for Latin America and the Caribbean
SEGEPLAN   Planning and Programming Secretariat of the Office of the President, Guatemala
SEZ        Special Economic Zones
SWM        Solid Waste Management
TS         Tropical Storms
UN         United Nations
UNDP       United Nations Development Programme
UNODC      United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
USD        United States Dollar
WB         World Bank
WDI        World Development Indicators
WSP        World Bank Water and Sanitation Program




                                                                                            iii
                                                  Central America Urbanization Review

                                        Making cities work for
                                          Central America
                                                             25 million
                                                        new urban dwellers by 2050




                             RAPID urbanization                                       Land is urbanizing
                                Central America is the 2nd most                       faster than
                                 rapidly urbanizing región in the
                                                          world.                      population




                                                                                      72
                                                                                                    Cities have evolved
                                                                                                     into agglomerations,
                                                                                                    with 72 out of 167
                                                                                                    expanding beyond
                                                                                                    3 municipalities.
Key Development Challenges




                                                                                             81%
                                                                                                         of the regional GDP is
                                       Lack of opportunities                                             concentrated in cities

                                                                      Challenges
                                                                    concentrated in
                                       Lack of social inclusion
                                                                       CITIES                Urban residents
                                                                                             living in slums    29%
                                       Vulnerability to disasters
                                                                                             75%
                                                                                                        of the assets at risk to
                                                                                                        natural disasters are in
                                                                                                        cities




                                                                                                                iv
                                          CITIES
can help to address these challenges

Managing cities and                                Competitive cities
agglomerations
Empower local governments insitutionally           Through local economic development
and financially to cope with the demands of        policies, Central American cities can
an increasing urban population.                    facilitate economic growth and job
                                                   creation.
                                                                     Key factors for success:
             Central and local government
                                                                     • Understanding of local
             coordination
                                                                       economic advantages.
             (vertical coordination)
                                                                     • Strong public-private
                                                                       dialogue.
                                                                     • Local capacity at the
                    Inter-municipal coordination
                                                                       right geographical scale.
                    (horizontal coordination)




Inclusive cities                                   Resilient cities
Improved national housing policies and                          Improve municipal information systems
better articulation with local territorial                      and incorporate disaster risk
                                                   Prevent




Development plans.                                              management (DRM) into local plans.
         • Improve housing quality and
     1     affordability for all: appropriate
           and well-located housing.                            Prioritize investments at the city level,
                                                   Mitigate




                                                                with financial support from the central
     2 • Housing policies                                       government.
            coordinated with
            national and local
            development                                         Improve knowledge base of vulnerability
                                                   Understand




            planning.                                           and hazard profiles at the city level.



                                                                                                v
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
WHY DOES URBANIZATION MATTER FOR CENTRAL AMERICA?
1.        Central America is undergoing an important transition, with urban populations increasing
at accelerated speeds, bringing pressing challenges as well as opportunities to boost sustained,
inclusive and resilient growth. Today, 59 percent of Central America’s population lives in urban areas,
but it is expected that within the next generation 7 out of 10 people will live in cities, equivalent to adding
700,000 new urban residents every year. At current rates of urbanization, the region’s urban population will
double in size by 2050, welcoming over 25 million new urban dwellers, calling for better infrastructure,
higher coverage and quality of urban services and greater employment opportunities. As larger numbers of
people concentrate in urban areas, Central American governments at the national and local levels face both
opportunities and challenges to ensure the prosperity of their country’s present and future generations.

2.      The region’s main development challenges are linked to the lack of social inclusion,
vulnerability to natural disasters, and the lack of economic opportunities and competitiveness. A
review of the World Bank’s most recent Systematic Country Diagnostics 1 (SCD) for Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua 2 and Panama highlights common development challenges
across the region. The reports show that countries experience, at varying degrees, limitations to economic
growth and competitiveness. Costa Rica and Panama are the two most advanced economies in the region,
yet their education and training systems are not adequately responding to their pace of development,
creating a mismatch of skills and jobs. Other causes of low growth and competitiveness relate to low
productivity, low investment levels and lack of export diversification. In terms of social inclusion, the
region continues to witness income inequality, economic exclusion, low access to quality basic services,
and high levels of crime and violence. Lastly, the SCDs underline the exposure and vulnerability of all six
Central American countries to natural disasters, and identify resilience as an important policy priority.
While improved urban policies alone cannot address all these issues, they are instrumental in conjunction
with other sector-specific policies.

3.       Due to rapid urbanization in the region, Central American cities increasingly concentrate
these development challenges. Despite important gains in poverty reduction and increases in GDP per
capita in the last decades, rapid urbanization in Central America has amplified the challenges concentrated
in cities. Inadequate housing, vulnerability to natural disasters and low economic growth are common in
urban centers. As cities in the region have expanded to accommodate migration and population growth, the
quality of the housing stock, particularly in terms of infrastructure access, has not kept pace with demand.
A significant portion of the region’s recent territorial development has taken place in areas prone to disaster
risk. Today, Central American cities contain 70 to 80 percent of assets at risk, or infrastructure exposed to
the potential effects of adverse natural events. This concentration will further rise with increasing
urbanization. If the earthquake that struck El Salvador in 2001 hit again today, the potential economic losses
would amount to US$1,810 million, or 7 percent of the country’s GDP. Despite concentrating the majority

 1 World Bank. 2015. Costa Rica. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
 World Bank. 2015. El Salvador: Building on strengths for a new generation. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
 World Bank. 2016. Building Bridges in Guatemala. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
 World Bank. 2015. Honduras: Unlocking economic potential for greater opportunities. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
 World Bank. 2015 Panama: Locking in success. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
 2 No SCD has been recently prepared for Nicaragua; the Country Partnership Strategy FY13-FY17 was used in lieu of it.



                                                                                                                         vi
of economic activity, cities in Central America are not realizing their full potential. They need to accelerate
job creation for the booming young demographic in order to increase growth and boost per capita incomes.

4.       The region’s development challenges can be addressed in cities by focusing on the economic
opportunities they offer. By addressing the costs of urbanization, Central American countries have the
opportunity to improve the region’s prosperity and livability. The pace of urbanization in the region
demands immediate policy action to realize the many benefits that cities can deliver and to avoid the costs
of negative externalities. As in other regions in the world, urbanization in the region has gone hand-in-hand
with economic growth. Cities can benefit from economies of agglomeration, by which the spatial
concentration of people and firms leads to higher productivity. In 1994, when less than half of the region’s
population lived in urban areas, per capita GDP in Central American countries averaged US$ 5,318. Twenty
years later, as the region became more urbanized, per capita incomes doubled to an average of US$ 11,531 3,
albeit with significant differences between the countries. But the benefits of urbanization are not automatic.
Neither urbanization alone can determine countries’ development trajectories. Despite the recent growth,
most Central American countries would need per capita growth of real income of between 6 and 14 percent
to close the gap with the most prosperous countries by 2030.

5.       The Central America Urbanization Review provides a better understanding of the trends and
implications of urbanization, and the actions that central and local governments can take to reap the
intended benefits of this transformation. The report makes recommendations on how urban policies can
contribute to addressing the main identified development challenges—lack of social inclusion, high
vulnerability to natural disasters, and lack of economic opportunities and competitiveness. Specifically, the
report focuses on four priority areas for Central American cities—institutions for city management, access
to adequate and well-located housing, resilience to natural disasters, and competitiveness through local
economic development. This Executive Summary summarizes the main messages developed throughout
the Urbanization Review, which includes one diagnostic chapter and four sectoral chapters:

      •    Chapter 1 “How Urbanization is Transforming Central America” offers a diagnostic of present
           and future urbanization trends, including an overview on the speed and spread of urbanization, the
           characteristics of the system of Central American cities, and the concentration of economic activity
           in cities. It also introduces economic and social challenges facing cities, which will be explored in
           more detail in the four remaining sectoral chapters.
      •    Chapter 2 “Managing Cities and Agglomerations: Strengthening Institutions for Effective
           Planning and Service Delivery” highlights the key role of local governments in effective city
           management to ensure quality service delivery, as well as coordinated planning with the national
           government for a coherent and sustainable development of urban areas.
      •    Chapter 3 “Making Cities Inclusive by Improving Access to Adequate and Well-Located
           Housing” discusses the constraints in the housing sector, which policymakers need to address in
           order to drive a more efficient, inclusive and sustainable model of housing, integrated with urban
           development. It identifies priorities at the national and city levels to improve access so quality
           affordable housing.
      •    Chapter 4 “Making Cities Resilient to Reduce Central America’s Vulnerability to Natural
           Disasters” advocates building resilient cities to reduce the long-term impact of natural disasters on
           the population and economy. It characterizes the risks and exposure to risk in the region’s urban

 3   Per capita income equals GDP per capita average (2011 constant prices), weighted by the country’s total population.

                                                                                                                           vii
          areas, and describes mechanisms through which countries can strengthen disaster risk management
          (DRM) and increase urban resilience.
      •   Chapter 5 “Making Cities More Competitive to Create More and Better Jobs” discusses the
          potential for LED in raising local and country-level competitiveness, contribute to fostering
          macroeconomic stability, and strengthening private sector development. It applies the World
          Bank’s global framework on competitive cities 4 to the Central American context.

HOW URBANIZATION IS TRANSFORMING CENTRAL AMERICA
6.       Central America is the second fastest urbanizing region in the world, second only to Africa.
When plotted against the global average of urbanization and countries at similar stages of urbanization,
Central American countries exhibit high urban population growth rates. Figure 1 shows that Costa Rica has
the highest urban population share (75%) in the region, and at the same time one of fastest annual growth
rates in the world for countries at similar urbanization levels (2.5% in 2014). By contrast, Guatemala and
Honduras are at lower urbanization levels with more than half of their population living in cities, but they
experience two of the highest urban population growth rates in the region (at an annual rate of 3.4% and
3.2%, respectively, in 2015). Panama, El Salvador and Nicaragua have intermediate urbanization levels,
around 60%, with urbanization rates exceeding the world average and comparable to the growth rates of
South Africa or Morocco.

Urban population growth of Central American Countries is high when compared with countries at
                                similar levels of urbanization.




                    Source: U.N. World Urbanization Prospects (2014).

7.       Urban areas are growing faster than the urban population, contributing to rising levels of
low-density sprawl. Using data from the Global Human Settlements Layer (GHSL), this report looked at
the territorial impact of the urbanization process in Central America between 1975 and 2014. The data
shows that total built-up area 5 in the region has tripled over the past 40 years. While the increases in built-
up area and population have followed similar trends until 2000, the recent trend shows that developed land

  4 World Bank. 2015. Competitive cities for jobs and growth: what, who, and how.
  5Built-up area is defined as areas characterized by developed land due to human intervention such as buildings, concrete, asphalt,
and suburban gardens (i.e. any land or buildings and non-building structures which are present as part of a larger developed
environment, such as an illuminated section of a road) (U.S. Geological Survey Land Cover Institute, 2012).

                                                                                                                                viii
has been increasing much faster than population. This expansion of built-up area translates into larger
sprawling urban areas, increasing the cost of providing basic services and connecting infrastructure. More
compact urban development and higher population densities would lower not only infrastructure costs but
also maintenance costs. Within the region, El Salvador has seen the greatest transformation, quadrupling
its built-up land since 1975. Improved land use planning is needed to manage this expansion in a more
sustainable way.

8.       Many urban areas are extending far beyond municipal boundaries. This report presents the
results of analysis conducted to identify the largest urban areas in the six countries using various spatial
databases. The analysis identified 167 urban agglomerations with a population over 15,000 people. Figure
2 locates the identified urban areas on a regional map. Many of the capital and secondary cities have
outgrown their municipal boundaries. Of the 167 agglomerations in the region, 72 encompass three or more
municipalities.

                         Identified Urban Agglomerations in Central America




Source: Own calculations using WB’s CDRP data and GHSL Alpha version




                                                                                                          ix
9.      The spatial extension of urban agglomerations beyond municipal boundaries poses a
challenge to city management. Without the proper inter-municipal cooperation mechanisms, it is difficult
to ensure adequate and coordinated urban planning and service delivery at the scale of the agglomeration,
particularly in larger cities. With the exception of Tegucigalpa, all the capital cities extend beyond
numerous municipal boundaries (figure 3). While all countries in the region have official metropolitan
delimitations for their capital cities—depicted in light blue—some of these need to be updated to reflect
changing urban dynamics and ensure proper management of agglomerations. San Salvador is striking, with
the urban agglomeration surpassing the official metropolitan area by twice the size of the official
metropolitan boundaries.

        Official municipal and metropolitan boundaries compares with urban agglomerations




Source: Own calculations using GHSL data and census data.

10.       Capital cities concentrate a larger share of the urban population than those reported by
official figures. In official statistics, about a third of the urban population of Central America lives in one
of the six capital cities, and these cities are expected to contribute less than 15% of the projected increase
in urban population over the next decade. However, with urban agglomerations extending beyond official
boundaries, the demographic and economic weight of the capital agglomeration in the country is larger,
sometimes dramatically larger, as in San Jose. More than two-thirds of the urban population in Honduras
is distributed between the two largest metropolitan areas (San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa). Likewise,
metropolitan Managua concentrates 55% of the urban population in Nicaragua, while San Jose and its
satellite cities account for nearly 85% of the urban population in Costa Rica. This highlights the imperatives
of managing these large agglomerations, due to their current and future roles in their countries.


                                                                                                             x
11.      Secondary cities have grown significantly over the last decade and represent between 15 and
65 percent of the national urban systems. According to official census figures, secondary cities
contributed nearly two-thirds to the urban population growth in Nicaragua and Guatemala over the last
decade. Cities with a population size between 15,000 and 100,000 inhabitants accounted for 20–30% of the
population growth in urban areas, escalating their role in the national urban systems. While large
metropolitan areas accounted for at least 40% of the demographic boom in urban areas, secondary cities
and towns are growing fast. In Guatemala and El Salvador, for example, migrant remittances contribute to
the growth and expansion of secondary cities. These secondary cities represent a very significant share of
the population, and even in small countries, well-functioning secondary cities and small towns play an
important role. This report calls for policies that can support the management of secondary and small cities.
While most of the existing literature focuses on managing large and capital cities—which requires greater
metropolitan coordination to ensure connectivity of services such as transport, sewage and waste
collection—improving the provision of basic services and connecting infrastructure in small and medium-
sized cities can enhance their role as trade and logistic centers connecting farmers in rural areas to industrial
markets.

CITIES ARE WHERE CENTRAL AMERICA’S MOST PRESSING DEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES NEED TO BE ADDRESSED
12.     Cities increasingly concentrate the region’s main development challenges—lack of social
inclusion, vulnerability to natural disasters, and lack of economic opportunities and
competitiveness—as well as the opportunities to address them. Based on the World Bank’s SCDs 6
(Country Partnership Framework in the case of Nicaragua), table 1 summarizes the key development
challenges for each of the region’s countries. Due to the clustering of people and economic activity, cities
not only concentrate these challenges, but also the opportunities to address them. If managed well,
urbanization is an opportunity to improve prosperity and livability, but the benefits of urbanization are not
automatic. The speed and spread of urbanization in the region demand immediate policy action to realize
the many benefits that cities can deliver and to avoid the unnecessary costs of negative externalities. The
benefits of cities come from the economies of agglomeration through which the spatial concentration of
people and firms leads to higher productivity. However, agglomeration is also associated with increasing
challenges, “diseconomies of agglomeration” or “congestion effects” such as traffic congestion,
unaffordable housing, and environmental degradation, which can reduce the quality of life and the
productivity of cities.




  6 Between 2012 and 2016, the World Bank prepared a series of Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCDs) for countries in the

Central American region. These reports –which are produced in close consultation with national authorities and key
stakeholders– provide an overview of a country’s strategic development goals. These diagnostics identify the key goals and
activities that have a high impact and are aligned with the global goals of ending absolute poverty and boosting shared prosperity
in a sustainable manner.

                                                                                                                                xi
                               Key Development Challenges in Central America
                       Lack of economic
                                                                                             Vulnerability to natural
                     opportunities and low               Lack of social inclusion
                                                                                                   disasters
                        competitiveness
                                                      • Stagnant poverty reduction
                  • Fiscal pressures threatening                                            • High exposure to
                                                        and rising inequality.
                    the Social Compact and                                                    hazards, especially
 Costa Rica                                           • Low access to sewage
                    Green Trademark.                                                          hydro-meteorological and
                                                        treatment and solid-waste
                  • Mismatch of skills and jobs.                                              geophysical.
                                                        management.
                  • Lack of opportunities and
                    low economic                      • Lack of social and financial
                                                                                            • High vulnerability to
 El Salvador        competitiveness.                    inclusion.
                                                                                              natural disasters.
                  • Limited mobility of the
                    middle class.
                  • Low economic growth.
                  • Low investment levels and         • Fragmented social contract.
                                                                                            • Vulnerability to natural
                    low agricultural                  • Widespread inequality and
                                                                                              disasters which
 Guatemala          productivity.                       economic exclusion.
                                                                                              disproportionally affect
                  • Weak institutions (low            • Malnutrition.
                                                                                              the poor.
                    taxation, weak investment         • Lack of quality education.
                    climate, frail rule of law).
                  • Regulatory frictions              • Low access and quality of
                    affecting the labor and             basic services.
                    products markets.                 • Unequal distribution of access
                                                                                            • Low resilience to natural
 Honduras         • Continued fiscal instability.       to services harming the poor.
                                                                                              hazards.
                  • Inadequate infrastructure         • High levels of crime and
                    and low access to capital.          violence.
                  • Shortage of skills.               • Limited access to education.
                  • External vulnerability due        • High crime rates.                   • High vulnerability to
                    to low economic                   • Unequal access to services            hazards, especially
 Nicaragua          diversification.                    between income groups.                hitting basic
                  • Vulnerability to food price       • Limited access to primary             infrastructure, roads and
                    increases.                          education.                            housing.
                  • Limited effectiveness of          • Increasing crime and
                    public institutions and             violence.
                                                                                            • Climate change and
                    regulatory framework.             • Weak protection of land rights
 Panama                                                                                       increased variability in
                  • Weaknesses in coverage            • Increasing concentration of
                                                                                              rainfall.
                    and quality of secondary            the extremely poor in the
                    and tertiary education.             indigenous territories.
Source: Synthesis of Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCDs); except for Nicaragua, which is based on the Country Partnership
Strategy for the period FY13-FY17.

Cities concentrate a large share of economic activity and can become engines of growth
13.      Job opportunities and economic activity are concentrated in cities, especially the largest ones.
Research worldwide suggests that more 80% of global economic activity is concentrated in urban areas.
Cities also drive the large majority of economic activity in Central American countries. The overlay of
urban areas defined in this study with a new spatial GDP disaggregation model applied to Central America
shows that cities contribute 80.5% to the regional economy. Cities in Costa Rica and Panama represent
more than 84% of each country’s GDP, while urban areas in other countries in the region contribute between
72% and 78% of their national economies. Within each country, more than two-thirds of the economic
activity is clustered in the largest cities (six capital cities and San Pedro Sula).

                                                                                                                          xii
14.      Cities can contribute to reducing poverty and increasing prosperity. International evidence
suggests that urbanization and economic growth are closely correlated. In Central America, urbanization
has gone hand-in-hand with higher per capita incomes and diminished poverty. But the benefits are not
automatic nor directly causal for economic development. For instance, Costa Rica and Panama are the two
most urbanized countries in the region, and also the ones who have experienced better development
trajectories in terms of reducing poverty and increasing per capita incomes. However, other factors such as
economic and political endowments have facilitated this growth. Despite intraregional disparities, countries
made progress in reducing poverty during this period of increased share of urban population, dropping from
approximately 48% of urban residents living in poverty in 1994 to 33% in 2013. Urban areas offer better
jobs, higher wages, better access to safe drinking water, and shorter distances to health care facilities. At
the same time, cities can sustain economic growth if they transform their economies into higher value-
added economic portfolios.

15.      However, growth in most of economies in the region builds on weak competitive foundations.
Despite a more predominant role of the services and industry in recent years, most economies in the region
are characterized by the production and trade of commodities with little value added, except in Costa Rica
and Panama. These commodities are generally sold through international marketing and distribution
channels controlled by large foreign multinational corporations (MNCs) and are subject to both price
volatility and the emergence of new entrants in global supply chains. Investment as a percentage of GDP
in the Northern Triangle 7 is well below the average of middle and low-income countries 8, and since it tends
to target low-skill sectors, productivity gains have remained low, and even flat in some cases, over the last
decade.

High poverty and crime rates in urban areas are a challenge for social inclusion
16.     Urbanization is being accompanied by a decrease in poverty levels, but the number of poor
living in cities keeps increasing. Despite intraregional disparities, countries made progress in reducing
poverty during this period, from approximately 48% of urban residents living in poverty in 1994 to 33% in
2013. However, as more people move to cities in search of better living conditions, the number of urban
poor has increased in absolute terms, reaching more than 8.3 million urban poor by 2011.

17.     Crime and victimization rates tend to be higher in urban areas. All six capital cities have higher
homicide rates per 100,000 population than the national average, with the largest gap observed in
Guatemala City (116.6 versus 41.6 in 2010) and Panama City (53.1 versus 17.2 in 2012). Reports by the
World Bank and the UN Office of Drugs and Crime 9 acknowledge a link between urbanization and higher
levels of crime and violence in the region, given the inherent characteristics of urban areas and urban
development unfolding in Central America. Poor urban planning, residential crowding, deterioration or lack
of public recreational spaces, and insufficient basic public services, compounded with limited access to
educational and job opportunities, are well documented risk factors for crime and violence.




 7  The sub-region formed by the countries of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras.
 8  The countries average 18% of GDP compared with the 31% of countries in the low-income category according to the Plan of
the Alliance for Prosperity, a road map to advance regional integration signed by Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala in 2014.
  9 Crime and Violence in Central America, Vol II; Crime and Violence in Central America: A Development Challenge, 2011.



                                                                                                                          xiii
The growth and expansion of informal settlements are linked to dysfunctional housing
markets in cities
18.      Housing, a key driver of economic growth, is an important foundation for inclusive
urbanization. The quality and location of housing in cities has long-term consequences for households and
governments. Well-located housing provides additional benefits to households by its proximity to jobs,
amenities, infrastructure and services such as schools and health clinics. Housing with immediate access to
these services can reduce travel time and expenditures and provide better education and health outcomes.
Proximity to basic services such as improved water and sanitation facilities and solid waste collection has
direct impacts on mortality rates and economic productivity losses. As each of these factors influence urban
competitiveness, livability and resilience, broad access to quality urban housing is essential.

19.       However, countries in the region face substantial housing deficits, which contributes to the
formation of slums and informal settlements that house about 29 percent of urban residents. The
share of urban residents in the region living in these informal and precarious conditions, approaches the
global average of 32 percent. Between 3 and 10 percent of houses are located in high-risk, disaster prone
areas. The available data suggests the situation is more prevalent in Nicaragua and Guatemala, with
approximately 45 and 39 percent of the population living in slums, respectively. In 2009 there were an
estimated 11.3 million households in Central America 37 percent of which faced some type of qualitative
deficit (UN Habitat, 2009). For example, recent data suggest that sewer systems are absent for between 30
to 66 percent of urban dwellers across the region. Alternatives such as septic systems, are more common,
but still in most countries more than 25 percent, and in Nicaragua, more than 50 percent of households do
not have even these facilities. Additionally, an estimated 290,000 (CCVAH, 2009) new households are
established annually in the region, exerting further pressure on the demand for quality housing.

20.      Countries in the region face similar challenges in access to affordable housing. Cities in the
region have been expanding to accommodate migration and population growth, but the quality of the
housing stock, particularly infrastructure access, has not kept pace with the need. Housing units with
infrastructure connections and in proximity to urban services are scarce—and unaffordable for the poor.
Existing mortgage subsidy programs aimed to improve affordability require documented incomes and a
prior banking history, which many low income groups do not have. As an alternative, the urban poor often
live in self-built, self-financed housing of varying levels of infrastructure connection and dwelling quality
or in informal rental arrangements. The lack of urban planning and enforcement has also enabled low
density expansion of informal settlements to areas where land and housing costs are lower, including areas
at risk of flooding, landslides or earthquakes. The low density urban form increases the cost of providing
services to these housing developments and contributes to increased congestion and exposure to
environmental and natural hazards.

In a region prone to natural disasters, cities concentrate people and assets at risk
21.     Central America’s geographic location makes it remarkably prone to disasters from adverse
natural events, including hurricanes, droughts, floods, earthquakes, and El Niño-Southern
Oscillations. In the past 50 years, the number of recorded natural events has increased substantially,
affecting all countries. This has resulted in strong adverse impacts on GDP per capita, income, and poverty,
hindering the capacity to foster sustainable growth. Earthquakes, hurricanes and large floods drive the
majority of economic losses in the region, especially in urban areas. Meteorological disasters have caused


                                                                                                          xiv
the largest economic losses, while earthquakes, despite their lower frequency, have registered the highest
death tolls in the region.

22.     The increasing concentration of population and economic activity in high-risk areas has
increased the vulnerability to natural catastrophic events. In Central America, disasters generated from
natural events have had devastating and disruptive effects on the foundations of economies, reversing
development gains. Between 1970 and 2010, major disasters—including earthquakes, hurricanes and large
floods—caused damages and losses of more than US$80 billion. Annual average losses from natural
catastrophic events account for between 0.7 and 2.6 percent of national GDP in Nicaragua, El Salvador and
Honduras. Adding all countries, the regional building stock exposed to risk totals US$232 billion, more
than 75% concentrated in cities.

POLICY PRIORITIES: HOW TO LEVERAGE CITIES TO UNLOCK CENTRAL
AMERICA’S DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
23.      Improved public policies can address some of the region’s most pressing challenges by
making cities more inclusive, resilient and competitive. The previous section presented a diagnostic of
the ongoing urbanization process in Central America and the common development challenges facing
countries. This section moves on to identify four public policy priorities aimed at tackling these challenges
at the city level. The priorities and their accompanying messages, developed in detail in each of the four
sectoral chapters, are presented here in that same order.

Managing Cities and Agglomerations: Strengthening Institutions for Effective Planning
and Service Delivery (Chapter 2)
Message 1: Empowering local governments, both institutionally and financially, is critical in order
to enhance their performance in delivering key services and financing necessary investments for a
growing urban population.
24.      Improving local government capacities is key to making cities more competitive, more livable,
and more resilient. To tackle urbanization’s negative impacts and reap its intended benefits, effective city
management is contingent upon strengthened municipalities. Municipalities are the predominant form of
local government in Central America, and the ongoing decentralization process in Central America has
extended their responsibilities. However, their ability to fulfill these increasing responsibilities is
constrained by their limited institutional and financial capacity. Today, municipalities’ weight in national
finances varies substantially throughout the region. In countries like Guatemala or Nicaragua (where local
governments’ income represents nearly 20 percent of government revenues), municipalities play a critical
role. In countries like El Salvador and Honduras, this contribution is relatively moderate (10.2 and 12.1 per
cent, respectively), and much lower in Costa Rica and Panama (7.6 and 2 per cent, respectively).

25.     Strengthening the institutional capacity of Municipalities is required for them to assume
increasing responsibilities in terms of service delivery, and to effectively play their role in terms of
territorial planning. The ongoing decentralization process puts a strain on the capacity of many
municipalities in the region, which are expanding their role from a one mainly focused on local
administrative functions to the delivery of local infrastructure and services. In addition, Municipal
governments have a central role to play in territorial planning in Central America. Although many
municipalities do not have the technical capacity to prepare territorial development plans, they play a key


                                                                                                          xv
role in their implementation as the responsibility of issuing building permits lies with them (except in Costa
Rica). Given the magnitude of the challenge, Central American countries should develop a clear roadmap,
including a strategy and objectives in terms of improvement in the institutional performance of
Municipalities, and align their local government capacity building programs with these objectives.

26.      Municipalities have limited financial resources and their financial autonomy has reduced.
Although the financial weight of municipalities in Central America is comparable to other countries in Latin
America – with local government revenue varying between 0.5 and 4 percent of GDP – resources remain
limited in absolute terms. Figure 4 shows the differences in local government income as percent of GDP.
Given that all countries in the region have relatively low levels of public spending as percentage of GDP,
the revenues per capita of the municipalities are uniformly low. In 2012, average local government revenues
per capita ranged from US$90 in Panama to US$185 in Guatemala. The financial autonomy of
municipalities in Central America has decreased, while the dependence on transfers from national
governments has increased. As the scope of the functions performed by municipalities has grown over time,
the devolution of spending responsibilities has not been matched. In the absence of adequate sources of
revenues, the increase in responsibilities has given rise to unfunded mandates. Municipal expenditure has
not been increasing in parallel with own-source revenues, deepening the vertical imbalance.

                   Financial weight of Municipalities in Central American countries




                Source: Based on data from the countries’ Central Banks and Ministries of Finance
27.      Central American countries can build on existing transfer mechanisms to increase the
municipalities’ capacity to finance required investments while strengthening administrative and
technical capacity as well as accountability. Most Central American countries are using formula-based
transfers as the main source of financial support for their municipalities. This type of transparent and
predictable inter-governmental fiscal transfer mechanisms are an important component of a sound
municipal finance framework. International experience offers examples of how national governments can
build on these foundations to develop programs that integrate financial support to municipal investment,
capacity building, and incentives for improved institutional performance at the municipal level.




                                                                                                           xvi
Message 2: Inter-municipal cooperation mechanisms can be strengthened to offer adequate service
delivery and territorial planning within agglomerations covering various local government
jurisdictions.

28.      The growth of capital cities and other secondary cities is extending beyond municipal
boundaries, calling for stronger inter-municipal cooperation. The urgency of developing effective
mechanisms and instruments for metropolitan planning and management is especially pressing for the main
cities. Many of these metropolitan areas are struggling with fragmentation, underscoring the need for
greater coordination among municipalities. Only a few agglomerations have supra-municipal and inter-
municipal coordinating mechanisms in place; the strongest example is COAMSS in San Salvador. Other
forms of coordination and cooperation among municipalities that are increasingly developing are
Mancomunidades and associations of local governments based on legal agreements known as Convenios.
Local governments must work collaboratively to ensure effective planning and equity in service delivery.
Provision of some public services, such as drainage, waste disposal, and sewage collection, is often
fragmented, resulting in higher costs and financing challenges for local governments. The lack of any
formal or informal metropolitan arrangement tends to reflect missed opportunities in cost savings, which
can be achieved through fair monetary contributions from all municipal governments sharing common
issues. The essence of a metropolitan approach is for local governments to cooperate on some but not all
initiatives or services.

29.     Ensuring a basic legal framework and clarifying roles and responsibilities are keys to
establishing a metropolitan arrangement. In all six countries, basic legal provisions exist for local
governments to form inter-municipal cooperation arrangements. In any metropolitan governance
arrangement, there needs to be clarity about functions and responsibilities among the involved parties,
particularly if any new authority is introduced, including both the expenditure responsibilities and the
revenue sources of the new entity. This needs to be effectively communicated to the constituencies in the
area, so they know whom to hold accountable for what. If a metropolitan agency is not given any
independent authority (and has only an advisory function), the risk of limited effectiveness would be high.

Message 3: Central and local governments can enhance coordination in areas where functional
responsibilities intersect, particularly in spatial development and service delivery.

30.     Central–local government coordination is critical, but the scope and emphasis depend on the
local context. Municipalities and central government agencies work together on a multitude of subjects,
ranging from spatial planning and municipal finance to shared local service provision and emergency
response. In some sectors, municipalities may have an executing function within a national regulatory
framework, with oversight by a central agency (such as housing, education and health). Dialogue and
coordination between both levels of government are important as more responsibilities are transferred to
municipalities, especially when the central government is operating in municipal jurisdictions. The transfer
of responsibilities is a gradual process that can be done in stages so that there is a clear distinction of “who
does what,” and there are no gaps or overlaps in service provision and land use planning.

31.    The scope of functional responsibilities devolved from the central government to the local
governments varies quite significantly among Central American countries, as do the need for and
approaches to coordination. Depending on the sector and country, the context for coordination is usually
one of the following: service provision at the local level is shared between the local and central

                                                                                                            xvii
governments; central government agencies are carrying out their responsibilities within municipal
jurisdictions; and municipalities have an executing function within a national regulatory framework. In
Panama and Costa Rica, where the central government delivers most local public services, coordinated
spatial (land use) planning is critical, particularly for transport and housing development. In Nicaragua and
Guatemala, where the municipalities deliver most local services, emphasis needs to be on finance in the
vertical relationship (effective tax regimes and inter-governmental fiscal transfer system, ideally with built-
in incentives for good local revenue collection and expenditure management).

Making Cities Inclusive By Improving Access to Adequate and Well-Located Urban
Housing (Chapter 3)
Message 4: Housing policies need to strengthen the overall system of housing delivery to improve
housing quality and affordability for all, across income groups.
32.      Ensuring the availability of quality housing will help Central America maximize the social
and economic benefits of urbanization. Where people live in a city is directly linked to the availability
and access they have to jobs, schools, health care facilities and other public services and amenities that
cities provide. However, the current trend of urban expansion has placed new housing farther from
employment centers and raised the cost to government of providing infrastructure connections to these
developments. Without improvements to housing quality and affordability, residents will miss out on the
economic and human development as well as on the social benefits that cities can provide. The housing
sector is a natural “aggregator” of most sector-specific investments in urban settings (such as transport,
water, sanitation, energy). Housing is a determinant of urban form and thus a driver of infrastructure
provision and maintenance, and it has direct impacts on the quality of life of the poor and most vulnerable.
Improving access and quality of affordable urban housing will have direct impacts on the living conditions
and economic opportunities of the poorest and most vulnerable urban dwellers.

33.     Policy interventions should focus on simultaneously increasing the accessibility of housing
finance and improving the quality of the informal housing stock. Rather than favoring specific
interventions, policy should focus on strengthening the entire housing sector to improve the affordability
and availability of housing across income groups. While each country in the region has different housing
needs and priorities, housing policies need to address three overlapping themes summarized in the figure
below.




                                                                                                          xviii
                            Reforming Housing for Growth and Inclusion




•   Cross cutting areas: These refer to interventions would improve the overall function of housing
    markets across income groups. They can include improvements in municipal land administration as
    well as reforms to planning and building standards to allow formalization through incremental housing
    improvements and reducing the time and steps required to comply with registration and permitting
    regulations. This type of interventions would encourage investment for higher density and urban infill
    developments. Formalizing rentals would provide a flexible low cost housing option across incomes
    and age groups.

•   Housing for growth: Housing interventions should seek to reduce the cost of purchasing a formal
    house. Housing finance can be strengthened by reforms to the banking sector to encourage competition
    in mortgage lending and identify screening and qualification criteria for low-income borrowers,
    including additional support for microfinance lenders and savings groups. This would improve
    borrowing options for home purchase or self-construction. These policies would also increase demand
    for materials and labor for formal housing construction.

•   Reducing informality: Housing stock in informal settlements does not meet standards and often lacks
    access to basic services. Targeted infrastructure investments in informal settlements can improve the
    quality of housing through in-situ upgrading. This can be further complemented with finance and
    technical assistance for self-built, incremental housing improvement and expansion.

                                                                                                       xix
34.      Current policies tend to focus on supporting homeownership while overlooking alternative
solutions that could address the broader segment of the market. Homeownership is supported through
mortgage subsidies for the purchase of a new, complete house. While the subsidies have expanded
homeownership among formally employed middle and upper income groups, they do not address other
areas of housing need. For example, governments have recognized the importance of upgrading and
improvement of informal settlements to improve the quality of existing stock, but the need remains far
greater than what has been delivered. Community organizations and non-profits in partnership with local
governments have also piloted neighborhood upgrading, but these projects have not achieved the necessary
scale. Furthermore, renters constitute a significant proportion of urban residents. Renting provides labor
mobility and flexibility to new migrants and young professionals, especially those who cannot afford a
mortgage. But there is little support for increasing the quality and availability of formal rental housing or
for improving the regulatory framework for rental housing to protect landlords and tenants. In order to
promote a truly inclusive housing policy based on the actual housing market and stock, these gaps in
existing housing policies need to be addressed and targeted on the basis of careful assessment of the national
and local circumstances.

Message 5: Housing policies need to be better aligned and coordinated with national and local
development planning, spatial planning and management in order to promote sustainable and
inclusive cities.
35.      Cities can have a key role in developing an inclusive housing system, in coordination with
national governments. The differing sizes and forms of primary and secondary cities should inform the
policy options for supporting housing delivery. For primary and capital cities, a diversity of housing types
close to existing job centers and services is needed. Growing secondary cities will need to improve planning
and coordination to ensure that new urban growth provides residents access to services and reduces the
incidence of new informal settlements. For example, the coordination of local land use and housing
development plans with national housing subsidy programs would help align subsidies to improve housing
affordability with local planning needs and housing market conditions.

36.      Existing mortgage subsidy programs encourage new housing development outside urban
areas, which present additional costs to beneficiaries and local governments. In order to ensure that the
price of eligible units meet subsidy requirements, developers seek to reduce costs by acquiring less valuable
land, as has occurred in Managua in Nicaragua. Similarly, in Costa Rica, which awards large upfront
subsidies, beneficiaries acquire vacant rural plots and then build housing units through savings or
commercial mortgages. Such subsidies encourage the consumption of low cost land for housing that is
located far from employment centers and urban services, which increases the time and monetary cost of
commuting to central cities. For local governments and utility providers, this form of development raises
capital investment and maintenance costs for trunk infrastructure and public services that these new
developments require. National level housing subsidies programs should include locational criteria to
encourage housing consumption through infill development and densification, rather than peripheral
developments that contribute to urban sprawl.

37.     Housing policies need to incorporate and strengthen links between national programs and
subsidies and the tools and capacities of local governments. Housing policies should promote
coordination between subnational governments and relevant ministries—including housing, transportation,
finance and infrastructure—with the purpose of improving low-income neighborhoods. This will reduce

                                                                                                           xx
overlapping or redundant public investments and will contribute to making direct housing subsidies to urban
areas more environmentally and economically sustainable. Similarly, housing policies should support a
plurality of housing and tenure options (apart from privileging single-family detached houses) in line with
local and regional needs. Local governments would benefit from obtaining tools and capacities to develop
local plans that would enable better coordination of long-term infrastructure investment and housing
planning with neighboring jurisdictions.

Making Cities Resilient to Reduce Central America’s Vulnerability to Natural Disasters
(Chapter 4)
Message 6: To prevent future risk, municipalities need to be provided with adequate information
capacity and incentives to incorporate disaster risk management criteria into local territorial
development plans, investments plans and building regulations.

38.      In a context of rapid urbanization, with Central American cities expected to host more than
50 million people by 2050, land use planning, building regulations and disaster-risk-sensitive
investments are key to build future urban resilience. Initial location on safe sites is inherently more
economical than relocation of existing settlements. Therefore, making Central American cities more
resilient is critical to reducing the long-term impact of natural disasters on people and economies. Natural
disasters not only have a significant negative impact on the lives of the urban residents in the region—
especially the poor—but they hinder the national growth trajectory. Cities already contain 70–80% of the
assets at risk in the different countries, and this concentration will further increase along with increasing
urbanization, rising population and faster economic growth. Poorly managed urbanization leads to
increased vulnerability to natural disasters because precarious settlements usually develop in risk prone
areas, inadequate building standards increase vulnerability to earthquakes and sprawling urban areas with
inadequate infrastructure increase flood risks.

39.      Urban and local development planning are under the domain of local governments and offer
an important entry point to influence DRM and urban resilience. Infrastructure that is now being
damaged by disasters was once the result of public or private investment decisions, so including disaster
risk analysis as part of the planning and project investment cycle is a key aspect toward building resilient
investment strategies. Additional funding, staffing and enforcing capacity is needed to implement building
regulation at the local level. While most of the countries have national building codes that include disaster
risk criteria, permit-related and inspection services are usually expensive and overly complex, acting as a
deterrent to meeting code requirements. This encourages building informality, increasing the vulnerability
of urban populations in the context of seismic risks. Obtaining a construction permit in Nicaragua took 189
days in 2005, but “municipal simplification projects” in pilot municipalities reduced the compliance costs
of operating and construction permits by 30% on average, and increased business formalization seven-fold.

Message 7: Reducing existing risk will require investments that will need the financial support of
the central governments. However, cities will need to lead the prioritization of investments in new
risk-mitigation infrastructure and in retrofitting existing critical infrastructure and buildings.

40.     Reducing existing risk requires addressing the vulnerability of built structures. This could be
achieved by developing effective systems to prioritize infrastructure retrofitting and, in extreme cases,
promoting preventive resettlement. In a context of limited resources available to local governments, major
corrective disaster risk reduction measures prioritized in DRM municipal plans need to be negotiated and

                                                                                                          xxi
supported by central governments. New construction with appropriate designs can be made disaster-
resistant for a small percentage of the construction cost (on the order of 5–10%), while retrofitting existing
vulnerable structures may require 10–50% of the building value.

41.      In addition to local government commitment, engagement by the central government remains
critical to support financing disaster reduction plans, as part of broader disaster risk reduction
strategies. The lack of clear mandates pertaining to DRM responsibilities in the countries' sectoral
regulatory frameworks (water, electricity, transport, housing, and so on), compounded by the slow
decentralization of public services, have hindered capacity of local government to efficiently deliver
disaster-resilient public services. In this context, there is work to be done within line ministries and central
entities providing public services to update their sectoral regulatory frameworks to include explicit
responsibilities to identify and reduce disaster risks.

42.      Reducing the vulnerability of the existing built infrastructure is critical. Most of the major
urban agglomerations in Central America are in seismic-prone areas and have been affected by destructive
earthquakes at different times in history. Removing, replacing and retrofitting existing unregulated and
unsafe buildings require an incremental approach that can reduce disaster risk over a reasonable period at
a feasible cost. Prioritizing critical infrastructures—such as schools, hospitals, potable water treatment
plants, bridges and drainage systems—can facilitate the engagement of local and national governments and
increase efficiency of public spending.

Message 8: To enhance understanding of disaster risk, national governments need to improve the
knowledge base of vulnerability exposure and hazard profiles at the city level and make them
available to local actors.

43.     Improving the knowledge base of vulnerability exposure and hazard profiles is a basic
condition to identify and implement policies to reduce disaster risk and improve urban resilience.
Understanding disaster risk implies, first, comprehensive knowledge of the natural events that could have
a negative impact on peoples and assets in the territory, including attributes such as frequency, returning
periods, probabilities and intensities (understanding the hazard). Second, it is necessary to identify people
and the type of assets (including construction materials and values) that are exposed to those hazards
(understanding the exposure), which is a dynamic aspect in a context of rapid urbanization processes. Third,
once the exposed segment of population and assets are identified, the assessment of their specific
vulnerability to specific hazards needs be determined (understanding the vulnerability), to finally assess the
likelihood of a negative impact (understanding the disaster risk).

44.      Sound local hazard information needs to be developed for the effective inclusion of disaster
risk criteria in local land use planning. Currently, hazard maps in the region are mostly available at low
resolution national scales (especially for small and medium-size cities), and therefore inadequate to inform
the diagnostic stages of local land use plans. Comprehensive risk identification methodologies such as risk
maps (based on historical impacts) or probabilistic risk assessments can inform local actors and be easily
incorporated in land use planning and spatial zoning. The Central America Country Disaster Risk Profile
project, led by the World Bank, had the objective of contributing to this goal by assessing potential direct
economic losses from adverse natural events, and by assisting governments in long-term planning and
preparedness Figure 3 shows the building exposure model for Panama City, where most of the value of
building stock is concentrated in the downtown area.


                                                                                                            xxii
                      CDRP Building Exposure Model for Panama City, Panama




                             Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)


Making Cities Competitive to Create More and Better Jobs (Chapter 5)
45.      Central American cities can support economic growth and job creation through local
economic development (LED). As urbanization concentrates economic activities in cities, improving their
competitiveness becomes more important. And international experience shows that a subnational lens to
economic development can provide Central American countries with new avenues for policymaking in
supporting their economic transition. Competitive cities can sustain economic success by adopting LED
policies to support the growth of existing firms, attract outside investors and stimulate the creation of new
businesses. In Central America, measures to boost competitiveness have traditionally been led mostly by
national governments and geared to improving the investment climate. Complementary policies geared
toward LED should be promoted more broadly—to help local governments implement job creation
initiatives that incorporate and leverage local comparative advantages.

Message 9: Through effective LED policies, Central American cities can improve their
competitiveness and facilitate economic growth and job creation.

46.      International experience shows that competitive cities focus their interventions across four
broad policy levers to influence local determinants of competitiveness. First are institutions and
regulations that improve the business environment. Second is the provision of adequate infrastructure and
land for economic activities. Third are programs and policies aimed at developing skills and innovation.
And fourth is enterprise support and finance. A recent global analysis of competitive analysis by the World
Bank shows that cities that are performing well in terms of economic growth and job creation build effective
local partnerships between public and private actors—“growth coalitions”—to devise and implement
strategies that combine actions across the four policy levers.


                                                                                                        xxiii
47.     Local governments with the support of national or regional bodies, can learn from each other
to further improve the local business environment, promoting convergence toward best practices in
the region. Today, there are substantial variations in business regulations (starting a business, obtaining a
construction permit, registering a property) and their implementation across countries, and among cities in
the same country. A comparison of general rankings of the Subnational Doing Business Report 2015 shows
that Panama City and San Jose de Costa Rica are ranked in the top positions followed by Guatemala City.
However, differences across cities within those countries and between the other cities from El Salvador,
Honduras and Nicaragua are substantial. An effective way to correct and improve public policy is through
peer-to-peer learning, which makes reform easier to implement and share with the citizens, and prevents
duplications of effort.

48.     To bridge the skills gap, cities are well positioned to match supply and demand of human
capital. Improving human capital is imperative to address the jobs challenge, considering the region’s gap
in educational development indicators. An unskilled workforce hinders economic development and ties an
economy to low-wage industries, making it more difficult to break the vicious circle of inequality, youth
unemployment, and migration. Broad government efforts to overhaul the educational system must be
coupled with pragmatic policies to bring these skills closer to firms, through a demand-driven approach to
secondary and higher education to improve the rates for graduates to enter the labor market. City managers
have an advantage in facilitating the linkages between firms and universities and training institutions.

49.     Central American countries can develop a more strategic approach to investment promotion
through better understanding the potential and opportunities at the local level. They can build on their
success in attracting investment in special economic zones to accelerate the transformation of their
economies. Central American countries have been early adopters of export processing zones, Zonas
Francas, and special economic zones along with Mexico, Colombia and the Dominican Republic. Special
economic zones (SEZs) account for a large share of light manufacturing jobs in El Salvador, Honduras,
Guatemala and Nicaragua. However, international evidence suggests that attracting cost-based production
without capitalizing on local spillovers limits the sustainability of the economic gains. Local economic
development agencies can leverage their understanding of their territory’s assets and productive
specialization to encourage technology and know-how spillovers from existing SEZs and inform the
planning of new ones.

50.     Strengthened capacity for local economic development can facilitate the access of local firms
to business support mechanisms, which tend to be scattered across multiple tiers and departments of
national government. Efforts are ongoing to streamline and consolidate national support for
competitiveness. The rationalization of the national provision of business services should be accompanied
by the development of similar integrated windows at the local level. Doing so would simplify the interaction
with firms and business environment—and allow public officials to gain a more complete understanding of
the competitive challenges of cities.

Message 10: Critical success factors for LED are a clear understanding of local economic
advantages, a strong public-private dialogue (PPD) at the local level, and local capacity at the
appropriate geographical scale.

51.     Local authorities must capture the distinct nature of their local economies to understand
potential sources of comparative and competitive advantage. Initiatives such as the Municipal


                                                                                                        xxiv
Competitiveness Index in El Salvador and similar attempts to assess subnational investment climates are
important steps toward gathering accurate benchmarking economic indicators in local settings. In this
context, firm-level surveys and investment climate indicators are important sources of information about
the perceived constraints to private sector development in each country and the region. LED policies should
be based on a comprehensive view of local economic actors, including local micro-enterprise as well as
large and medium firms.

52.      Promoting an effective local PPD is the key element to translate LED strategies into action.
Involving the private sector in “growth coalitions” is key to understanding the local economy, defining
economic and investment plans, and implementing LED strategies. In Central America, LED success stories
have built on the influence of public and private leaders, such as mayors, local businessmen or industry
experts. Local growth coalitions can help cities not only identify and pursue key priorities but also leverage
investments from the national government.

53.      Identifying the right geographical scale to develop LED policies is critical. A local approach to
economic development allows for a closer understanding of the local economic conditions, and a closer
relation between public and private stakeholders. However, it is important to seek the economies of scale
required to make the provision of LED services economically sustainable at the local level, and to take into
account the economic linkages between neighboring territories. In Central America’s larger cities, where
urban agglomerations extend beyond municipalities, LED capacity should be developed at the metropolitan
or inter-municipal level. For regions with a less developed entrepreneurial fabric, the regional micro-
regional scale is probably the best to reach critical mass while focusing on regions with common economic
dynamics.




                                                                                                          xxv
WHO DOES WHAT? THE ROLE OF THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN
ADDRESSING THE POLICY PRIORITIES
54.      Each of the four policy priorities identified here call for the active and continuous engagement
of both the national and local governments. In realizing these priorities, each level of government has a
distinctive and complementary role to play. Table 2 presents concrete actions that can be taken to improve
planning and service delivery, offer adequate urban housing, improve resilience to natural disasters and
attain higher levels of competitiveness. It distinguishes what the national and local governments can each
do to achieve sector-specific objectives.
                    What national and local governments can do to make cities more
                                  inclusive, resilient and competitive
                                        National                                            Local
                                                                           • Integrate planning for land use and
                   • Invest in building the technical capacity of
Strengthening                                                                infrastructure investment at local level
                     municipal governments.
institutions for                                                           • Improve mechanisms to generate own-
                   • Align financial resources with functional
effective                                                                    source revenues.
                     responsibilities.
planning and                                                               • Coordinate planning and service
service delivery   • Provide legal frameworks, incentives and technical
                                                                             delivery across municipalities and
                     assistance for inter-municipal cooperation.
                                                                             agglomerations.
                                                                           • Integrate housing programs with local
                   • Develop a comprehensive housing policy.
                                                                             development plans.
                   • Improve subsidy targeting.
Providing                                                                  • Prioritize the generation of serviced
access to          • Strengthen land administration systems.
                                                                             land in accessible locations.
adequate and       • Provide resources and incentives for municipalities
well-located                                                               • Implement targeted neighborhood
                     to align territorial development and capital
housing                                                                      improvement investments to extend
                     investment plans to national housing goals.
                                                                             access to basic services in poor
                   • Improve information systems at national levels.
                                                                             neighborhoods.
                   • Improve the quality and accessibility of disaster     • Develop and enforce risk-informed
Building             risk information with a focus on urban areas.           land use plans and building
resilience by      • Incorporate disaster-risk information in public         regulations.
reducing             investment decisions.                                 • Identify and prioritize critical
disaster risk      • Allocate financial resources to fund critical risk      investments needed to reduce risk at
                     reduction investments.                                  the city level.
                   • Improve the quality and availability of economic      • Improve the business environment at
Increasing           data for decision making.                               the local level.
competitiveness    • Build subnational capacity for business support       • Incorporate economic development
through local        services for local firms.                               considerations into local development
economic           • Adopt a more strategic approach to investment           plans.
development          promotion in order to maximize spatial and sectoral   • Strengthen Public-Private Dialogue
                     comparative advantages.                                 (PPD) at the local level.


In conjunction with the ongoing decentralization process in the region, countries have made progress
on some of these policy priorities in recent years, but implementation challenges remain.
55.      The overview of the policy priorities highlights the importance of integrating policies at the


                                                                                                               xxvi
city level. Local integration clearly appears as a key transversal element of the policy priorities identified.
Integration of territorial planning with capital investment planning can lead to more effective local service
delivery. Articulating the housing programs with local territorial development plans is critical in ensuring
that the associated investments do not translate into costly urban sprawl. The report notes that incorporating
disaster risk information in territorial planning is a very cost effective way to prevent the creation of future
risk. Finally, incorporating economic development into local development plans is an important element
contributing to increasing competiveness at the local level. While some countries in the region have
advanced on these agendas, strengthening these efforts at the city level will be needed in the future.
56.      Municipalities are at the forefront of integrating policies at the local level, but they need to
be empowered to play this role. Because they are the predominant form of local government in all Central
American countries, Municipalities have a central role to play in achieving the local articulation of policies
mentioned above. It is important to note that this responsibility adds to the service delivery functions already
assigned to them, and for which they often lack the financial and technical capacity. The policy priorities
identified to make cities more inclusive, resilient, and competitive, therefore strengthen the case to empower
local governments both institutionally and financially. This means aligning financial resources with
functional responsibilities in terms of service delivery and infrastructure provision, developing the
Municipalities’ administrative capacity to adequately plan for and execute the required investment, and
strengthening their technical capacity to effectively plan and manage rapidly growing cities.
57.      Support from the National Government is critical and should be focused on addressing key
challenges and being results-oriented. National governments in Central America are well aware of the
need to support municipalities in fulfilling their increasing functions, and the challenges and opportunities
identified in this report only reinforce this priority. A challenge that National Governments face when
developing policies and programs aimed at providing municipalities with the resources and tools they
require to make cities work, is to provide them with a consistent legal and policy framework, and a clear
set of priorities in terms of performance improvement. This requires both a dialogue between the National
and Local Governments, and internal coordination between the National Government Agencies which
interact with Local Governments in the many areas involved in local development.
58.      Approaching issues at the metropolitan or inter-municipal scale presents the opportunity to
address these at the relevant territorial scale, and harness economies of scale. One of the key elements
of the urbanization diagnostic presented in this report is the emergence of agglomerations extending beyond
municipal boundaries. This phenomenon is not only taking place in the main metropolitan areas but also in
secondary cities and smaller towns. This represents yet an additional challenge for municipalities by
requiring them to coordinate investments and service delivery at the agglomeration level, but it also
represents an opportunity to develop policies at the relevant territorial scale. By working together,
municipalities can adopt an integrated approach to water management and think about water supply,
sanitation and drainage at the scale of a watershed. They can approach local economic development at the
level of employment catchment areas. And perhaps more importantly, they can pool scarce human and
financial resources to address the many challenges they face in a more efficient manner.




                                                                                                           xxvii
CHAPTER 1: HOW URBANIZATION IS TRANSFORMING CENTRAL AMERICA


TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. TOWARD AN URBAN CENTRAL AMERICA: WHY DOES URBANIZATION MATTER FOR THE
REGION? .......................................................................................................................................... 4
2. UNDERSTANDING THE SPEED AND SPREAD OF URBANIZATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA ........... 5
2.1.       URBAN POPULATION IS GROWING AT CHALLENGING SPEEDS ................................................. 5
2.2.       HOW URBAN IS CENTRAL AMERICA? .................................................................................... 7
2.3. URBAN POPULATION IS GROWING AT CHALLENGING SPEEDS, WITH SECONDARY CITIES
GROWING RELATIVELY FASTER ...................................................................................................... 11
2.4.       LAND IS URBANIZING FASTER THAN POPULATION ............................................................... 15
3. DUE TO RAPID URBANIZATION, CITIES ARE INCREASINGLY CONCENTRATING THE REGION’S
MOST PRESSING CHALLENGES – BUT ALSO THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT ............... 18
3.1. CITIES CAN CONTRIBUTE TO INCREASE PROSPERITY BY TRANSITIONING TOWARD SUSTAINED
ECONOMIC GROWTH ....................................................................................................................... 20
3.2.       THROUGH SUSTAINED ECONOMIC GROWTH, CITIES CAN HELP REDUCE POVERTY ................ 28
4. CITIES CAN HELP TO BOOST LIVABILITY IN CENTRAL AMERICA BY PROVIDING SOLUTIONS
TO THE REGION’S MOST PRESSING CHALLENGES ........................................................................ 30
4.1.       ADDRESSING PRIORITIES IN URBAN HOUSING IS CRITICAL FOR BUILDING INCLUSIVE CITIES 31
4.2. CRIME AND VIOLENCE IN CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES IS HAMPERING THE BENEFITS OF
URBANIZATION ............................................................................................................................... 32
4.3.       RESILIENT CITIES CAN IMPROVE AND SUSTAIN ECONOMIC GROWTH ................................. 34
4.4.       URBAN POLLUTION AND CONGESTION HINDER AGGLOMERATION ECONOMIES. ................... 35
4.5.  IF WELL MANAGED, URBANIZATION CAN IMPROVE SERVICE DELIVERY AND BOOST
LIVABILITY..................................................................................................................................... 36
5. REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................ 38


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Central America is the second-fastest urbanizing region in the world .......................................... 5
Figure 2. Urbanization has come at different moments in time for countries in region ............................... 6
Figure 3. Urban population growth is above average compared to countries at ........................................... 7
Figure 4. Looking at urban agglomerations beyond administrative boundaries in Central America.......... 11
Figure 5. Urbanization in the region is not only driven by the main urban agglomerations....................... 12
Figure 6. Population in largest cities, urban agglomerations vs. official urban boundaries ....................... 13
Figure 7. Intermediate cities are growing at high speeds, while large agglomerations’ growth rate is below
national averages......................................................................................................................................... 14
Figure 8. Distribution of the urban population by size of agglomeration (2012) ....................................... 15

                                                                                                                                                           1
Figure 9. Built-up areas are expanding at a faster rate than population ...................................................... 16
Figure 10. Official municipal and metropolitan boundaries compared to urban agglomerations ............... 17
Figure 11. In situ urbanization has taken place in Guatemala over the last 15 years ................................. 18
Figure 12. Countries with higher levels of urbanization experience a higher income per capita ............... 21
Figure 13. As countries urbanize, the sectoral composition of the economy changes toward a service-
based economy ............................................................................................................................................ 25
Figure 14. Service exports are not driven by knowledge-intensive services .............................................. 27
Figure 15. Manufacturing exports are driven by low-technology products, except in Costa Rica ............. 27
Figure 16. Poverty incidence is declining in urban areas, although the number of poor is growing with
urbanization................................................................................................................................................. 30
Figure 17. Homicide Rates per 100,000 population in Central America 2000-2012/13 by Country ......... 33
Figure 18. Average losses due to extreme weather events can account for 2.6% of GDP ......................... 34
Figure 19. Dependency ratios will reach a historic low in the next 20 years.............................................. 37

LIST OF BOXES
Box 1. Measuring economic activity from outer space............................................................................... 23

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. The definition of “urban” varies across countries ........................................................................... 8
Table 2. Urbanization level (share of urban population as % of total) ......................................................... 9
Table 3. Number of agglomerations by size ............................................................................................... 10
Table 4. Total built-up area has tripled in the past 40 years ....................................................................... 16
Table 5. Key development challenges in Central America ......................................................................... 19
Table 6. Cities concentrate a larger share of economic activity than their share of population.................. 22
Table 7. Share of total brightness and GDP in the main Central American agglomerations ...................... 23
Table 8. Despite growth, Central America underperforms LAC in poverty reduction outcomes .............. 29
Table 9. Urban housing deficit reached 44% in 2009 ................................................................................. 32
Table 10. Cost of traffic diseconomies in Greater Metropolitan Area of San Jose, 2005-2009 (in millions
of USD) ....................................................................................................................................................... 36




                                                                                                                                                                2
OVERVIEW

Central America is the second-fastest urbanizing region in the world and its urban population is
expected to double by 2050. This demographic transition opens a unique opportunity to tackle some
of the region’s most pressing challenges. Due to the high concentration of people, economic activity
and risks in urban areas, cities are increasingly the place where Central America must invest to tackle
some of the region’s key development bottlenecks: lack of opportunities, lack of social inclusion,
and increased vulnerability to disasters. Understanding the way urbanization is unfolding in the
region is key for policymakers to better identify the challenges and opportunities that this transition
can bring to their countries.
This chapter outlines the main patterns of the urbanization process and sheds light on how it shapes
the key challenges and opportunities for the region. Section 2 provides a description of the trends
observed in the region over the last decades and describes the methodology that constitutes the basis
of the analysis. Section 3 deepens into the elements that link urbanization and economic prosperity.
Lastly, Section 4 delves into the challenges that a growing urban population brings for building
sustainable and livable cities. This diagnostic identifies five main findings for the region.

Key findings
•   Central America is in the midst of a rapid urban transformation. Urban population is growing at
    fast speeds, even when compared with countries at similar stages of urbanization. Within one
    generation, 7 out of 10 people will live in cities, adding 700,000 new urban residents every year.

•   Built-up areas are expanding at a faster rate than urban population, and leads to the development
    of urban agglomerations extending beyond municipal boundaries. The report identified 167
    urban agglomerations in the region, 72 of which extend over three or more municipalities.

•   While most of the urban population is concentrated in large agglomerations, secondary cities
    accounted for 20-30% of the population growth in urban areas in recent years, escalating their
    role in the national urban systems.

•   Cities in the region concentrate economic opportunities. Urbanization in Central America, as in
    other regions of the world, has gone hand-in-hand with higher per capita incomes and diminished
    poverty. Cities drive the large majority of jobs and economic activity in Central America, with
    more than 78% of the region’s GDP concentrated in urban areas.

•   Cities increasingly concentrate social challenges and vulnerability to disasters. Today, 1 out of
    4 urban residents live in informal settlements lacking access to improved sanitation, while
    homicides rate are above 53 per 100,000 people in most countries. At the same time, the
    increasing concentration of people and economic activity in high risk areas has resulted in rising
    vulnerability to catastrophic events, with cities concentrating 70-80% of the assets at risk in the
    region.




                                                                                                          3
      1. TOWARD AN URBAN CENTRAL AMERICA: WHY DOES URBANIZATION MATTER FOR THE
         REGION?

1.      Within the next generation, 7 out of 10 people in Central America will be living in cities.
Today, 59% of the region’s population resides in urban areas, but rapid urbanization is changing the region’s
demographic landscape. By 2050, the region will double its urban population within one generation’s
lifespan. “Pull” factors attracting rural workers and their families to urban areas have the potential to move
large numbers of poor people to places with better economic opportunities and access to basic services.
However, the large influx of urban residents presents significant challenges for cities in providing adequate
urban infrastructure and reliable basic services. At the same time, it opens up an opportunity to create an
enabling environment for job creation and higher productivity in cities that can contribute to reduce poverty
and boost livability.

2.       More than 80.5% of GDP is concentrated in the largest cities of Central America countries,
although the transition to high-productivity sectors is still ongoing 10. Research worldwide suggests that
over 80% of global economic activity is concentrated in cities. Globally, 72% of the 750 largest cities in
the world outperform their own national economies in terms of economic growth. Competitive cities sustain
economic success by engaging in pro-active policies across three channels of firm-level growth: the growth
of existing firms, the attraction of outside investors, and the creation of new businesses. Cities too, drive
the large majority of economic activity in Central American countries. Urban areas offer better jobs, higher
wages, better access to safe drinking water, and shorter distances to health care facilities. However, despite
concentrating most of the economic activity, cities are not as productive as they can be. Most of the region’s
manufacturing sector is distinguished by low-technology products and little of the services sector is
knowledge-intensive. And while both sectors have shown important growth in recent years, employment
growth continues to take place mostly in low-skill occupations (Bashir, Gindling and Oviedo, 2012).

3.      Cities can help sustain Central America’s growth while improving living conditions for the
poor. Driven primarily by China’s growing demand for commodities, the recovery in the United States,
and continued weakness in international energy prices, the region has benefited from a “virtuous cycle” of
stronger demand, lower inflation, and better external position that boosted job creation, improved salaries,
and reduced poverty incidence across countries. GDP growth in 2015 averaged 4.25%, slightly below that
of 2014 (4.5%), due to a cooling of remittances in countries like El Salvador and country-specific drags to
growth including Intel’s withdrawal from Costa Rica (IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook 2015). Despite
good economic performance in recent years, some of the hoped-for gains are still tentative, while stronger
policies are essential to reap durable benefits. As the region explores ways to sustain this growth and
continue to make progress on social outcomes, cities can become engines of growth through supporting
ongoing structural transformation and enhanced productivity in urban agglomerations.

4.       City-level policies can help to effectively manage the benefits and negative outcomes of rapid
urban growth. Addressing the need for urban services and infrastructure are becoming increasingly
important in Central America given the accelerated pace of urbanization. With the rise of urban residents,
local governments are faced with the need to respond to greater challenges and population demands, such
as expanded provision of water and sanitation services, and resilient housing. To be able to provide solutions
to these and other urgent problems, local governments can be empowered institutionally and financially. In


 10   Own calculations and World Bank’s Latin America & Caribbean Region Probabilistic Risk Assessment Program (CAPRA).

                                                                                                                      4
doing so, they can work with the central government and in close collaboration with other municipalities,
especially in large agglomerations where city and metropolitan boundary lines become blurry.

     2. UNDERSTANDING THE SPEED AND SPREAD OF URBANIZATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA
     2.1. URBAN POPULATION IS GROWING AT CHALLENGING SPEEDS

6.       Central America is the second fastest urbanizing region in the world. After Africa, Central
America displays the highest urban growth rate at the global scale. As shown in Figure 1. Central America
is the second-fastest urbanizing region in the world, until the late 1990s, the region’s rate of urbanization
followed closely the global trend and was much slower than the transformation experienced by its Latin
American peers. Over the last two decades, its urban population has grown at an average rate of 3.8 percent
per annum– 1.7 times faster than the global average and twice as fast as the Latin American average11. The
share of people living in cities increased from 48% in 1990 to about 59% today, although the region remains
the least urbanized in Latin America. Official projections show that Central America will double its urban
population within the next 35 years, welcoming 25 million new residents to cities as a result of both rural-
to-urban migration and natural population growth. This is equivalent to adding today’s combined
populations of Guatemala and Honduras, the two most populous countries in the region.

              Figure 1. Central America is the second-fastest urbanizing region in the world

                100                                                                                  CENTRAL
                                                                                                     AMERICA
                 90
                                                                                                     WORLD
                 80
                                                                                                     LATIN AMERICA
                 70
                                                                                                     AND THE
                 60                                                                                  CARIBBEAN
                                                                                                     AFRICA
                 50
            %




                                                                                                     ASIA
                 40

                 30                                                                                  EUROPE

                 20
                                                                                                     NORTHERN
                 10                                                                                  AMERICA
                                                                                                     OCEANIA
                  0
                   1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050


              Source: U.N. World Urbanization Prospects (2014)
             *Latin America & the Caribbean excludes Central American countries.

7.      Central American countries have experienced different growth trends over the past half
century. As displayed in Figure 2. Urbanization has come at different moments in time for countries
in region


  11 Central American countries arranged in order of most to least urbanized as of 2014 are as follows: Costa Rica (75.9%), Panama

and El Salvador (tied at 66.3%), Nicaragua (58.5%), Honduras (54.1%) and Guatemala (51.1%) (WDI, 2015).

                                                                                                                                5
8.       , not all countries experienced this demographic transformation at the same time. On the one hand,
the shift from the countryside to urban areas took place earlier in Panama and Nicaragua, whose populations
became predominantly urban in the late 1970s and beginning of the 1980s (i.e. with over 50 percent of the
population living in urban areas). By that time, only 1 out of 3 people were living in cities in the rest of the
Central American countries. While Costa Rica and El Salvador followed a similar trend since 1960, with
both becoming predominantly urban between 1990 and 1992, the two countries took divergent trends
starting on the early 2000s. Lastly, Honduras and Guatemala achieved the 50% threshold at a later stage in
2008 and 2012, respectively, and can learn from the lessons learned by their regional neighbors. By 2050
all countries are projected to exceed urbanization rates of 70%, with the exception of Guatemala (67.3%),
with Costa Rica and Panama’s urban population projected to reach close to 90% of total.

        Figure 2. Urbanization has come at different moments in time for countries in region

                                                       80%
                                                                                                                             Costa Rica
           Share of urban population (as % of total)




                                                       50%
                                                              Panama
                                                                                Nicaragua

                                                             El Salvador

                                                                    Guatemala

                                                                    Honduras
                                                       20%
                                                             1960               1970           1980           1990    2000        2010
        Source: World Development Indicators (2015)

9.      The region’s urban population is growing faster than other countries at similar stages of
urbanization. Central American countries exhibit high urban population growth rates when compared to
the global average and countries at similar stages of urbanization, although there are variations across group
of countries. On the one hand, Figure 3. Urban population growth is above average compared to
countries at

                                                                                     similar levels of urbanization


10.       shows that Costa Rica has the highest urban population share (75%) in the region, and at the same
time one of fastest annual growth rates in the world for countries at similar urbanization levels (averaging
2.5% in 2014). On the other hand, Guatemala and Honduras are at a lower urbanization level with over half
of their population living in cities, but experience two of the highest urban population growth rates in the
region (at an annual rate of 3.4% and 3.2%, respectively in 2015). Lastly, Panama, El Salvador and
Nicaragua have intermediate urbanization levels, around 60%, with urbanization rates exceeding the world
average and comparable to the growth rates exhibited by South Africa, Tunisia, and Morocco.


                                                                                                                                          6
            Figure 3. Urban population growth is above average compared to countries at
                                   similar levels of urbanization




                Source: U.N. World Urbanization Prospects (2014)

11.     Research points to rural-to-urban migration as an important driver of urbanization in
Central America. Rural populations are migrating to cities in search of better employment and educational
opportunities and quality of life. Push factors such as declining agricultural prices, environmental
degradation, and natural disasters have urged rural households to move to cities, particularly in El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. The International Organization for Migration and the World Food
Programme has identified food insecurity, vulnerability to shocks, and economic instability as dominant
forces affecting migration in the countries of the Northern Triangle, resulting in relocations either to other
countries or to urban areas (IOM and WFP, 2015). This study identified a significantly positive correlation
between food security and migration in the three countries. It calculated between 5 and 12 percent of
households having one or more of its members migrating within one month prior to the survey as a
responsive measure to a continuous dry spell (5, 10 and 12 percent in El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala,
respectively).

    2.2. HOW URBAN IS CENTRAL AMERICA?

12.      Differences in the official urban definitions across countries makes comparison between
countries difficult. In Central America, as in the rest of the world, different countries have different
definitions of what is considered urban. For instance, Guatemala and Honduras classify as urban any human

                                                                                                            7
settlements with a population greater than 2,000 residents that has access to basic infrastructure such as
piped water and electricity. In Nicaragua and Panama, this threshold goes down to 1,500 and 1,000
inhabitants, respectively. In contrast, Costa Rica and El Salvador define urban areas as those in which
residents are living within municipal boundaries (cantones o cabeceras municipales), regardless of
population size. Table 1. The definition of “urban” varies across countries below summarizes the
definition or urban areas in the six Central American countries.

                       Table 1. The definition of “urban” varies across countries

 Country         Official Urban Definition

                 Population living in municipalities (cantones), including parts of the primary district and
 Costa Rica      surrounding areas. These areas are delineated a priori considering physical and functional
                 criteria, such as street coverage, electricity, and urban services.

                 Residents living in municipal areas (cabeceras municipales), regardless of population size
 El Salvador
                 or structural characteristics.


                 Cities, villas, and towns with more than 2,000 residents and with at least 51% of households
 Guatemala
                 with access to electricity and piped water inside dwelling.

                 Population living in settlements with a population size over 2,000 residents; and with access
                 to: (i) piped water; (ii) roads, railroads, or air/maritime connectivity; (iii) provision of
 Honduras
                 complete primary school (6 grades); (iv) mail or telegraph, and at least one of the following
                 services: electricity, sewerage system, and health facilities.
                 Localities within the set of municipal areas with a population over 1,000 inhabitants; and
 Nicaragua       with access to: planned roads and streets; electricity; commercial and industrial
                 establishments; among others.

                 Localities with a population over 1,500 inhabitants; and access to: electricity, piped water,
 Panama          sewerage system, paved roads, commercial establishments, communication facilities,
                 secondary schools, among others.



13.     Previous work have addressed some of these difficulties by providing a standard measure of
urbanization. When using an alternative measure of urbanization in Central America, the level of
urbanization in most countries is lower than the official level. The Agglomeration Index (AI) is a
comparable measure of urbanization developed by the World Bank as a means to provide a globally
consistent definition of urban concentration to conduct cross-country comparative and aggregated analyses.
The AI calculates urbanization rates in the region to be between 3 and 10 percent lower than those reported
by official urbanization figures. This also holds true for the rest of Latin America & the Caribbean region
(LAC), where Central America continues to be the least urbanizing region within LAC. The exception is
El Salvador, where the AI is above the official figure, given the country’s high population density. Error!
Reference source not found. below shows the differences in values as calculated by the AI and the World
Development Indicators (WDI) in two points of time. In both periods, the AI in El Salvador was higher
than the official urban share by at least 10 percentage points. Similarly, the weighted-average difference in


                                                                                                                 8
urbanization at the regional level between the AI and official figures was 3.2 percent in 2000 and 8.1 percent
in 2010.




                 Table 2. Urbanization level (share of urban population as % of total)

                                         Agglomeration               WDI Urban
                                             Index                   Population
                                         2000        2010          2000         2010
                       Costa Rica        55.40        53.0         59.05        71.73
                      El Salvador        73.70        73.8         58.91        64.29
                       Guatemala         36.60        39.5         45.13        49.32
                       Honduras          41.60        42.9         45.46        51.70
                       Nicaragua         48.40        43.0         54.74        57.26
                        Panama           52.60        55.2         62.20        65.11

                       Weighted
                                        48.60         48.8        51.80         56.88
                       Average

              Sources: Word Development Indicators (WDI) 2014; World Development Report 2009

14.      This report takes a step forward in providing comparable measures of urbanization that are
consistent with official Census figures in Central America. This work presents a new analysis of the
evolution of urban areas in Central America. In order to provide a better understanding of the dynamics of
urban areas in the region, this report uses comparable urban definitions that are based on the study of
satellite imagery to provide a harmonized perspective of urbanization in the region and allow for cross-
country comparisons. The definition of an urban agglomeration refers to the geographical space where
people work and make life in the city, and is not limited to the municipal or metropolitan administrative
boundaries of a city.

15.      In order to achieve a balance between cross-country comparability and consistency with
official urban statistics, these urban definitions combine the use of satellite imagery with Census data.
On the one hand, these urban definitions are derived from processed satellite imagery, NOAA’s DMSP
nighttime lights, as well as gridded population layers derived from Census data such as Worldpop. This
analysis takes into account the physical extent in which residents of an urban center interact for delineating
urban boundaries within the contiguous built-up area of a city. However, the extent of these urban
boundaries also consider Census data as the main source of demographic information in order to provide
urban headcounts that are consistent with official statistics at the national level.

16.     Looking at urban agglomerations provides a better understanding of the national urban

                                                                                                            9
systems today. Along with urbanization trends based on official national census data, this report uses the
notion of urban agglomerations to better understand the composition of the urban system across the region.
The new analysis described above is used to examine the distribution of urban population and land across
the national territories. However, since this analysis is only available for one period in time, the study of
regional historical trends relies mostly on publicly available data from official and international sources.

17.     Using this definition, this analysis shows that the region’s system of cities is comprised of 167
urban agglomerations with a population greater than 15,000 inhabitants. Figure 4. Looking at urban
agglomerations beyond administrative boundaries in Central America shows the geographic extension
of the 167 urban agglomerations identified for the purposes of this report. Out of these, seven metropolitan
areas have a population that surpassed one million people in 2012, namely the six capital cities and San
Pedro Sula in Honduras. A total of 29 cities have a population between 100,000 and 1 million inhabitants,
while at least 131 urban agglomerations were reported to have a population between 15,000 and 100,000
people. In most cases, the majority of these urban agglomerations are concentrated in surrounding territory
of the capital city. Error! Reference source not found. provides the disaggregated distribution of cities
by country and population size. Guatemala stands out by having the highest number of cities both between
100,000 and 1 million people and between 15,000 and 100,000.

                                Table 3. Number of agglomerations by size

                                          >1M              100K-1M            15K-100K

                  Costa Rica               1                   2                   14
                  El Salvador              1                   5                   13
                  Guatemala                1                   10                  45
                   Honduras                2                   5                   22
                  Nicaragua                1                   5                   27
                    Panama                 1                   2                   10

                     Total                 7                   29                 131

              Source: Own calculations.




                                                                                                          10
 Figure 4. Looking at urban agglomerations beyond administrative boundaries in Central America




 Source: Own calculations using WB’s CDRP data and GHSL Alpha version.

    2.3. URBAN POPULATION IS GROWING AT CHALLENGING SPEEDS, WITH SECONDARY CITIES
         GROWING RELATIVELY FASTER

18.      While capital cities account for most of the population, urbanization in recent years has
mainly driven by growth in secondary cities. Contrary to what is observed in some countries in South
America, urbanization in the region is not only driven by the largest urban agglomerations. According to
official figures, most of the urban population growth in Guatemala and Costa Rica, for example, is taking
place outside the capital region. As shown in Figure 5, the contribution of secondary cities to urbanization
in these two countries has been rising steadily since 1973 and 1984, respectively, with intermediate cities
now accounting for over 65% of the total urban population in their countries. In countries like Panama and
Honduras, however, the contribution of secondary cities to national urban growth has remained stagnant

                                                                                                         11
since 1960, as shown by the flat lines depicted in the figure below, which represent the share of urban
population (as a percentage of total) that is living outside the country’s largest agglomeration. In these two
countries, Panama City and Tegucigalpa continue to account for the vast majority of urban growth.

   Figure 5. Urbanization in the region is not only driven by the main urban agglomerations
                                                80%
      Share of urban population living in the
            largest city (as % of total)




                                                       Panama


                                                        Costa Rica
                                                50%
                                                       Guatemala


                                                       El Salvador
                                                                            Nicaragua

                                                                                                     Honduras
                                                20%
                                                      1960           1970           1980   1990   2000          2010
   Source: World Development Indicators (2015).

   *In the case of Costa Rica, the share of population living in the largest city only includes the residents of the
   San Jose municipality (not greater metropolitan region).

19.      When treated as urban agglomerations, cities concentrate a larger share of the urban
population than those reported by official figures. Independent analysis using satellite data and official
population figures carried out for this study finds that over two thirds of the urban population in Honduras
is distributed among the two largest metropolitan areas in the country (San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa).
Figure 6 shows the differences in the estimated urban population concentrated in the largest city, comparing
the official figures compiled in the World Bank’s WDI with the custom analysis carried out for this study.
Following this analysis, metropolitan Managua concentrates 55% of the total urban population in
Nicaragua, while official figures report 27%. Likewise, while independent estimates show that San Jose
and its satellite cities account for nearly 85% of the national urban population in Costa Rica. While official
Census report that only 1 out 3 urban residents in the country reside in San Jose, this major discrepancy is
due to the fact that the official definition considers only the central San Jose municipality and not
neighboring cities 12.




  12 It is important to note that while the WDI figures are based on a population aggregation within certain administrative

boundaries, the estimates showed in this report are derived from a definition based on built-up area and population. Because the
model used in this work allocates a larger share of population to developed land and built areas, it is possible that these figures
over-estimate the share of urban population concentrated in urban areas, while the official figures may be under-estimating
population in cities.

                                                                                                                               12
          Figure 6. Population in largest cities, urban agglomerations vs. official urban boundaries

                                                       85%

            Concentration of urban population
               in largest city (as % of total)                                                                       64%
                                                                                                                           61%
                                                                                                               55%

                                                                                   40%
                                                                    35%      35%
                                                 32%                                               30%
                                                              27%                            26%         27%




                                                 Costa Rica   El Salvador   Guatemala        Honduras    Nicaragua   Panama

                                                                            WDI     Own calculations


         Source: Own calculations using WDI (2015) and WB’s CDRP data.

20.     As in other parts of the world, while urban population is clustered in large agglomerations,
secondary cities are growing at relatively higher speeds. Figure 7 depicts the population sizes and annual
growth rates for 74 cities in four Central American countries for which official Census data was available
at a comparable scale. The size of each circle is proportional to the number of inhabitants registered in each
agglomeration in the last Census year. The color scheme represents the speed of the annual urban population
growth rate – where dark red indicates a fast growth rate (7% per annum or above), and dark green
corresponds to a relatively slow growth rate (1.3% or below). The Guatemalan capital region experienced
rapid growth between 1994 and 2002, with cities such as Chimaltenango, Retalhuleu, and Quetzaltenango
growing at a faster pace than the national average. In Nicaragua, the Jinotega-Matagalpa triangle
experienced high urban population growth between 1995 and 2005, while larger cities in the West corridor
underwent a slower growth. In Costa Rica, San Jose is growing slower than San Isidro and Punta Arenas,
but faster than other secondary cities in the country, such as Guápiles and Acosta. Lastly, Panama
experienced a period of relatively slow urban population growth rates during the 2000s throughout the
country, with Penonomé and the western suburbs of Panama City among the fastest growing urban areas in
the country.




                                                                                                                                 13
 Figure 7. Intermediate cities are growing at high speeds, while large agglomerations’ growth rate
                                     is below national averages.




  9.92% = mean growth                           1.64% = mean growth




   3.06% = mean growth                           0.71% = mean growth

 Source: Own calculations using WB’s CDRP estimates and official Census figures.

21.      Secondary cities have grown significantly over the last decade and represent up to 65% of the
national urban systems. According to official Census figures, intermediate cities contributed nearly two
thirds to the urban population growth in Nicaragua and Guatemala over the last decade. As shown in Figure
8 below, agglomerations with a population size between 15,000 and 100,000 inhabitants accounted for 20-
30% of the population growth in urban areas, escalating their role in the national urban systems. While
large metropolitan areas accounted for at least 40% of the demographic boom in urban areas, secondary
cities and towns are growing fast. In Guatemala and El Salvador, for example, a factor contributing to the
growth and expansion of secondary cities are migrant remittances. A 2010 study exploring the urbanization
sprawl of the intermediate cities of Quetzaltenango (Guatemala) and San Miguel (El Salvador) –where over
40 and 30 percent of the population receives remittances, respectively– found that real estate and residential
projects targeting the middle class have unfolded rapidly in areas with a significant share of remittance-
receiving populations. Many of these developments are characterized by gated communities and expensive
homes, a share of which remain unused (Klaufus, 2010).




                                                                                                           14
                                         Figure 8. Distribution of the urban population by size of agglomeration (2012)
                                     8
                                                                                                  # of agglomerations / % of urban
    Number of persons, in millions

                                     7                                                                       population
                                           45 / 29%
                                     6                                   13 / 8%

                                     5
                                           10 / 31%                                                      14 / 15%
                                     4                                   5 / 57%

                                     3                    22 / 21%                                       2 /0%             10 / 15%
                                                                                       27 / 23%
                                                          5 / 19%
                                     2                                                 5 / 22%
                                                                                                                        2 / 25%
                                            1 / 40%                                                     1 / 85%
                                     1                    2 / 60%        1 / 35%
                                                                                       1 / 55%                          1 / 61%
                                     0
                                          Guatemala      Honduras     El Salvador     Nicaragua        Costa Rica      Panama
                                                         >1,000,000     100,000 - 1,000,000       15,000 - 100,000
                                                                      Size of agglomeration

 Source: Own calculations using official Census data and satellite imagery.



       2.4. LAND IS URBANIZING FASTER THAN POPULATION
22.       Despite rapid demographic growth, built-up areas 13 are expanding at a faster rate than
population. In 1990, countries in the region built on average 91 m2 of land per capita 14. Today, this figure
has grown by a third, with an average 120 m2 of built-up land per capita. Using built-up per capita as a
comparable measure of sprawl across the region, El Salvador and Honduras have seen the greatest increases
in this indicator mostly driven by the resurgence of the construction industry in the 1990s. Meanwhile, this
ratio has followed a much more moderate increase in Guatemala and Nicaragua, while in Costa Rica urban
sprawling accelerated during the last decade 15. Lastly, Panama has experienced a contrary process, with
greater densification driven by the mass developing of high-density buildings funded with foreign
investments that helped fuel Panama’s real estate market over the past 14 years. However, a parallel process
is occurring in Panama’s urban periphery as new semi-gated housing developments are accommodating the
growing middle-class urban population.




  13 Built-up area is defined as areas characterized by developed land due to human intervention such as buildings, concrete, asphalt,

and suburban gardens (i.e. any land or buildings and non-building structures which are present as part of a larger developed
environment, such as an illuminated section of a road) (U.S. Geological Survey Land Cover Institute, 2012).
  14 Urban land cover, or urban extent, is typically measured by the total built-up area (or impervious surface) of cities, sometimes

including the open spaces captured by their built-up areas and the open spaces on the urban fringe affected by urban development
(Angel, S., J. Parent, D. L. Civco and A. M. Blei, 2010).
  15 Own calculations using GHSL 1975, 1990, 2000, 2014.



                                                                                                                                      15
  Figure 9. Built-up areas are expanding at a faster rate than population
    Built-up area per capita   150
         (m2 per person)



                               100




                                50




                                 -
                                        Costa Rica      El Salvador      Guatemala         Honduras   Nicaragua       Panama
                                                                  1975    1990      2000    2014

  Source: Own calculations using WB’s CDRP urban agglomeration polygons and UN World Urbanization
  Prospects.

23.      Total built-up area in the region has tripled over the past 40 years. Expanding at an average
rate of 7.5% per year, built-up area in Central America has grown twice as fast as other cities in the region.
In Mexico, Tijuana and Guadalajara expanded their built-up coverage at an average rate of 4.9%, 2.8% per
annum, while Montevideo and Valledupar grew 2.9% and 2.8, respectively (Angel et al 2010). Error!
Reference source not found. summarizes the evolution of the built-up coverage for four periods of time
using information derived from satellite imagery calculations. Developed land in the region has expanded
substantially throughout the territory at an exponential trend. By 2000, most countries in the region had
doubled their built-up extension from that in 1975. Today, total developed land is three times larger than
four decades ago. Within the region, El Salvador has seen the greatest transformation, quadrupling its built-
up land since 1975.

                                            Table 4. Total built-up area has tripled in the past 40 years

                                               Country                           1975        1990     2000         2014
                                                     Km2                         211.77       315.2   439.14      669.25
                               Costa Rica
                                                     Relative Growth               1          1.49     2.07         3.16
                                                     Km2                          118        212.36   299.71      511.46
                               El Salvador
                                                     Relative Growth               1           1.8     2.54         4.33
                                                     Km2                         555.68      765.24   997.01      1,631.01
                               Guatemala
                                                     Relative Growth               1          1.38     1.79         2.94
                                                     Km2                         340.03       491.5   730.66      1,212.85
                               Honduras
                                                     Relative Growth               1          1.45     2.15         3.57
                                                     Km2                         259.92      363.82   514.87      708.16
                               Nicaragua
                                                     Relative Growth               1           1.4     1.98         2.72
                                                     Km2                         223.06      323.31   446.31      530.79
                               Panama
                                                     Relative Growth               1          1.45      2           2.38


                                                                                                                               16
          Source: GHSL Landsat Alpha Version – European Commission JRC, 2015.

24.      In 72 urban agglomerations across the region, urban expansion has grown beyond the official
administrative boundaries. Figure 10 below shows how cities, when defined as urban agglomerations,
extend beyond one or more municipal boundaries. While all countries in the region have official
metropolitan delimitations for their capital cities –depicted in light blue–some of these may need to be
updated to reflect changing urban dynamics. In this sense, the case of San Salvador is strikingly notorious,
with the urban agglomeration surpassing the official metropolitan area by twice the size of the official
metropolitan boundaries. The same is true for non-capital cities. Analysis carried out for this study found
that 72 out of the 167 urban agglomerations in the region encompass three or more municipalities, stressing
the need to strengthen intra-municipal coordination for better urban planning and service delivery.

   Figure 10. Official municipal and metropolitan boundaries compared to urban agglomerations




   Source: own calculations using GHSL data (from WB’s CDRP project), and Census data.
25.     Low-density sprawl is concentrated in the urban periphery or outside large cities in the
region. Most of the urban expansion that the region has experienced in recent years has taken place
primarily along three areas: (i) the periphery of capital cities, (ii) in secondary cities, or (iii) in the vicinity
of road corridors connecting urban centers. Figure 11 shows the period in which recent land development
has taken place across the Quetzaltenango-Guatemala City corridor. As shown in the figure below, most of
the developments in recent years have taken place outside metropolitan Guatemala City. Built-up growth
between 2000 and 2014 occurred predominantly in the outskirts of Quetzaltenango and along the road
network connecting these two urban centers. In fact, the large majority of these new developments seemed
to have happened spontaneously in the form of in situ urbanization 16 -or low-density settlements taking

  16 In situ urbanization is urbanization that is driven by natural population growth, by the reclassification of a settlement from

rural to urban, or both. Such urbanization differs from that driven by net rural-urban migration.

                                                                                                                               17
place in rural areas or far from exiting urban agglomerations.

          Figure 11. In situ urbanization has taken place in Guatemala over the last 15 years




 Source: Own calculations using GHSL Landsat Alpha Version, European Commission JRC, 2015.


      3. DUE TO RAPID URBANIZATION, CITIES ARE INCREASINGLY CONCENTRATING THE
         REGION’S MOST PRESSING CHALLENGES – BUT ALSO THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
         DEVELOPMENT

26.      A review of World Bank’s strategic diagnostic reports show countries in the region face
common challenges and opportunities. Between 2012 and 2016, the World Bank prepared a series of
Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCDs) for countries in the Central American region 17. These reports –
which are produced in close consultation with national authorities and key stakeholders– provide an
overview of a country’s strategic development goals. These diagnostics identify the key goals and activities
that have a high impact and are aligned with the global goals of ending absolute poverty and boosting shared
prosperity in a sustainable manner. The reports show that countries experience, at varying degrees,
limitations to economic growth and competitiveness. Lastly, the SCDs underline the exposure and
vulnerability of all six Central American countries to natural disasters, and identify strengthened resilience
as an important policy priority.

27.      The region’s main development challenges are linked to lack of social inclusion, vulnerability


 17 A review of the World Bank’s most recent SCDs for Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama

was conducted for this report aiming to identify the most pressing development challenges and policy priorities in the region.

                                                                                                                            18
to natural disasters, and lack of economic opportunities and competitiveness. While Costa Rica and
Panama are the two most advanced economies in the region, their education and training systems are not
adequately responding to their pace of development, creating a mismatch of skills and jobs. Other causes
of low growth and competitiveness relate to low productivity, low investment levels and lack of export
diversification. In terms of social inclusion, the region continues to witness income inequality, economic
exclusion, low access to quality basic services, and high levels of crime and violence. Table 5. Key
development challenges in Central America below offers a summary of the key development challenges
in each country as identified in the World Bank’s SCDs and Country Partnership Framework (CPF).

                          Table 5. Key development challenges in Central America

                       Lack of economic
                                                                                             Vulnerability to natural
                     opportunities and low               Lack of social inclusion
                                                                                                   disasters
                        competitiveness
                                                      • Stagnant poverty reduction
                  • Fiscal pressures threatening                                            • High exposure to
                                                        and rising inequality.
                    the Social Compact and                                                    hazards, especially
 Costa Rica                                           • Low access to sewage
                    Green Trademark.                                                          hydro-meteorological and
                                                        treatment and solid-waste
                  • Mismatch of skills and jobs.                                              geophysical.
                                                        management.
                  • Lack of opportunities and
                    low economic                      • Lack of social and financial
                                                                                            • High vulnerability to
 El Salvador        competitiveness.                    inclusion.
                                                                                              natural disasters.
                  • Limited mobility of the
                    middle class.
                  • Low economic growth.
                  • Low investment levels and         • Fragmented social contract.
                                                                                            • Vulnerability to natural
                    low agricultural                  • Widespread inequality and
                                                                                              disasters which
 Guatemala          productivity.                       economic exclusion.
                                                                                              disproportionally affect
                  • Weak institutions (low            • Malnutrition.
                                                                                              the poor.
                    taxation, weak investment         • Lack of quality education.
                    climate, frail rule of law).
                  • Regulatory frictions              • Low access and quality of
                    affecting the labor and             basic services.
                    products markets.                 • Unequal distribution of access
                                                                                            • Low resilience to natural
 Honduras         • Continued fiscal instability.       to services harming the poor.
                                                                                              hazards.
                  • Inadequate infrastructure         • High levels of crime and
                    and low access to capital.          violence.
                  • Shortage of skills.               • Limited access to education.
                  • External vulnerability due        • High crime rates.                   • High vulnerability to
                    to low economic                   • Unequal access to services            hazards, especially
 Nicaragua          diversification.                    between income groups.                hitting basic
                  • Vulnerability to food price       • Limited access to primary             infrastructure, roads and
                    increases.                          education.                            housing.
                                                      • Increasing crime and
                  • Limited effectiveness of
                                                        violence.
                    public institutions and
                                                      • Weak protection of land             • Climate change and
                    regulatory framework.
 Panama                                                 rights.                               increased variability in
                  • Weaknesses in coverage
                                                      • Increasing concentration of           rainfall.
                    and quality of secondary
                                                        the extremely poor in the
                    and tertiary education.
                                                        indigenous territories.
Source: Synthesis of Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCDs); except for Nicaragua, which is based on the Country Partnership
Strategy for the period FY13-FY17.


                                                                                                                          19
    3.1. CITIES CAN CONTRIBUTE TO INCREASE PROSPERITY BY TRANSITIONING TOWARD
          SUSTAINED ECONOMIC GROWTH

28.     Cities provide the needed space for firms to benefit from locating close to each other
(localization economies) through labor market pooling and the creation of knowledge spillovers. The
mushrooming of technology companies concentrated in Silicon Valley is a perfect example of this type of
scale economies. While labor costs are high, firms continue to locate there because of the advantages of
gaining access to a highly specialized labor force. Within Central America, Guatemala is a good regional
example. In Guatemala, call center operations have grown substantially. The country accommodates 75 of
the 103 call centers located throughout Central America (Prensa Libre). The industry employs 35,000
workers up from 9,000 in 2008, and inserts close to US$160 million to the local economy in employment
generation. Likewise, growing population allows the fixed cost of new infrastructure –such as utilities,
transport, and urban amenities– to be spread over a larger number of people and firms.

29.      Due to the proximity of various economic activities, cities facilitate the exchange of ideas,
knowledge and technology. The economies of scale in cities promote a higher level of specialization and
productivity. The proximity of firms, workers and markets, in large metropolitan areas enable
agglomeration economies and can become global platforms for the exchange of knowledge, goods and
services. Intermediate cities can benefit from policies that promote sectoral clusters and enable access to
large markets, while smaller cities and towns can take advantage of the provision of basic urban
infrastructure and services that enable their insertion in the national productive chains.

30.     International evidence suggests that urbanization and economic growth are closely related.
Through higher densities, cities enable more frequent social and economic interactions than nonurban
settings (World Bank, 2013; World Bank, 2015a). These interactions create a vibrant place for
entrepreneurs and investors to translate ideas into innovative products and services. As shown in Figure 12,
countries around the world experience higher per capita incomes as they become more urbanized. This trend
also holds for the Central American context. Panama and Costa Rica, the two most urbanized countries in
the region, have the highest per capita incomes. On the contrary, Honduras and Guatemala, which exhibit
the lowest urbanization levels (at nearly 55%), rank lower in per capita incomes among the group of six
countries considered in this report.

31.      As in other regions on the world, urbanization in Central America has gone hand-in-hand
with higher per capita incomes and diminished poverty. In 1994, when less than half of the region’s
total population was considered urban, per capita GDP in Central American countries averaged US$ 5,318.
Twenty years later, as the region became more urbanized, incomes per capita have doubled to an average
of US$ 11,531 18, albeit significant differences (e.g. Panama’s GDP per capita in 2013 was $19,082, while
in Honduras and Nicaragua it amounted to less than $5,000). Despite intraregional disparities, countries
made progress in reducing poverty during this period, dropping from approximately 48% of urban residents
living in poverty in 1994 to 33% in 2013. However, the region still faces important challenges in improving
the living conditions of more than 8.3 million urban poor, while at the same time lifting out of poverty
nearly 11 million rural residents living under the national poverty lines.



  18 Per capita income figures were calculated by taking the GDP per capita average (at 2011 constant prices), weighted by the

country’s total population in each year.

                                                                                                                          20
             Figure 12. Countries with higher levels of urbanization experience a higher
                                         income per capita




                                  100
                   Nivel de urbanizacion (%)
                                       75                                  PAN


                                                          SLV      CRI

                                                   NIC
                                                   HND
                             50




                                                         GTM
                   25             0




                                               0          10,000           20,000         30,000       40,000        50,000
                                                                         PIB per capita (PPP USD)

                                                         Resto del mundo         Centroamerica   America Latina y Caribe


                   Source: Own calculations using WDI (2015)

32.      Along with being the most urbanized countries in the region, Costa Rica and Panama have
exhibit economic and political endowments that have facilitated different development trajectories.
For instance, Panama’s exceptional growth performance over the past decade stems from a number of
factors including the transfer of the Canal to Panama in 2000. This allowed the country not only to benefit
from the growth of world trade, but also to leverage its geographical position to transform itself into a well-
connected logistics and trade hub and a financial center. Moreover, Panama has managed to attract
increasing foreign direct investment (FDI) flows and private investment while undertaking important public
investment projects. Overall, this has enabled Panama to increase its capacity to invest in and manage urban
development. In the case of Costa Rica, political stability, significant investment in education, a highly
educated and bilingual workforce and trade openness are among the factors that have defined its economic
success. Most importantly, productivity has risen rapidly thanks to shifts in investments from low-tech
sectors, such as textiles, to high-tech and high value-added sectors, such as electronics and advanced
manufacturing. This has allowed Costa Rica to produce high-tech manufacturing products and services for
export.

33.      Cities play an important role in the economy, contributing 80.5% of the regional GDP while
hosting 56.9% of the population. In order to provide estimates on the contribution of cities to national
GDP, this report builds on the methodology designed by the WB’s Country Disaster Risk Profile team that
divides the countries in 1 Km2 grid and calculates GDP in each cell (see Box 1). Throughout the region, the
share of overall product clustered in urban areas is larger than the share of population concentrated in cities.
Take Nicaragua as an example, where over half of the population (57.7%) is living in cities, yet urban areas
contribute more than 72.6% to the national economy. Similarly, Honduras and Guatemala experience a
similar ratio with urbanization level reaching nearly 50 percent while urban GDP is over 76% in each
country. As shown in Error! Reference source not found., even in more urbanized countries such as

                                                                                                                              21
Panama and Costa Rica, the concentration of economic activity in cities and urban areas is higher than the
share of population living in cities. Through enabling higher productivity, cities can become catalysts to
promote sustained economic growth, create jobs, and achieve prosperity for Central American residents.

     Table 6. Cities concentrate a larger share of economic activity than their share of population

                                                          Urban GDP              Urban population
                                                         (as % of total)          (as % of total)

                             Costa Rica                       84.82%                     72.87%

                             El Salvador                      78.11%                     64.79%

                             Guatemala                        78.10%                     49.77%

                             Honduras                         76.02%                     52.32%

                             Nicaragua                        72.62%                     57.54%

                             Panama                           86.17%                     65.40%

                             Weighted average                 80.50%                     56.88%

                           Source: Own calculation using WB’s Gridded GDP project, and DMSP 2010.


34.       Similar to population dynamics, economic activity in Central America is also highly
concentrated in the largest agglomerations. In the absence of abundant economic data disaggregated at
the sub-national level, this report builds on the work of Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) and uses
the amount of lights at night and brightness as a proxy to measure economic activity 19 (see Box1). With the
exception of Honduras, over two thirds of the total brightness is concentrated in the countries’ capital cities.
In the case of San Jose, Costa Rica this figure reached 82% of the total amount of lights at night. In
Honduras, the existence of a large economic pole outside the capital city –in San Pedro Sula– is reflected
in the light distribution between the two largest urban centers in the country. Together, Tegucigalpa and
San Pedro Sula account for 68% of the country’s economic activity –with 38% and 29%, respectively.
Additional exploratory analysis looking at the spatial disaggregation of GDP figures at the sub-national
level leads to similar results under the WB’s Gridded GDP project. Based on information derived from
satellite imagery in conjunction with official statistical reports, this report estimated the share of total GDP
that is concentrated in each agglomeration, as shown in the last column in Error! Reference source not
found. below.




  19 One potential limitation of this approach is that it does not considers the regional variations in electrification rates within the

region and countries. Therefore, it is difficult to disentangle the share of the variation in total brightness that is explained by
differences in electrification rates from the one that can be attributed to increases in economic activity.

                                                                                                                                    22
  Table 7. Share of total brightness and GDP in the main Central American agglomerations

                                                    Share of total      Share of GDP
                                                     brightness        (WB’s Gridded
                                                    (DMSP 2010)         GDP Project)


                Country       Agglomeration        1996       2010          2011

               Costa Rica         San Jose         81%        82%            81%

               El Salvador      San Salvador       68%        62%            71%

               Guatemala         Guatemala         52%        57%            63%

                Honduras       San Pedro Sula      37%        29%            34%

                Honduras        Tegucigalpa        33%        38%            36%

                Nicaragua         Managua          74%        74%            68%

                 Panama           Panamá           71%        69%            65%

       Source: Own calculations based on WDI 2014, WB’s Gridded GDP project, and DMSP 2010.


BOX 1. MEASURING ECONOMIC ACTIVITY FROM OUTER SPACE

When official data is not available, this report relies on ancillary data to calculate sub-national
estimates of economic activity. This analysis uses the best data available to describe the observed
trends as precisely as possible. However, as in many developing economies, there are data limitations
in some of the countries in the region, which means that some estimates, projections, and figures
might be discounted or overestimated. Therefore, calculations in this report should be interpreted
more as indications of overall trends rather than precise figures. Additionally, although this report
relies on primary data from official sources—mainly reported by the national statistical agencies in
each country —for most of the analysis, complementary data were used in cases where disaggregated
information were unavailable.
For instance, GDP growth is rarely measured in cities or subnational regions. But recent
innovations based on the use of satellite imagery have developed methods to estimate growth in
economic activity at the subnational level. By looking at the extent of the lights at night and the
brightness (intensity) of these lights, Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) propose the use of
satellite data on lights at night as a proxy to measure GDP growth. They develop a statistical
framework that uses growth in lights to augment existing income growth measures, under the
assumption that measurement error in using observed light as an indicator of income is uncorrelated
with measurement error in national income accounts. For countries with poor data on national
accounts, this new estimate of average annual growth differs as much as 3 percentage points from
official data. Most important, lights data allow for measuring income growth in cities and subnational
regions, as well economic activity in the formal and informal sectors.



                                                                                                         23
BOX 1 (CONTINUED). MEASURING ECONOMIC ACTIVITY FROM OUTER SPACE




Exploratory analysis uses new computational methods to disaggregate national GDP at the
sub-national scale. This report builds on the methodology designed by the WB’s Country Disaster
Risk Profile team. The methodology was designed to estimate a spatial high-resolution map (1Km2)
of subnational GDP improving the previous methodology developed by the Global Economic
Activity Map (GLEAM). In particular, the new methodology maintains the distinction between
agricultural and non-agricultural sectors considered in the former methodology but the major
improvement relies on the non-agricultural component estimation technique. The approach adopted
for disaggregating the agricultural production only uses a Global Landcover grid that gives the
percentage of land used for agricultural production by cell. On the other hand, the non-agricultural
GDP disaggregation process uses population data from LandScan 2012 database3, 2010 Nighttime
Lights (NTL) and a market access proxy5. In addition to this, sub-national GDP data were collected
from various sources including UNDP reports, Central Banks, Ministries of Economy, and National
bureaux of statistics of the countries considered. When available, the sectorial structure of the GDP
at a sub-national level was also compiled.
Source: WB LCR Probabilistic Risk Assessment Program - CAPRA (P144982) and funded by the World Bank through a
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) grant (TF014499) from the Government of Australia
(AusAid). The methodology will be available in a WB Working Paper in preparation: “Gross Domestic Product
Disaggregation Methodology and applications in Disaster Risk Management” by Blanchard, P; B. Blankespoor, J. Rivera-
Fuentes, R. Gunasekera, O. Ishizawa and L.F. Jiménez-Salazar. Contact: oishizawa@worldbank.org




                                                                                                                       24
35.     The proximity of markets, firms, and labor in cities can enable economic transformation and
growth. As countries become more urbanized, they transition from economies based on agricultural
production toward more diversified economies where industry and high-value services play a larger role.
Figure 13 depicts the sectoral composition of 170 economies ordered by their level of urbanization in 2014,
where the diameter of each circle is proportional to the size of a country’s overall economy, as measured
by GDP per capita. The charts illustrates that as countries become more urbanized, the contribution of
agriculture to national GDP falls, while industry and services capture a larger share in the economy. Within
the region, the services sector is the largest contributor to the national economies, and has become the
leading sector faster than in other countries around the world. Nicaragua is the exception, where
agriculture’s share in GDP is among the highest in the world when compared to countries at similar income
and urbanization levels.

    Figure 13. As countries urbanize, the sectoral composition of the economy changes toward a
                                       service-based economy




 Source: World Development Indicators (2015).




                                                                                                         25
36.     However, most economies in the region are characterized by the production and trade of
commodities with little value added. Despite a more predominant role of the services and industry sectors
in recent years, most of the growth in Central American economies occurs in low-technology manufacturing
and services that are not knowledge intensive. Only Panama and Costa Rica have significantly increased
their exports based on knowledge-intensive and specialized services, as shown in Figure 14 below. Costa
Rica shows the highest share of knowledge-intensive service exports in both absolute and relative terms,
representing 35% of all service exports and worth US$ 1.4 billion. To contrast with a high-income country,
knowledge-based service exports in the U.S. accounted for 64.6% of all service exports in 2011. Source:
“Mejores Empleos en América Central: El Rol del Capital Humano.” 2012, Banco Mundial




                                                                                                       26
   Figure 15. Manufacturing exports are driven by low-technology products, except in Costa Rica
37.      shows that Costa Rica is the only country with a large proportion of high-technology
manufacturing exports, while low-technology manufacturing exports constitute the majority in the other
five countries, representing between 43 and 74 percent of all manufacturing exports.

                                     Figure 14. Service exports are not driven by knowledge-intensive services
                             6,000


                             5,000


                             4,000
    millions of US dollars




                                                                                                                              78%

                             3,000
                                           65%

                             2,000


                                     82%                                                                      79%       82%
                             1,000
                                                                            86%
                                           35%                                               91%                              22%
                                                         77%          73%              87%               82%
                                                     66%
                                0
                                     18%             34% 23%          27% 14%          13%   9%          18% 21%        18%
                                     2000 2008       2000 2008        2000 2008        2000 2008         2000 2008      2000 2008
                                        Costa Rica      Honduras         El Salvador      Nicaragua         Guatemala    Panama

                                                        Knowledge-intensive services    Other Services


Source: “Mejores Empleos en América Central: El Rol del Capital Humano.” 2012, Banco Mundial




                                                                                                                                    27
   Figure 15. Manufacturing exports are driven by low-technology products, except in Costa Rica
                             8,000

                             7,000

                             6,000
    millions of US dollars




                             5,000

                             4,000

                             3,000

                             2,000

                             1,000

                                0
                                        2000    2008   2000   2007   2000       2008     2000   2007    2000   2008   2000   2008
                                          Costa Rica    Honduras      El Salvador         Nicaragua      Guatemala      Panama

                                     High technology   Medium-high technology          Medium-low technology    Low technology


 Source: “Mejores Empleos en América Central: El Rol del Capital Humano.” 2012, Banco Mundial

    3.2. THROUGH SUSTAINED ECONOMIC GROWTH, CITIES CAN HELP REDUCE POVERTY
38.      Despite economic growth in recent decades, the region has underperformed in poverty
reduction when compared to Latin America. GDP per capita in Central America increased behind the
average of middle-income economies and, compared to Latin America as a whole, the region has
underperformed in poverty reduction outcomes. Central America’s pace of decline in income inequality has
been stagnant over the last decade, hindering the region’s capacity to lift people out of vulnerability and
into the middle class. Although unemployment rates are low for Latin American standards, data may ignore
important factors such as outbound migration and the informal economy’s prominent role. Central
American countries are within the 4-6% band, except in Costa Rica where unemployment hit 8% in 2014.
However, underemployment is high across the board, reaching 30-40% in the Northern Triangle) 20. Lack
of opportunities have translated into social pressures that hinder sustainable development. By the mid-
2000s, countries in the Northern Triangle –namely Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala– suffered
mounting migration while crime and violence presented the width of the social drama. Out of the 3 million
Central American immigrants living in the United States, 90% come from these countries. In 2012, four
Central American countries ranked in the top five countries with the highest homicide rates in the world.




  20 Underemployed workers include those that are highly skilled but working in low paying or low-skilled jobs, and part-time

workers that would prefer to be full-time. %. Source: ”U.S. Strategy For Engagement in Central America”. Communication from
the White House in support of The Alliance for Prosperity.

                                                                                                                                    28
   Table 8. Despite growth, Central America underperforms LAC in poverty reduction outcomes

                            % of population                            World        Unemployment
                                                   % in Extreme
                            living in Poverty                        Bank GINI      rate (% of labor
                                                  Poverty ($2 day)
                                 ($4/day)                            Index 2016      force in 2013)

          Costa Rica               12.2                 4.6              49.2              7.6

         El Salvador               31.8                 12.7             43.5              6.3

          Guatemala                62.4                 40.5             52.4              2.8

          Honduras                 59.4                 39.6             53.7              4.2

          Nicaragua                52.2                 29.3             45.7              7.2

           Panama                  20.4                 9.9              51.7              4.1

       Central America            43.7                  24.9            0.50

             LAC                                                        0.50
        Source: World Bank’s Development Indicators.

39.      Central American cities can become platforms for lifting people out of poverty. Through
enabling agglomeration economies, empirical studies around the world show that urbanization is linked to
poverty reduction. Within Latin America, some of the most urbanized countries have the lowest urban
poverty and inequality levels. For example, Argentina, Chile, Peru and Uruguay are among the ten countries
with the highest urbanization rates in the region that show both declines in urban poverty and inequality –
with Argentina, Peru and Uruguay currently registering among the lowest Gini coefficients in the region
(42.28, 44.73 and 41.87 in 2013, respectively), and Argentina and Chile having the two lowest urban
poverty rates (4.7% and 12.4% in 2013, respectively). In the case of Central America the evidence is mixed.
On the one hand, Costa Rica and Panama, the two most urbanized countries in the region, show the two
lowest urban poverty rates (19.5% in 2014 and 13.8 in 2013, respectively), although Costa Rica has
registered slight increases in very recent years. However Panama, being among the most urbanized has the
third highest Gini coefficient (51.67 in 2013), just behind Honduras and Guatemala, which are the two least
urbanized countries in Central America and with the largest share of urban poor. Contrary to this case are
Costa Rica and El Salvador, which rank among the three most urbanized countries and register the fourth
and sixth lowest Gini coefficients, respectively.

40.      While the share of urban dwellers living in poverty has been in decline, poverty incidence still
remains high. The past ten years have been characterized by sustained growth in economic indicators and
reduced poverty throughout Central America. However, as more people move into cities in search of better
living conditions, the number of urban poor has increased in absolute terms (Figure 16). Despite progress
in recent years, the region still faces important challenges in improving the living conditions of more than
8.3 million urban poor. Costa Rica, Panama, and Nicaragua have reduced the absolute number of poor
living in cities. However, while the urban poverty rate in Costa Rica and Panama is below 20%, over half
of the total urban population in Nicaragua lives under the poverty line. At the same time, Guatemala,
Honduras, and El Salvador have showed progress in reducing urban poverty over the last 15 years, but
poverty rate in cities is still over 40% and the total number of urban poor has increased to over 1.4 million


                                                                                                          29
residents in each country. In January 2016 alone, more than 30,000 people fell into poverty in Honduras as
unemployment remains very high and families are unable to cover their living costs (Proceso Digital).

 Figure 16. Poverty incidence is declining in urban areas, although the number of poor is growing
 with urbanization
         Urban poverty 1992-2012 (% of total                               Number of poor in urban areas,
                       pop.)                                                        2006-2011
        80                                                    3,000
        70
                                                              2,500
        60




                                                          Thousands
        50                                                    2,000
        40                                                    1,500
    %




        30
                                                              1,000
        20
        10                                                            500
         0                                                             -



                   1994**   2001*   2009*                                              2006   2011



 Source: Own calculations using WDI (2015) and CEPAL (2014).

    4. CITIES CAN HELP TO BOOST LIVABILITY IN CENTRAL AMERICA BY PROVIDING
       SOLUTIONS TO THE REGION’S MOST PRESSING CHALLENGES

41.      Despite progress in recent years, important challenges on livability remain, with cities often
being associated with the growth and expansion of informal settlements. In 2005, over 30% of the
urban population in the region lived in informal settlements with precarious living conditions –above the
Latin American average of 26%. Between 2001 and 2010, 45% of the urban growth in San Salvador took
place in informal human settlements, while secondary cities such as San Juan de Opico y Colón, Santa Ana,
and San Miguel witnessed similar figures, at 38%, 45%, and 36% respectively. Guatemala and Nicaragua
had the highest rate of urban population living in slums, only below Belize, Bolivia, Jamaica and Haiti
when compared to the rest of Latin America. The spatial concentration of poverty in slums adds to the rising
crime rates and vulnerability to risk, two of the most pressing challenges in the region’s development
agenda.

42.      Fast and spreading urbanization puts pressure on municipal finances and provision of basic
urban infrastructure. In Mexico, for instance, the current model of sprawled urban expansion increased
the cost of infrastructure provision, which are then transferred on to firms through higher fees and taxes.
Similarly, providing housing in the outskirts of Santiago de Chile is ten times higher than building housing
units in the city core. Recent studies find that municipal spending on public works and infrastructure per
capita was nearly 1.5 higher in the least dense municipalities in the country, when compared to cities with
higher population densities. Moreover, scenario planning available for different urban growth trajectories
showed that more compact urban development could save cities up to 70% of infrastructure and
maintenance costs.



                                                                                                            30
      4.1. ADDRESSING PRIORITIES IN URBAN HOUSING IS CRITICAL FOR BUILDING INCLUSIVE
         CITIES

43.     Shortcomings in basic urban services, land, housing, and urban transport can translate into
residents and firms prematurely experiencing the downside of urban concentration. Failing to provide
adequate housing policies and programs needed to cope with rapid urbanization can translate into rising
informality and slums, high land costs, social conflict over plot tenure, degraded public areas, threats to
public health and emerging crime (Kessides, 2005). Further, the shortage of fiscal resources for providing
the needed investments by national and local governments reduced the benefits of urbanization and rises
the costs of the major private and public investments that cities attract.

44.      In Central America, a large segment of housing is produced and consumed informally. The
quality and location of housing has important long term consequences for both households and
communities. Housing with immediate access to jobs, amenities and services can reduce travel time and
expenditures, and provide access to better education and health outcomes. Further, proximity to basic
services such as improved water and sanitation facilities and solid waste collection have direct impact on
mortality rates and economic productivity losses. However, vulnerable populations often tend to
concentrate in areas where housing is most affordable, but may lack these key services. In Central America,
slums and informal settlement are the biggest challenge to the provision of quality housing in cities and
unmanaged urbanization has driven income inequality and contributed to the concentration of poverty in
slums and information settlements. Chapter 4 takes a housing value-chain approach framework to assess
and compare the housing sector between countries. The chapter analyses the dynamics of housing markets
in the region (both formal and informal), and identifies key areas of policy action.

45.      Today, 1 out of 4 urban residents in the region live in slums and lack access to improved
sanitation. Access to improved sanitation is the most critical infrastructure deprivation for poor urban
households in Central America. Despite substantial achievements in recent years in terms of increasing
electricity and potable water access in the region, improved sanitation systems are absent from a substantial
share of urban dwellers, even in wealthier countries such as Costa Rica. In nearly all countries, a third or
more of urban households do not have access to improved toilet or is not connected to the sewage network.
Improved sanitation systems, such as septic systems, are a more common alternative, but in most countries
more than 25 percent do not even have these facilities, with this figure reaching more than 50 percent in the
case of Nicaragua.

46.    There are significant levels of housing deficit, particularly qualitative deficit. In 2009 there
were an estimated of 11.3 million households in Central America, and the total housing deficit reached
44%, out of which 7% represented quantitative deficit and 37% qualitative deficit. In 2005, approximately
31% of urban population lived in slums, however, there were significant differences between countries as
slum population in Costa Rica and Panama reached 11% and 23% respectively, while in Guatemala and
Nicaragua was above 40%, reaching 41% and 46% respectively21. Additionally, an estimated of 290,000 22
new households are established annually in the region, which exert further pressure on the demand for
housing.


 21 UN Habitat, Urban Database
 22 Concejo Centroamericano de Vivienda y Asentamientos Humanos (CCVAH), “Estrategia Centroamericana de Vivienda y
Asentamientos Humanos, 2009”

                                                                                                               31
               Table 9. Urban housing deficit reached 44% in 2009 Urban Housing Deficit,
                                        2009 (% of households)
                                                                 Qualitative Deficit
                        Quantitative
                                                                                                 Lack of
                          Deficit
                                         Total   Materials   Overcrowding     Infrastructure     Secure
                                                                                                 Tenure
  Central America            7.2         37.5       19.3          15.3                 27.2        11.3
  Costa Rica                 2            10         5              1                   1           6
  El Salvador                8            41        21             16                  30           17
  Guatemala                  11           46        32             27                  32           10
  Honduras                   2            41        18             14                  26           12
  Nicaragua                  12           58        33             28                  52           10
  Panama                     8            29         7              6                  22           13

Source: Inter-American Development Bank, "Room for Development-Housing Markets in Latin America and the
Caribbean"

    4.2. CRIME AND VIOLENCE IN CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES IS HAMPERING THE BENEFITS OF
         URBANIZATION

47.     Crime and violence are one of Central America’s greatest challenges to its prosperity and
development. Criminal violence and gang warfare is costing the region an estimated 8-9 percent of GDP
each year (Villiers Negroponte, Caballero & Amat, 2011). Along with Southern Africa, the region suffers
from the highest homicide rates in the world. The rate of intentional homicide per 100,000 population varies
among Central American countries, from a high rate of 91 in El Salvador in 2012 to a visibly lower rate of
8.4 in Costa Rica in the same year (UNODC, 2014). The “Northern Triangle” comprised of El Salvador,
Honduras and Guatemala account for the steepest rates in the region, with the three ranking among the five
countries with the highest homicide rates in the world.

48.     Homicide is the defining crime of Central America. While other violent crimes such as robbery
and assault prevail in the region, their magnitude is lower, and are normally below the average of Latin
America. However, Guatemala and El Salvador face extremely high rates of violent victimization, affecting
almost 1 in 6 adults (World Bank, 2010). Figure 17 shows the patterns on homicide rates over the period
2000-2012/13. Although homicide levels are significantly lower in Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Panama,
they have registered recent rises, most notably in Panama. Their proximity to the Northern Triangle
countries and strategic position as an illegal drug trade corridor, puts them at risk for greater crime and
violence.




                                                                                                           32
  Figure 17. Homicide Rates per 100,000 population in Central America 2000-2012/13 by Country
                                            100
                                             90
                                             80
         Homicides per 100,000 population



                                             70
                                             60
                                             50
                                             40
                                             30
                                             20
                                             10
                                              0
                                                  2000         2002           2004         2006      2008     2010       2012

                                                  Costa Rica    El Salvador          Guatemala    Honduras   Nicaragua    Panama


 Sources: Global Study on Homicide, 2013. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2014. Crime and Violence in Central
 America, Vol II. World Bank, 2010. Crime and Violence in Central America: A Development Challenge. World Bank, 2011.
 Transnational Organized Crime in Central America and the Caribbean: A Threat Assessment. United Nations Office on Drugs
 and Crime, 2012. Berge, Louis-Alexandre and Marlon Carranza. Crime, Violence, and Community-Based Prevention in
 Honduras. World Bank, 2015, Departamento de Estadisticas Coepol, Honduras (2009-2013).

49.     Crime and victimization rates tend to be higher in urban than rural areas. All six capital cities
have higher homicide rates per 100,000 population than the national average, with the largest gap observed
in Guatemala City (116.6 versus 41.6 in 2010) and Panama City (53.1 versus 17.2 in 2012). Reports by the
World Bank and the UN Office of Drugs and Crime acknowledge a link between urbanization and higher
levels of crime and violence in the region, given the inherit characteristics of urban areas, as well as the
kind of urban development unfolding in Central America. International evidence shows that rapid and
mismanaged urbanization can be linked to higher levels of crime and violence. Poor urban planning create
an environment more susceptible to victimization of residents. Residential crowding, deterioration or lack
of public recreational spaces, and insufficient basic public services, compounded with limited access to
educational and job opportunities are very well known risk factors for violence and crime, including the
involvement in illicit activities and association with criminal or delinquent groups, which also results in the
victimization of residents in the region. Other factors associated with urban living also play into higher
levels of violent crime, such as income inequality and the possibility to remain anonymous within denser
and higher populated places. For instance, UNODC’s Global Study on Homicide 2013 states that
settlements with a population of over 50,000 register a disproportionate number of homicides in the Central
American countries.

50.       The causes of increased criminal violence and a larger perception of insecurity in Central
America are many and multidimensional. Research has narrowed them down to three main drivers: (i)
illicit drug trade, (ii) expansion of local gangs, and (iii) wide availability of and easy access to firearms
(World Bank, 2011; Shifter, 2012). Among the three, drug trafficking is the dominant factor explaining the
hike and prevalence of violence in the region. At present, Central America is heavily affected not only for
operating as a drug trade corridor between cocaine producers in South America and the consumer market


                                                                                                                                   33
in the US and abroad, but also for recently evolving into a production center for other synthetic drugs.
Homicide rates are 65 percent higher in areas with widespread drug trafficking activity than other areas of
a country (World Bank, 2010).

51.      The heavy presence of gangs or maras throughout the region – more than 900 currently
operating in the region – can be explained in part by the limited education and employment
opportunities available for the youth. In the case of Honduras, rising levels of urbanization and migration
beginning in the 1980s made cities more susceptible to violent crime. Crime is geographically concentrated
in the country, with 65 percent of homicides taking place in only 5 percent of urban municipalities in 2013.
Urban areas have not been able to cope adequately with the incoming population, leading to insufficient
infrastructure to accommodate all migrants and marked inequality in services provision. Additionally,
competition over jobs and inequality may contribute to heightening the risk of violence. New incomers are
also facing limited job opportunities as supply does not meet demand, causing high levels of unemployment,
particularly among the youth (Berge, Louis-Alexandre and Marlon Carranza, 2015).

       4.3. RESILIENT CITIES CAN IMPROVE AND SUSTAIN ECONOMIC GROWTH
52.      The increasing concentration of population and economic activity in high risk areas have
resulted in rising vulnerability to natural catastrophic events. In Central America, disasters generated
from natural events have had devastating and disruptive effects on the foundations of a country’s economy,
reversing hard-won development gains. the increasing concentration of population and firms in urban areas
have resulted in rising exposure and vulnerability to natural catastrophic events, with annual average losses
accounting between 0.7% and 2.6% of national GDP in Nicaragua, El Salvador and Honduras. These
factors, combined with global climate change and increased climatic variability, are likely to exacerbate
Central America’s exposure to hurricanes, floods, erosion, landslides, and droughts.

        Figure 18. Average losses due to extreme weather events 23 can account for 2.6% of GDP




   -
 Source: Global Climate Risk Index, 2014.




  23 Weather events include: Meteorological events (tropical storms, winter storms, severe weather, hail, tornado, local storms);

hydrological events (storm surges, river floods, flash floods, landslides); climatological events (freeze, wildland fires, droughts).

                                                                                                                                 34
53.      Building resilient cities can help countries withstand shocks and adapt to changing situations.
In the context of the region´s changing demographics, rapid urban growth and certain unpredictable climatic
trends, integrating disaster risk reduction policies and measures into local, national and regional
development practices are critical to build the future resilience of Central American cities. Increasing
vulnerability to risks and high exposure in urban areas requires taking better informed financial decisions
and policy priorities based on evidence-based research. Given the current regional institutional and
regulatory context for risk management, improving the tools and policies for timely risk identification, as
well as planning and financing instruments for better managing the impacts of disasters will be needed.

     4.4. URBAN POLLUTION AND CONGESTION HINDER AGGLOMERATION ECONOMIES.
54.      In absence of regulations, congestion and pollution costs can slow economic growth and
reduce livability in cities. Unmanaged urban sprawl can lead to greater energy use for transport, lower
labor productivity, and higher costs for energy and water supply. Oher countries also experience the burden
associated with the negative externalities of urbanization. Annual congestion costs in comparable cities in
rapidly urbanizing Africa 24 are between US$ 255 to 400 million annually, including socioeconomic and
environmental costs. Overall, minibus drivers lose around US$ 164.7 million in income and an estimated
US$ 15.9 million in fuel costs yearly, while employers lose US$ 74.8 million in paid wages to workers who
are not working because they are trapped in traffic jams (Kiunsi, 2013; Ng'Hily, 2013). Similarly, growing
traffic congestion in urban areas carries significant environmental and health implications, which reduced
the quality of life. A recent study by Harvard Center for Risk Analysis (HCRA) estimated that emissions
from traffic congestion in the 83 largest urban areas in the US resulted in more than 2,200 premature deaths
in 2010 with a value of 18 billion in public health and social costs (Levy, Buonocore, & von Stackelberg,
2010).

55.      Traffic congestion in Central America has become an economic burden. In Central America,
traffic congestion on main trading routes has been determined to increase road freight transport costs and
prices, affecting trade and overall economic growth (Osborne; Pachón & Araya, 2014). Transportation costs
are especially high in Costa Rica. A study analyzing the agglomeration economies and urban diseconomies
in the Greater Metropolitan Area (GMA) of San Jose identifies the city’s transportation infrastructure and
networks as an important urban diseconomy, with the potential of reversing the gains accrued from
economies of scale (Pichardo-Muñiz and Otoya Chavarría, 2012). Existing road conditions of the city’s
transport system are conducive to serious road congestion and have cost US$ 3.8 billion between 2005 and
2009, representing 2.8% of the country’s annual GDP. Error! Reference source not found. below lists
the monetary costs of the main transport system diseconomies in the GMA.




  24 In Tanzania, congestion and lack of infrastructure investments threatens to erode the potential benefits associated with rapid

urban growth in Dar es Salaam –the country’s largest and most vibrant city with a population over the 4.3 million residents.

                                                                                                                               35
   Table 10. Cost of traffic diseconomies in Greater Metropolitan Area of San Jose, 2005-2009 (in
                                           millions of USD)

           Costs              2005          2006          2007          2008          2009          Total

      Time Loss in
                               505           515           531           578           590          2,719
    Traffic Congestion

    Additional Fuel in
                               46            46            48             52            53           245
    Traffic Congestion

     Traffic Accidents         86            101           106          1245           122           540

     Air Pollution due
     to Motor vehicle          54            59            59            634           656           301
        Emissions

           Total               690           721           744          8189           831          3,805

     % with respect to
                             2.64%         2.63%         2.66%          2.79%         2.84%        13.56%
          GDP

  Source: Pichardo-Muñiz and Otova Chavarría, 2012

    4.5. IF WELL MANAGED, URBANIZATION CAN IMPROVE SERVICE DELIVERY AND BOOST
         LIVABILITY.

56.      High population density in cities brings cost savings in service provision. The proximity of
physical structures and people bring efficiencies to the provision of ‘network services’ such as drainage,
sewerage, solid waste management and transport connectivity. Economies of scale, high density lowers
marginal cost of service provision. In Santiago de Chile, the cost of developing a new residential unit in the
outskirts of the city is ten times larger than that in the city core, when accounting for the cost of water pipes,
sewage, equipment and other basic infrastructure. In Latin America and the Caribbean region, the average
per capita cost for providing sewer connection ranges from US$120 to 160 per household (UNEP, 2000;
WSP 2013). Yet in high-population density areas such as cities, the household cost of both conventional
and ‘simplified’ sewerage drops up to population densities of around 80 people per hectare.

57.     In their quest for improved quality of life for its residents, municipalities in the region are
faced with a dual challenge of addressing a significant backlog of infrastructure needs and at the
same time coping with rapid population growth. This puts growing stress on the administrations,
particularly at the local level. In providing policy recommendations to tackle these challenges, Chapter 2
presents the legal and institutional frameworks of city management in Central America in terms of division
of functions between levels of government, municipal finance, and the provision of local goods and
services. This chapter then addresses the needs for further vertical and horizontal coordination of
government activities, i.e. coordination between local and central governments, and the need for further
coordination among the local governments in major agglomerations (metropolitan areas).

58.     Failing to improve the living environment in cities could prevent the region from harnessing
the economic benefits of an emerging demographic dividend. Along with rapid urbanization throughout
the region, the proportion of children and seniors relative to the working-age population will soon reach a

                                                                                                               36
historical low. Thanks to its demographics, the region faces a unique development opportunity during the
next 20 years (2015 to 2015, the period between the two vertical lines depicted in Figure 19). As other
regions have shown, low dependency ratios 25 create great economic opportunity (Bloom and Williamson,
1998; Li, Zhang, and Zhang, 2007). But to take advantage of this window, Central American cities must
provide human capital and labor market opportunities to its growing population. Building livable cities is
needed in order to attract and retain highly skilled workers in high-productivity sectors. But today the
proportion of youth that does not work nor attends school in Central America is among the highest in Latin
America. In Honduras and El Salvador, one of every four youth between the ages of 15 and 24 are out of
school and not working, with the large majority, close to 75 percent, living in cities (de Hoyos, Rafael;
Rogers, Halsey; Székely; Miguel, 2016).

                Figure 19. Dependency ratios will reach a historic low in the next 20 years




                Source: de Hoyos, Rafael; Rogers, Halsey; Székely; Miguel (2016).
                Note: The dependency ratio is defined as the ratio of the population aged 0-14 and 65
                or more to the population aged 15-64.

59.      Better urban policies require a deeper understanding of the form of cities and the role they
can play in their national urban systems. Understanding the urban dynamics between the main
metropolitan centers and those that take place outside the capital regions could present important
opportunities for advancing toward a more sustainable urbanization model. Urbanization requires making
large infrastructure investments that will lay the ground for a city’s ability to transport goods and services
more efficiently, facilitate the exchange of knowledge and ideas and provide good quality of life for its
residents. Larger cities need to prioritize investments on connecting infrastructure in order to maximize the
economic and social returns of agglomeration. At the same time, smaller cities invest on basic infrastructure
to ensure a sustainable growth pattern. Further, in order to maximize the social and economic returns of
these investments, infrastructure provision must be tuned with the spatial layout of people and land. An
accompanying piece to this report “Morphology of Secondary Cities in Central America” offers a
comparative look on the evolution of the form and function of urban areas in the region, with a special focus
on secondary or intermediate cities.


  25 The dependency ratio is an age-population ratio that measures the rate of dependency between the population that is not in the

labor force (the dependent) and those that are able to work. The ratios are calculated as the sum of population aged 0-14 and over
65 years old, divided by the population able to work (aged 15-65).

                                                                                                                               37
       5. REFERENCES


Angel, S., Parent, J., Civco, D. L., & Blei, A. M. (2010). Atlas of Urban Expansion. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln
       Institute of Land Policy.

Bashir, S., Gindling, T. H., & Oviedo, A. M. (2012). Better Jobs in Central America: The Role of Human Capital.
        World Bank.

Berg, L. A., & Carranza, M. (2015). Crime, Violence, and Community-Based Prevention in Honduras.

Bloom, D. E., & Williamson, J. G. (1998). Demographic transitions and economic miracles in emerging Asia. The
       World Bank Economic Review, 12(3), 419-455.

Consejo Centroamericano de Vivienda y Asentamientos Humanos (CCVAH). (2009). Estrategia centroamericana
       de vivienda y asentamientos humanos 2009-2012. Nicaragua

Germanwatch (2014). Global Climate Risk Index 2014. Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events?
      Weather-Related Loss Events in 2012 and 1993 to 2012.

Henderson, J. V., Storeygard, A., & Weil, D. N. (2012). Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space. American
       Economic Review, 102(2), 994-1028.

Hoyos, R. D., Rogers, H., & Szekely, M. (2016). Out of school and out of work: risk and opportunities for Latin
       America's ninis. World Bank.

Inter-American Development Bank. (2012). Room for development: Housing markets in Latin America and the
       Caribbean.

International Monetary Fund. (2015). Regional Economic Outlook. Western Hemisphere: Northern Springs
         Southern Chills.

Kessides, C. (2005). The Urban Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for Economic Growth and Poverty
       Reduction.

Kiunsi, R. B. (2013). A Review of Traffic Congestion in Dar es Salaam City from the Physical Planning
        Perspective. Journal of Sustainable Development, 6(2), 94-103

Klaufus, C. (2010). Watching the city grow: remittances and sprawl in intermediate Central American
       cities. Environment and Urbanization, 22(1), 125-137.

Levy, J. I., Buonocore, J. J., & Von Stackelberg, K. (2010). Evaluation of the public health impacts of traffic
        congestion: a health risk assessment. Environmental health, 9(65), 1-12.



                                                                                                            38
Li, H., Zhang, J., & Zhang, J. (2007). Effects of longevity and dependency rates on saving and growth: Evidence
         from a panel of cross countries. Journal of Development Economics, 84(1), 138-154.

Negroponte, Diana Villiers, Alma Caballero, and Consuelo Amat.Conversations with Experts on the Future of
       Central America: Summary Report. Brookings Institution, 2012.

Ng’Hily, Dickson. (December 31, 2013). How Dar Traffic Jams Cost 411bn/-annually. IPP Media.

Osborne, T., Pachon, M. C., & Araya, G. E. (2014). What drives the high price of road freight transport in Central
       America?. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (6844).

Pichardo-Muñiz, A., & Chavarría, M. O. (2012). Agglomeration Economies Versus Urban Diseconomies: The Case
       of the Greater Metropolitan Area (GMA) of Costa Rica. INTECH Open Access Publisher.

Prensa Libre. (2015, May 4th). 103 call centers operan en Centroamérica, 75 de estos en Guatemala. Retrieved 19
        May 2016, from http://www.prensalibre.com/economia/103-call-centers-operan-en-centroamerica-75-de-
        estos-en-guatemala

Proceso Digital. (2016, February 11th). Solo en enero surgieron unos 30 mil nuevos pobres en Honduras, según el
       Fosdeh. Retrieved 19 May 2016, from http://www.proceso.hn/nacionales/item/118705-solo-en-enero-
       surgieron-unos-30-mil-nuevos-pobres-en-honduras-segun-el-fosdeh.html

Shifter, M. (2012). The shifting landscape of Latin American regionalism. Current History, 111(742), 56.


UN Habitat Urban Data. (2016). Retrieved 19 May 2016, from http://urbandata.unhabitat.org/

UN World Food Programme (WFP) and the International Organization for Migration (OIM). (2015). Hunger
     Without Borders: The Hidden Links Between Food Insecurity, Violence and Migration in the Northern
     Triangle of Central America.

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2012). Transnational Organized Crime in Central America and the
       Caribbean: A Threat Assessment.

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2014). Global study on homicide 2013: trends, contexts, data.

United Nations. (2014). World Urbanization Prospects 2014. United Nations Publications.’
World Bank (2009). World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

UNEP. (2010). The Central Role of wastewater management in sustainable development.

World Bank (2010). Crime and Violence in Central America, Vol II. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                               39
World Bank (2011). Crime and Violence in Central America: A Development Challenge. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

World Bank. (2013). Planning, Connecting, and Financing Cities—Now: Priorities for City Leaders. World Bank
       Publications.

World Bank LCR Probabilistic Risk Assessment Program - CAPRA (P144982). WB Working Paper in preparation:
       “Gross Domestic Product Disaggregation Methodology and applications in Disaster Risk Management” by
       Blanchard, P; B. Blankespoor, J. Rivera-Fuentes, R. Gunasekera, O. Ishizawa and L.F. Jiménez-Salazar.

World Bank. (2015). Competitive Cities for Jobs and Growth: What, Who, and How. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

World Bank. (2015). Costa Rica. Systematic Country Diagnostic.

World Bank. (2015). El Salvador: Building on strengths for a new generation. Systematic Country Diagnostic.

World Bank. (2015). Honduras: Unlocking economic potential for greater opportunities. Systematic Country
      Diagnostic.

World Bank. (2015). Panama: Locking in success. Systematic Country Diagnostic

World Bank. (2016). Building Bridges in Guatemala. Systematic Country Diagnostic.

World Bank Development Indicators. (2016). World Bank Open Data. http://data.worldbank.org/




                                                                                                              40
CHAPTER 2: MANAGING CITIES AND AGGLOMERATIONS: STRENGTHENING
INSTITUTIONS TO LEVERAGE THE POTENTIAL OF CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES


TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. IMPROVING CITY MANAGEMENT IN AN INCREASINGLY URBAN CENTRAL AMERICA................... 43
2. THE CENTRAL ROLE OF MUNICIPALITIES IN CITY MANAGEMENT .............................................. 43
3. MANAGING AGGLOMERATIONS THROUGH INTER-MUNICIPAL COORDINATING MECHANISMS ... 47
4. MUNICIPAL FINANCES IN CENTRAL AMERICA ............................................................................ 53
5. PRIORITIES FOR LEVERAGING THE POTENTIAL OF CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES:
STRENGTHENING MUNICIPALITIES FOR EFFICIENT CITY MANAGEMENT ....................................... 59
6. REFERENCES .............................................................................................................................. 67


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Total revenue by level of government in CA as % of GDP, 2012 .............................................. 54
Figure 2. Total revenue per capita by level of government in US$ PPP, 2012........................................... 54
Figure 3. Total income of capital city municipalities in CA by source, 2013 ............................................ 58
Figure 4. Own income by source of capital city municipalities in CA, 2013 ............................................. 58
Figure 5. Total expenditures of capital city municipalities in CA by type, 2013 ....................................... 59


LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Territorial subdivisions in Central American countries and underlying framework .................... 44
Table 2. Service provision in the metropolitan area of capital cities in CA ............................................... 46
Table 3. Metropolitan arrangements and coordination in territorial planning ............................................ 48
Table 4. Inter-municipal coordination mechanisms in CA countries.......................................................... 51
Table 5. Local taxes of municipalities in CA.............................................................................................. 55
Table 6. Transfers to municipalities in CA ................................................................................................. 56


LIST OF BOXES
Box 1. COAMSS in El Salvador................................................................................................................. 50
Box 2. Interjurisdictional coordination in Colombia: Law of Territorial Ordering .................................... 53
Box 3. Performance-based programs: International experiences ................................................................ 62
Box 4. Municipal performace ranking in Guatemala .................................................................................. 63
Box 5. Metropolitan governance arrangements from around the world ..................................................... 65




                                                                                                                                            41
OVERVIEW

To harness the benefits and address the costs of urbanization, improving how cities are managed is
essential. Improved city management is critical to enhance the reach and quality of service delivery,
finance the investments required to accommodate an increasing urban population, and coordinate
infrastructure and service provision with territorial development plans. In Central America, the
central and municipal governments are the key institutions involved in managing cities. The ongoing
decentralization process in Central America has extended the responsibilities of municipalities, but
their ability to fulfill these increasing responsibilities is constrained by their limited institutional and
financial capacity. The central government has an important role in strengthening local institutions
through capacity building and financial incentives to enhance their performance in managing the
development of urban areas.

This chapter presents a diagnostic of the institutional and financial framework of municipalities and
identifies policy options for Central American countries to improve how cities are managed. Section
2 presents an overview of the institutional framework for city management in Central America.
Section 3 discusses current efforts of inter-municipal coordination in the region. Section 4 presents
an overview of the existing financial capacities of municipalities in the region. Lastly, section 5
identifies priorities for leveraging the potential of Central American cities through improved city
management.

Key messages
Central American countries can focus on the following key actions to improve city management and
ensure better investments in urban areas.

•   Empowering local governments, both institutionally and financially, is critical in order to
    enhance their performance in delivering key services and financing necessary investments for a
    growing urban population.

•   Inter-municipal cooperation mechanisms can be strengthened to offer adequate service delivery
    and territorial planning within agglomerations covering various local government jurisdictions.

•   Central and local governments can enhance coordination in areas where functional
    responsibilities intersect, particularly in spatial development and service delivery.




                                                                                                               42
    1. IMPROVING CITY MANAGEMENT IN AN INCREASINGLY URBAN CENTRAL AMERICA

1.       Improved management at the city level can help address some of Central America’s most
pressing challenges by making cities more prosperous and livable. Inequality, lack of social inclusion,
crime and violence, vulnerability to disasters and lack of opportunity continue to override the region’s
economic and social gains. While Central America has benefitted largely from urbanization, it has also been
subject to numerous urban diseconomies, most visible in terms of congestion, poor services provision, and
precarious housing. To tackle urbanization’s negative impacts and reap its intended benefits (as those
discussed in Chapter 1), management at the city level is key. Effective city management is contingent upon
strengthened municipalities and can go beyond the provision of basic services and infrastructure to also
shape the efficiency, sustainability and resilience of cities through territorial planning, capital investment,
and articulation of public policies at the local level. Through these actions, municipalities are better
positioned to make cities work in favor of existing residents or newly arriving urban residents.

2.        There is an ongoing process of decentralization throughout the region, but it can be further
strengthened. The level of decentralization differs across Central American (CA) countries, with
Nicaragua and Panama being the most and least decentralized countries, respectively. New and recent laws
have extended and better defined functions, responsibilities and resources at the subnational level, but
overall, their enactment has moved fairly slowly and has been confined mostly to basic services provision.
Full implementation of the decentralization process has been hindered mostly by the municipalities’
relatively weak institutional and financial capacities. Strengthening the decentralization process will allow
municipal governments to have a more active role in city management by assuming greater responsibilities
in spatial development, expanded service delivery, capital investments and revenue mobilization. This calls
for the active engagement of the Central Government, which will be key in supporting municipalities by
facilitating the mechanisms to build their planning and management capacities to enhance performance.

3.       In the Central American context, strengthening institutions for city management means
strengthening municipal governments’ capacities for territorial planning, financial management and
investing, improving the coordination with the central government, and developing inter-municipal
cooperation for efficient management of urban agglomerations. Municipalities are the focus of
improved city management. Strengthening their planning, financial and executing capacities will not only
enhance their performance in their current role of basic services providers, but will also prepare them to
assume greater urban functions, which will be informed by, and benefit from a local perspective. Municipal
governments can coordinate with Central Government policies, initiatives and operations to ensure coherent
development of urban areas, and at par with other municipal governments for efficient service delivery and
territorial planning.

    2. THE CENTRAL ROLE OF MUNICIPALITIES IN CITY MANAGEMENT

4.       Municipalities are the predominant form of sub-national government in Central America.
All countries in the region are unitary states. Power resides mainly in the central government, with only
some powers devolved to politically autonomous local governments, namely municipalities. Other
territorial subdivisions exist such as Provinces and Departments, but these are not administered by
autonomous governments, and act as deconcentrated extensions of the Central Government with no real



                                                                                                            43
executive powers. With the exception of specific autonomous regions in Nicaragua and Panama 26,
municipalities are the autonomous local administrations in the six Central American countries. The extent
of devolution of powers to municipalities varies from country to country, and it is more or less reflective of
when decentralization laws were adopted. Since the second half of the 1980s, Guatemala and Nicaragua,
two of the most decentralized countries, passed legislation granting greater autonomy to subnational
governments. Contrastingly, a decentralization law was recently approved in 2015 in Panama – the most
centralized country in the region. Table 1 summarizes the territorial subdivisions in each of the countries
and references the existing legal framework for decentralization.

   Table 1. Territorial Subdivisions in Central American Countries and Underlying Framework

                        Main Territorial subdivisions                        Underlying Legal Framework

                                                                       •   Constitution of the Republic of Costa Rica
                  •   The national territory is divided into
                                                                           (CRCR), Title XII – El Regimen Municipal
                      Provinces, Cantons and Districts (Art. 168
                      CRCR)                                            •   Municipal Code (Law 7794/1998)
 Costa Rica
                  •   7 Provinces, with no executive office            •   General Law on the Transfer of Powers from
                                                                           the Executive Government to the Municipalities
                  •   81 Cantons, with Municipal Governments
                                                                           (Law 8801/2010)


                  •   The Republic is divided into Departments
                                                                       •   Constitution of the Republic of El Salvador
                      (Art. 200 CRES), and these are further divided
                                                                           (CRES), Title VI, Chapter VI – Gobierno Local
                      into Municipalities (Art. 202 CRES)
                                                                       •   Municipal Code (Decree 274/1986)
                  •   Municipalities are autonomous economically,
 El Salvador          technically and administratively (Art. 203       •   Law of Development and Territorial Planning of
                      CRES)                                                the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador and
                                                                           Nearby Municipalities (Law 732-1993)
                  •   14 Departments further divided into 39
                      Districts                                        •   The decentralization process follows the
                                                                           National Decentralization Policy of 2007.
                  •   262 Municipalities


                  •   Municipalities act by delegation of the State    •   Constitution of the Republic of Guatemala
                      (Art. 134 CRG).                                      (CGR), Title V, Chapter VII - Regimen
                  •   The territory is divided into Departments, and       Municipal.
 Guatemala            these into Municipalities (Art. 224 CRG)         •   Municipal Code (Law 12-2002)
                  •   22 Departments                                   •   Preliminary Law of Regionalization (Law 70-
                  •   335 Municipalities                                   1986)

                  •   The national territory is divided into
                                                                       •   Constitution of the Republic of Honduras
                      Departments and these into autonomous
                                                                           (CRH), Title V, Chapter XI – Del Regimen
 Honduras             Municipalities administered by Corporations
                                                                           Departmental y Municipal
                      elected by the people (Art. 292 CRH)
                                                                       •   Law of Municipalities (Decree 134-1990)
                  •   78 Municipalities




  26 The North Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region (RACCN) and the South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region (RACCS)

are the two autonomous regions in Nicaragua. Panama has five semi-autonomous administrative units, organized as indigenous
comarcas (or territories), which include Emberá-Wounaan, Kuna Yala, Ngöbe-Buglé, Kuna de Madugandí and Kuna de Wargandí.

                                                                                                                         44
                     Main Territorial subdivisions                          Underlying Legal Framework

               •   The national territory is divided into
                   Departments, Autonomous Regions of the
                   Atlantic Coast and Municipalities (Art. 175
                   CRN)                                               •   Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua
               •   The Municipality is the basic unit of the              (CRN), Title XI Political-Administrative
 Nicaragua         political-administrative division of the country       Division
                   (Art. 176 CRN)                                     •   Law of Municipalities (Law 40/1988)
               •   15 Departments + 2 Autonomous Regions (No
                   executive government)
               •   153 Municipalities

               •   Municipalities are defined as "the fundamental
                   entity of the political-administrative division
                   of the State, with a self-government that is       •   Constitution of the Republic of Panama (CRP),
                   democratic and autonomous." (Art. 233 CRP).            Title VIII – Regimenes Municipales y
                                                                          Provinciales
               •   Provinces are essentially extensions of the
                   Central Government                                 •   Law 106/1973 on the Municipal Regime
               •   The provinces are divided into Districts           •   Law 2/1985 on the functions of provincial
 Panama            (Municipalities), and these are further divided        governors
                   into Corregimientos.                               •   Congress approved a new Decentralization Law
               •   10 Provinces + 3 Indigenous Comarcas at the            in 2009, but the President did not sign it (Law
                   level of provinces                                     37/2009).
               •   2 other smaller Indigenous Comarcas at the         •   A Decentralization Law was approved in 2015
                   level of Corregimiento                                 (amended Law 37/2009).
               •   77 Municipalities



5.      Decentralization policies are underway in the CA region, yet at varying rates. For a relatively
homogenous group of countries in terms of size, population and history, the region presents a variety of
approaches to, and degree of, decentralization and city management. Panama is by far the most centralized,
and Nicaragua the most decentralized. Newer laws (e.g. Panama) build on earlier examples and better define
subnational functions, responsibilities and resources. However, implementation of decentralization policies
has been consistently slow in the region and it has been confined primarily to basic services provision.

6.       Legal decentralization frameworks assign roles and responsibilities to municipalities, but
these are only partially implemented. All countries guarantee subnational policymaking in their
Constitutions, but the level of detail of these guarantees differs throughout the region. Specific laws,
commonly Municipal Codes, specify subnational responsibilities and designate municipalities as the
subnational institutions empowered to solve local problems. However, significant heterogeneity exists
throughout the region in terms of actual municipal competence. In practice, the role of municipalities is
limited, and central governments across the region are still responsible for some local service provision.
Table 2 below summarizes the roles and responsibilities for provision of municipal services in the
metropolitan areas of capital cities in CA. As illustrated, municipal governments in Nicaragua and
Guatemala have the broadest scope of responsibilities, while in Panama and Costa Rica, the central
government is in charge of most local service provision. The situation in El Salvador and Honduras falls
somewhere in between. Aside from San Salvador, no metropolitan entity is currently responsible for
coordination of service provision at the Metropolitan level.


                                                                                                                        45
                 Table 2. Service Provision in the Metropolitan Area of Capital Cities in CA


         Level        Costa Rica     El Salvador       Guatemala            Honduras         Nicaragua        Panama

                     -Cadaster
                     -Building       -Cadaster
                                                                                                          -Cadaster
                     Permits         -Water
                                                                                                          -Water Supply
                     -Water          Supply                                              -Water
                                                                        -Cadaster                         -Sanitation
                     Supply          -Sanitation                                         Supply
                                                      -Cadaster         -Transport                        -SWM
       Central       -Sanitation     -Local Roads                                        -Sanitation
                                                      -Public           (regulation)                      -Local Roads
     Government      -Local          -Drainage                                           -Public
                                                      Safety**          -Public                           -Drainage
                     Roads           -Transport                                          Safety
                                                                        Safety**                          -Transport
                     -Drainage       (regulation)
                     -Transport                                                                           -Public
                                     -Public
                                                                                                          Safety**
                     -Public         Safety
                     Safety**

                                     -Building
                                     Permits
     Metropolitan
                                     -Solid Waste
       Entity
                     -               Management                         -
                                     (disposal)       -                                  -                -

                                                      -Building
                                                                        -Building
                                                      Permits
                                                                        Permits          -Cadaster
                                     - SWM            -Water
                     -SWM                                               - Water          -Building
                                     (collection)     Supply
                     -Local                                             Supply           Permits          -Building
                                     -Local           -Sanitation
       Local         Roads*                                             -SWM             -Solid Waste     Permits
                                     Roads*           -SWM
     Government      -Drainage*                                         -Local Roads     Management       -Public
                                     -Drainage*       -Local Roads
                     -Public                                            -Drainage        -Local Roads     Safety**
                                     -Transport       -Drainage
                     Safety**                                           -Transport       -Drainage
                                                      -Transport
                                                                        -Public          -Transport
                                                      -Public
                                                                        Safety**
                                                      Safety**

*Secondary function. **Shared public safety responsibility.

7.     Roles and responsibilities for municipal service provision vary substantially across countries
and sectors. Some examples to highlight include:

     • Water and sanitation – This sector shows the largest inconsistency between what is stated in the
       respective laws and what occurs in practice. Although all countries in the region – with the exception
       of El Salvador – legally assign water and sanitation provision to Municipalities; only Guatemala City
       provides this service, through its company EMPAGUA. 27 Despite the legal provisions in place,
       national agencies are the actual providers of water and sanitation services 28.



   27 EMPAGUA was created in 1972 tasked with the provision of water; in 1984 sanitation and drainage were added to its mandate.

It is owned by the Municipality of Guatemala. EMPAGUA also serves other municipalities in the metropolitan area
28
     The service provision was passed to municipalities in Honduras in 2015.

                                                                                                                            46
 • Solid waste management – In most countries, municipalities provide solid waste management
   services, either directly, or through private concessions. The exception is Panama, where the service
   is centralized, and currently provided by the Authority of Urban and Household Sanitation (AAUD).
   In the case of San Salvador, solid waste management services are provided through a mechanism of
   metropolitan coordination. Through a public-private partnership, COAMSS (Consejo de Alcaldes
   del Área Metropolitana de San Salvador) and private sector investors created the company MIDES
   (Manejo Integral de Desechos Sólidos) to offer integrated solid waste management services to a total
   of 87 municipalities.
 • Roads – Responsibility for the construction and maintenance of roads varies considerably across the
   region. For instance, municipalities in Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua are in charge of this
   service, while national-level agencies oversee inter-urban connectivity networks. On the other hand,
   in Costa Rica and El Salvador it is a shared responsibility between the central and local government.
   Similar to many other local services in Panama, the central government is also responsible for
   management of urban roads.
 • Public safety – National police forces are the main providers of public safety in all Central American
   countries. However, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Panama are complementing national
   forces with police departments managed at the municipal level. In these cases, a clear division of
   responsibilities and adequate coordination among both levels of police are mostly lacking.

8.       Municipal governments have a central role to play in territorial planning in Central America.
Although many municipalities do not have the technical capacity to prepare territorial development plans,
they play a key role in their implementation as the responsibility of issuing building permits lies with them
(except in Costa Rica). Territorial planning is an area where coordination between Central and Local
Governments is critical for sustainable urbanization to take place in Central America. Given the limited
capacity at the local level, territorial development plans are often developed by central agencies, which
results in limited appropriation of these instruments at the local level. This diminishes the potential impact
of these plans, not only through partial implementation of the territorial control provision they contain, but
also through a lack of coordination between spatial development and capital investment planning. Central
America offers examples of inter-municipal cooperation mechanisms which can contribute to solving this
challenge by providing the adequate geographical scale to build local capacity for territorial planning. The
following sections discusses the current situation and opportunities for such arrangements.

    3. MANAGING AGGLOMERATIONS THROUGH INTER-MUNICIPAL COORDINATING
       MECHANISMS

9.       Local governments need to seize opportunities for coordinated planning and service delivery
across agglomerations. Chapter 1 showed how the growth of capital and secondary cities is increasingly
extending over formally defined municipal boundaries. As a result, cities are becoming more economically
interdependent with other surrounding urban and rural areas, constituting agglomerations or metropolitan
areas. While these areas can benefit from economies of scale in service provision, they are also more
vulnerable to negative spill overs. For example, clogged storm drains in one area can cause flooding in
another, or water pollution in an area can bring health risks in another. This pattern of growth and greater
interconnectedness among cities calls for development at the metropolitan scale, which can be achieved by
establishing stronger inter-municipal coordination and cooperation arrangements.

                                                                                                           47
10.     Inter-municipal coordination increases overall productivity. As economically dynamic regions
outgrow their local political boundaries, each municipality usually continues delivering services within
their own jurisdictions only, even though most urban services spill over the municipal boundaries. Inter-
municipal coordination is critical for adequate service delivery, managing growth, and ensuring
environmental sustainability across municipal boundaries. Moreover, the governance structure of
agglomerations that include multiple municipalities is known to have a direct impact on overall
productivity. OECD work shows, for instance, that a metropolitan area of any given size with twice the
number of municipalities is associated with around 6 percent lower productivity rates, but the existence of
an effective governance mechanism at the metropolitan level can cut this effect by almost half 29. In Central
America, where agglomerations span multiple municipal administrative boundaries, several scales of
metropolitan regions are formed.

11.       However, Central American agglomerations have few supra-municipal coordinating
institutions. There are only a few instances, where service provision has been decentralized, that formal
coordinating mechanisms have been established between neighboring local governments. In general,
metropolitan level dialogue and collaborative efforts among municipalities are limited in most of the capital
regions. One exception, and the strongest example of metropolitan coordination in CA, is the Council of
Mayors of the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador (COAMSS), a formal coordination mechanism entrusted
with urban planning responsibilities (described in detail in Box 1). Tegucigalpa is a unique case, given that
the metropolitan area (comprised of two cities) coincides with the area of the Central District Municipality,
facilitating metropolitan-wide coordination. Table 3 briefly describes the metropolitan arrangements of
capital regions and the extent to which metropolitan coordination exists, particularly in the form of
territorial plans. Although certain territorial plans were conceived by some metropolitan areas, the lack of
strategic coordination between investment and territorial planning in key sectors, has prevented their
successful execution.

             Table 3. Metropolitan Arrangements and Coordination in Territorial Planning

   Capital
                             Metropolitan Arrangement                          Examples of Territorial Plans
    City
                The Metropolitan Area of Guatemala (AMG) comprises 3
                large municipalities, each with more than one million
                people, and 14 other small municipalities. Despite being
                an area with intensive daily commuting to, and from,          In 2009, the Municipality of
                Guatemala City, there is very limited coordination among      Guatemala City launched a Land
 Guatemala      the 17 municipalities. The exception is the                   Management Plan (Plan de
 City           Mancomunidad del Sur Villanueva formed by six                 Ordenamiento Territorial, or
                municipalities in the metro area. Further metropolitan-       “POT”), but this had a limited
                level dialogue might be triggered in the future around (i)    metropolitan perspective.
                heavy transit going through the core city; (b) pollution of
                the river; and (iii) the potential extension of an existing
                Bus Rapid Transit system beyond Guatemala City.
                                                                              Although municipalities in the
                Metropolitan areas are defined at two scales: (i) The Zona
                                                                              Managua’s Metro Region have
 Managua        Metropolitana de Managua (ZMM) comprised of seven
                                                                              achieved some progress in territorial
                municipalities, including Managua, Ciudad Sandino,
                                                                              development, there are no strategic

  29 OECD (2015), The Metropolitan Century, Understanding Urbanization and its Consequences, Paris: OECD Publishing,

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264228733-en

                                                                                                                  48
      Capital
                                Metropolitan Arrangement                             Examples of Territorial Plans
       City
                  Tipitapa and Mateare 30; and (ii) the Región                      guidelines and concrete land
                  Metropolitana de Managua (RMM), covering thirty local             management instruments to carry out
                  authorities in the departments of Managua, Granada,               projects at a supra-municipal level. 31
                  Masaya and Carazo (an area accounting for about 40% of            Currently, there is no articulation
                  Nicaragua’s population). Inter-municipal dialogue is              between existing territorial
                  mainly in conjunction with a weekly meeting in Managua            development plans such as the
                  with all the mayors in the country.                               Municipal Plan for Territorial
                                                                                    Development and Managua’s Master
                                                                                    Plan (Plan Regulador).
                                                                                    A territorial Metropolitan Plan was
                  The Panama City Metropolitan Area (Area Metropolitana             developed in 2012 by the Ministry of
 Panama           del Pacífico) contains four municipalities (Panama City,          Housing and Territorial Planning
 City             San Miguelito, Arraigan and La Chorrera), which                   (MIVIOT), but has had very limited
                  represent close to 40% of the population in the country.
                                                                                    developmental impact to date. 32
                                                                                    The Central District elaborated a
                                                                                    Municipal Development and
                  The Central District of Tegucigalpa, containing                   Territorial Plan (Plan de Desarrollo
                  Tegucigalpa and its neighboring city Comayaguela,                 Municipal y Ordenamiento
                  represents the metro area of the capital city. It is by far       Territorial, PDMOT), approved in
                  the largest among the municipalities in Honduras, at              2014. The plan was developed in
 Tegucigalpa      almost eight times the size of the average municipality in        consultation with public, private, and
                  the country. The metro area is confined to the Central            civil society stakeholders. However,
                  District administration (with two cities), thereby reducing       no mechanisms have been put in
                  the problem of coordination compared to metro areas with          place to ensure the plan’s
                  many municipalities.                                              implementation nor to guide the
                                                                                    metro area’s urban development. 33
                  Fourteen municipalities make up the Metropolitan Area             The “Municipal Plan for Territorial
 San              of San Salvador. They are organized through an                    Planning of the City of San
 Salvador         autonomous coordinating entity, COAMSS (explained in              Salvador” was recently approved in
                  detail in Box 1).                                                 2015.
                  Three scales of metropolitan areas exist: (i) four main
                                                                                    A “Territorial Plan GAM 2013-
                  municipalities considered local metropolitan areas (San
                                                                                    2030” was prepared in 2013 but was
                  Jose, Alajuela, Heredia and Cartago); (ii) the Area
 San Jose                                                                           not formally approved by the
                  Metropolitana de San Jose (14 municipalities); and (iii)
                                                                                    Institute of Housing and Urbanism
                  the Gran Area Metropolitans (GAM), or Valle Central (31
                                                                                    (INVU).
                  municipalities).




 30  A “Plan de Desarrollo Urbano de la Capital”, covering parts of the ZMM, is under development with support of the Emerging
and Sustainable Cities Initiative of the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB).
  31 IADB. (2014) “Plan de Acción: Managua Sostenible.”
  32 Territorial scenarios were recently developed for Panama City and its neighboring areas with support of the Emerging and

Sustainable Cities Initiative of the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB).
  33 IADB. (2016). “Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela: Capital Sostenible, Segura y Abierta al Público.”



                                                                                                                           49
   BOX 2. COAMSS IN EL SALVADOR

   The Consejo de Alcaldes del Área Metropolitana de San Salvador (COAMSS) is an autonomous
   institution established in July 1987. Its objective is to fuel and facilitate inclusive social, economic
   and territorial development of the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador to improve the quality of life
   of its inhabitants. The area is composed of 14 municipalities with a population in 2012 of 2.2 million,
   36% of the population in El Salvador at the time. The area is 610 km2 (about 3% of the national
   territory); the urban (built up) area is about 175 km2 (29%). Although a large part of the metropolitan
   area is rural land, 97% of the population is considered urban. The GDP of the area is about a third of
   the national GDP.
   This institutional arrangement was born out of the earthquake of 1986, and from the realization that
   the area had become a metropolis whose problems could not be tackled by the various local
   governments independently, hence the need for a coordinated and united reconstruction approach for
   the area.
   The mission of COAMSS is “To be a collegial body that formulates, regulates, coordinates and leads
   the policies and programs that allow for the integral development of the territory and the inhabitants
   of the metropolitan area of San Salvador.”
   The initial solution was for COAMSS to create in 1988 the Oficina de Planificación del Area
   Metropolitana de San Salvador (OPAMSS), a technical advisory entity charged with investigating,
   analyzing, and proposing solutions to the urban development in the area. OPAMSS also functions as
   an executive secretariat of the Consejo. In 1994, COAMSS reformed the statutes of OPAMSS
   making it a separate legal entity, an administratively and financially autonomous municipal
   institution. COAMSS appoints the Executive Director of OPAMSS, and its administration is
   overseen by the General Coordinator and Executive Committee of COAMSS. OPAMSS is funded
   by municipal contributions, user charges for services they provide in the metro area, and by project
   implementation resources from national and international cooperation agencies.
   With the approval of Law 732/1993* the OPAMSS was also charged with regulating urban land use
   and approving building permits in the area. In time, the COAMSS has also served as the responsible
   coordination mechanism for various projects in the area, most notably on public safety, and solid
   waste management. In 2015 a Consejo de Desarrollo Metropolitano (CODEMET) was established
   within the COAMSS framework to propose public investment projects for metropolitan
   development, and be the entity focused on collaboration with the central government.
   * La Ley de Desarrollo y Ordenamiento Territorial del Área Metropolitana de San Salvador y de los Municipios Aledaños,
   with related regulations issued in 1995.

   Source: www.opamss.org.sv



12.     Municipalities in CA are increasingly organizing, and establishing mechanisms for inter-
municipal coordination. The most notable forms of coordination and cooperation among municipalities
are Mancomunidades (legal entities formed by member local governments) and associations of mayors or
local governments (e.g. based on legal agreements known as Convenios). These mechanisms are being

                                                                                                                            50
established in all the countries to various extent, including in some cross-border settings. They are a
reflection of current municipal efforts to strengthen decentralization as municipalities lack sufficient
capacities to assume some responsibilities alone. The use of such voluntary arrangements in the respective
country is summarized in Table 4. See Box 2 to learn about Colombia’s efforts in interjurisdictional
coordination within agglomerations.

          Table 4. Inter-Municipal Coordination Mechanisms in Central American Countries

 Country            Description

                    Mancomunidades, as separate inter-municipal legal entities, have not been set up in
 Costa Rica         Costa Rica to date. Instead, Convenios are sometimes established for the purpose of
                    metropolitan level coordination.

                    For over twenty years, the country has worked in forging inter-municipal arrangements,
                    referred to as micro-regions, Mancomunidades or associations of municipalities. About
 El Salvador        90% of the country’s municipalities are members of one or more association. Currently,
                    about 50 such entities exist, with memberships ranging from 2 to 25 municipalities for
                    each.

                    Approximately 25 Mancomunidades de Municipios and local associations of
                    municipalities exist in Guatemala. 34 Some of them focus on one specific function such
                    as solid waste management or joint training programs, while others have prepared
 Guatemala
                    strategic plans supported by the EU. Others function as political alliances for joint
                    proposals to the central government. About 40% of the municipalities in the country are
                    members of one or more such arrangement.

                    The national government as well as the National Association of Municipalities
                    (AMHON) in Honduras have for many years promoted the formation and strengthening
                    of Mancomunidades (or micro-regions) as a means of increasing the administrative
 Honduras
                    capacity of the smaller municipalities in the country. As per the Municipal Law, by
                    municipal council vote of two thirds, the municipalities can form associations for
                    territorial or sectoral reasons, or for the purpose of rendering services.

                    Inter-municipal dialogue in Nicaragua is mainly in conjunction with a weekly meeting
                    in Managua attended by all the mayors in the country. These meetings are chaired by
 Nicaragua          the president of the Instituto Nicaragüense de Fomento Municipal (INIFOM). Within
                    departments, inter-municipal interaction tends to be mainly along party lines. However,
                    a few subject-specific coordination initiatives exist.

                    Only a few small Mancomunidades exist at present, mainly for coordination of solid
                    waste disposal. More inter-municipal cooperative initiatives may emerge in coming
 Panama             years since the municipalities will be able to implement more investments based on
                    significant property tax funds being distributed to the municipalities by the central
                    government as of 2016.
13.       These inter-municipal coordinating structures are a good starting point, but they can be

  34 Both forms are legal entities as stipulated in the Código Municipal. In addition, a couple of cases exist of “empresa municipal

de tipo asociativa”. For example, EMAPET a water and wastewater company serving the two municipalities Flores and San Benito
in northern Guatemala since 1997.

                                                                                                                                51
strengthened and applied more broadly in the Central American countries. A municipality’s
association to a Mancomunidad, or Convenio, alone, is not sufficient. It needs to actively use the structure
to foster effective coordination among the member municipalities on critical subjects. Stronger institutional
platforms (e.g. the staffing of a secretariat or administrative unit) and financial resources are needed in most
cases for these coordinating entities to reach their maximum potential (see Box 1 on San Salvador as a good
example). In some cases, and for specific sectors, a separate metropolitan authority may be considered a
stronger arrangement (see Box 5). Taking full advantage of coordination and cooperation efforts among
local governments will help municipalities achieve four important objectives: (i) seize economies of scale,
(ii) address negative spill-overs, (iii) address equity concerns, and (iv) become stronger by acting jointly.
Below is a brief explanation of these objectives, and a few examples of existing Mancomunidades and
existing supra-municipal institutions working toward their achievement.
 • Seize opportunities for economies of scale, to save on costs. Examples include, solid waste disposal
   to one (or a few) sites in the area and integrated water and sanitation networks (provided the various
   urban areas are close enough). The “Federacion Metropolitana de Municipalidades” (FEMETROM)
   in Costa Rica, formed in 2004 by 12 municipalities in the Metropolitan Area of San Jose, address
   their solid waste management jointly. The “Región Metropolitana de Managua” (RMM), an informal
   association of fourteen municipalities, has also come together to jointly address their solid waste
   management. A third regional example of cooperation among local governments is the
   Mancomunidad del Sur Villanueva, formed in 2013 by six suburban municipalities south of
   Guatemala City. This mancomunidad conducts joint initiatives and addresses a variety of subjects
   through studies and other preparatory work, including a potential joint landfill, water resource
   management, transport studies, and providing land for a local university, among others.
 • To address spill-overs (externalities). Such case occurs when activities in one local jurisdiction have
   negative or positive impacts in neighboring local jurisdictions, and raises a question of “fairness.”
   For instance, air and water pollution and flooding tend to disregard jurisdictional boundaries.
   Similarly, tourism attractions may exist in one jurisdiction while accommodations are mainly located
   in another. The “Asociación de Municipios de la Subcuenca del Lago de Managua (AMUSCLAM)”,
   an alliance of the municipalities of Managua (three districts), Crucero, Concepción, Tecuantepec and
   Nindiri are focused on water and other environmental issues south of Lake Managua.
 • To address equity concerns. Large differences may exist in the tax base among the local jurisdictions,
   creating significant differences in the service provision. People may live (and pay local taxes) in one
   city, but work and spend most of their time in another, using services they do not pay for. Such
   situations may raise questions of “compensation”.
 • To become stronger by acting jointly. This may include pooling of funds for a facility or equipment
   for shared use, jointly attracting investments or major events to the area (rather than locally
   competing for them among each other), and carrying out joint procurement to achieve better price
   and lower transaction costs.




                                                                                                             52
      BOX 3. INTERJURISDICTIONAL COORDINATION IN COLOMBIA: LAW OF
      TERRITORIAL ORDERING

      International experience indicates that national governments are able to reduce coordination costs by
      offering municipalities incentives for interjurisdictional coordination in metropolitan areas.
      Colombia is one example of a country that introduced instruments for coordination within a context
      of decentralization. Similarly to the majority of Central American countries, decentralization in
      Colombia was consolidated under the national constitution, but the process was lacking a framework
      for interjurisdictional coordination – a tool to strengthen municipal capacity and to drive projects
      that cross boundaries.
      After more than 20 years of debate to create integrated approaches to land use management and
      provision of infrastructure for cities that extended beyond their municipal borders, Colombia enacted
      the Law 1454 of 2011 (Ley Orgánica de Ordenamiento Territorial, LOOT for its acronym in
      Spanish). The law provides the legal, administrative and financial framework for coordinating spatial
      units across the country. In a country as decentralized as Colombia – with more than 1,000 municipal
      governments having identical responsibilities – appropriate incentives for inter-municipal
      coordination become essential to avoid forgoing the benefits from economies of scale and minimize
      costs from urbanization.
      The new law reinforces municipal authority over local projects and creates commissions to
      collaborate on territorial planning issues. It creates various schemes for voluntary territorial
      association (esquemas asociativos territoriales) for metropolitan areas, allowing municipalities to
      work together in joint projects and to create spaces for voluntary, collaborative interjurisdictional
      arrangements.
      Source: Colombia Urbanization Review: Amplifying the Gains from the Urban Transition


      4. MUNICIPAL FINANCES IN CENTRAL AMERICA

14.       The financing of municipalities in CA reflects the overall decentralization scenario in the
respective countries. Figure 1 presents Local Governments’ and Central Government revenues35 as % of
GDP in the six countries. The weight of Local Government revenues, both in terms of % of GDP and as %
of total government revenues, varies significantly between the countries, with Panama and Costa Rica being
the most centralized countries, and Guatemala and Nicaragua the most decentralized. In 2012, revenues of
municipalities in Panama represented the smallest percentage, both in terms of % of GDP (0.5%), and in
comparison to the Central Government revenues (municipal revenues represented around 2% of total
government revenues). Nicaragua is the country in which Municipal revenues are the most significant,
representing around 4% of GDP and 20% of GDP.




 35   Local Government revenues presented here include both own-source revenues and transfers.

                                                                                                              53
                 Figure 1. Total Revenue by Level of Government in CA as % of GDP, 2012




               Source: Based on data from the countries’ Central Banks and Ministries of Finance

15.      Although the financial weight of municipalities is significant, their resources remain limited
in absolute terms. The wide range that can be observed in CA, in terms of the share of total government
revenues assigned to the municipalities, mirrors the diversity both within Latin America and across the
World. However, all countries in Central America have relatively low level of public spending, with
Guatemala being the country with the lowest percentage of public expenditure as % of GDP. As a result, in
spite of receiving a significant share of public revenues in some of the countries, the revenues per capita of
CA municipalities are uniformly low. Figure 2 presents total revenues per capita by level of government.
In 2012, average Local Government revenues per capita ranged from US$ 90 in Panama to US$ 185 in
Guatemala.
            Figure 2. Total Revenue per Capita by Level of Government in US$ PPP 36, 2012




Source: Based on data from countries’ Central Banks and Ministries of Finance, and the World Bank


 36   PPP = purchasing power parity

                                                                                                           54
16.     The allocation of tax revenues between central governments and municipalities varies
significantly within the countries. Municipalities with the most limited revenues are in countries where
the central government collects and keeps the property tax, as in the cases of Costa Rica and Panama.
However, the situation in Panama is changing following the enactment of the 2015 decentralization law
which provides for the creation of a decentralization fund, financed by the revenues from the property tax,
and directed to the financing of municipal investments. Table 5 summarizes the taxes allocated to
municipalities in the six countries.
                              Table 5. Local Taxes of Municipalities in CA

                        Main Locally Collected Taxes and Fees                    Centrally Collected Taxes

                 • Business patents (Art. 79 Municipal Law 7.794/1998).
                 • For the Municipality of San José the National Tax
                   Directorate (DGT) has transferred the collection of the
                                                                                • Property tax is collected by
                   property tax.
 Costa Rica                                                                       the Central Government DGT
                 • Municipalities can collect fees for public lighting, solid     (Law 7.509/1995).
                   waste management, park maintenance, police services
                   and other services it deems necessary (Art. 74
                   Municipal Law 7.794/1998).
                 • Municipalities can collect taxes on local businesses and
                   property (Art. 125 Law 86/1991)

 El Salvador     • Municipalities can collect fees on public services such
                   as public lighting, solid waste management, park
                   maintenance, paving of public roads, and markets,
                   among others (Art. 130 Law 86/1991).
                                                                                • The Central Government
                                                                                  collects the property tax
                 •   Municipalities collect an annual tax from citizens
                                                                                  (IUSI) through the Tax
                     based on their income for maintenance of local
                                                                                  Administration
 Guatemala           infrastructure (Boleto de Ornato, Law 121/1996), as
                                                                                  Superintendence (SAT), but
                     well as taxes on economic activities (Municipality-
                                                                                  directly transfers most of the
                     specific regulation).
                                                                                  collection to municipal
                                                                                  governments (Law 15/1998).
                 • Taxes are: property tax, personal income tax, tax on
                   economic activities, tax on extraction or exploitation of
                   mineral resources, and tax on cattle (Art. 75 Law
 Honduras
                   134/1990).
                 • Fees on municipal services; use of public property and
                   administration fees (Art. 84 Law 134/1990).
                 • Property tax (Decree 3/1995).
                 • In Managua there is a tax on economic activities and a
                   patent register tax (Decree 10/1991).
 Nicaragua
                 • There are fees and rights for municipal services
                   (including electricity, telephone, solid waste.
                   management), cattle, markets and use of municipal
                   property (Decree 10/1991).

                                                                                                                   55
                       Main Locally Collected Taxes and Fees                            Centrally Collected Taxes

                 •   Taxes on economic activities, the sale of alcoholic
                     beverages and butchering.                                      •     Property tax is collected by
                                                                                          the Central Government
 Panama          •   Fees and rights on the use of municipal goods and                    through the National
                     services; and rights on public spectacles and extraction             Authority for Public Income
                     of sands, other non-metallic mining, wood and                        (ANIP).
                     exploitation of forests (Law 106/1973).

17.      Most Central American countries have been using formula-based transfers as the main
source of financing for their municipalities. The most common design of transfer is one where
municipalities receive a percentage of the central government budget. In El Salvador and Guatemala, the
transfer is based on the total current income, while in Honduras and Nicaragua it is based on the tax income
only. For many of these recurrent transfers, minimum requirements exist for their use on capital (not
current) expenditures. These capital expenditure requirements can be up to 90%. No central approvals are
required for the projects for which the transfers are used. A second transfer design is based on agreements
between the central government and municipalities. This is mainly the case in Costa Rica, although other
countries also have such transfer mechanisms to complement the main recurrent transfers. Finally, a third
design is recurrent capital transfers. The best example is Panama, where a set amount is transferred based
on approved projects. This is also the case in Costa Rica with a complementary transfer for roads based on
fuel taxes.

                               Table 6. Transfers to Municipalities in CA

                              Current/Mixed Transfers                           Conditional Capital Transfers

                 •   The Law contemplates transfers to municipalities           •       7.5% of the Tax on Fuels is
                     based on agreements with the central government on                 transferred to Municipalities
  Costa Rica         transferred competencies (Law 8.801/2010)                          for building and maintenance
                 •   There are no unconditional transfers to                            of local roads (Law
                     municipalities                                                     8.114/2001)

                 •   The Central Government transfers 8% of its current
                     net income to the Municipal Economic and Social
                     Development Fund (FODES) (Art. 1 Law 74/1988).
                     FODES is managed by the Salvadorian Institute for
  El Salvador        Municipal Development (ISDEM)
                 •   The FODES in turn transfers funds to municipalities.
                     80% of funds must finance infrastructure, and 20%
                     for current expenditures.
                 •   The central Government must transfer 10% of its
                                                                                •       The Central Government
                     operating budget to Municipalities. At least 90% of
                                                                                        collects a tax on vehicles, and
                     the transfer must be invested on programs in
                                                                                        transfers a share to
                     education, preventive health, infrastructure and
  Guatemala                                                                             municipalities. This transfer
                     public services; the remaining up to 10% can finance
                                                                                        must be spent on road
                     functioning expenditures (Art. 257 CRG)
                                                                                        maintenance and construction
                 •   1.5% of VAT collection must be transferred to                      (Law 70/94)
                     Municipalities. Up to 25% can finance functioning

                                                                                                                          56
                                       Current/Mixed Transfers                                Conditional Capital Transfers
                            expenditures, with the remaining 75% for
                            investment (Law 27/1992)
                       •    Various other Laws include current transfers to
                            municipalities including on gasoline, agricultural
                            products and liquor (see Law 6/1991)
                       •    The Central Government must transfer 5% of total
                            tax income to Municipalities. Of this, up to 15% can
      Honduras
                            be spent on current expenditures, while 85% or more
                            should be spent on investment (Art. 91 Law 134/90)
                       •    The Central Government must transfer a percentage
                            of tax income to Municipalities, starting with 4% in
                            2004 and increasing 0.5 percentage points a year up
                            to 10% in 2010 (Art. 5 Law 466/2003)

  Nicaragua            •    Municipalities must spend most transfers on
                            investment, with the required percentage changing
                            according to a government classification of
                            municipalities by total income. For the top category
                            of municipalities (of four) it is 90%, and for the
                            bottom category 60%. (Art. 12 Law 466/2003)
                                                                                             •    The National Program for
                                                                                                  Local Development
                                                                                                  (PRONADEL) makes yearly
                                                                                                  fixed-amount capital transfers
      Panama
                                                                                                  to Municipalities and
                                                                                                  Communal Juntas based on
                                                                                                  specific pre-approved projects
                                                                                                  (Law 84/2012)


18.      The largest source of financing for capital cities 37 is their own-source income, consisting
mostly of local taxes and fees. This is true both for municipalities that are relatively strong and relatively
weak financially speaking (see Figure 3). The relative weight of taxes and fees in local income varies
significantly between capital cities. Taxes –mainly property taxes– are the predominant source of own
income in San Jose, Tegucigalpa, Managua and Panama City, while local service fees generate most income
in San Salvador and Guatemala City (see Figure 4). However, in Costa Rica tax revenues are kept by the
central government. This was also the case in Panama until 2016 when property tax revenues are scheduled
to be transferred to the municipalities (to be used for capital investments only). Other common taxes
collected at the municipal level in all Central American countries include business taxes, patents, and a
percentage of sales (turnover tax). Transfers represent more than 10% of total income only in Managua
and Guatemala City. Debt is a notable source in San Salvador and Nicaragua.




 37   The rest of the discussion on financing is done only for the capital cities due to data availability.

                                                                                                                                   57
            Figure 3. Total Income of Capital City Municipalities in CA by Source, 2013




        Source: Based on budgets of capital city municipalities


             Figure 4. Own Income by Source of Capital City Municipalities in CA, 2013




        Source: Based on budgets of capital city municipalities

19.     Basic local government functioning is the largest expenditure item in CA capital cities. This
is common across Latin America. Resources allocated to government day-to-day operations are particularly
large in San Jose and Guatemala City, and notably low in Managua, leaving significant space for other
types of expenditures. Figure 5 shows the breakdown of expenditures in the capital cities for the year 2013
(2014 for Panama City). The second largest item is capital expenditures, which is a notably large part of


                                                                                                        58
the budgets in Managua and Panama, while essentially nonexistent in San Jose. San Salvador spends the
most on debt service and transfers. San Jose is the only capital city that had no debt service expenditures in
its budget in 2013 (see Figure 5).

            Figure 5. Total Expenditures of Capital City Municipalities in CA by Type, 2013




          Source: Based on budgets of capital city municipalities

20.      Municipalities can contract debt but usually only after approval or rating by a central entity.
All capital cities have contracted short-term debt in recent years to various degree (see Figure 3).38 Except
in Costa Rica, municipal debt needs to be approved or rated by a Central Government controlled
mechanism. This gives the central government some fiscal and political control over the public indebtedness
of local governments. In most countries there are also restrictions on how much a municipality can borrow.
Limits are set in terms of: (a) length (loan maturity); usually the term in office of local officials; or (b)
amount; by capacity to pay, as a ratio of the municipal income. The more restrictive designs limit the total
amount of debt by operating income, or short-term necessities, while the less restrictive ones limit the
amount of budgeted income that can be used for debt service payments. In Costa Rica and Panama there
are no formal specific limits.

     5. PRIORITIES FOR LEVERAGING THE POTENTIAL OF CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES:
        STRENGTHENING MUNICIPALITIES FOR EFFICIENT CITY MANAGEMENT

Strengthening municipalities institutionally and financially

21.     The central government has an important role to play in enhancing local capacity. Capacity
building at the local level is a mutual responsibility between the central and local governments (particularly
in unitary states as in CA). As mentioned above, continued urbanization puts additional stress on local

  38 However, in 2013 San José did not reflect any debt service expenditures in its financial statement. Panama City has only limited

long term debt.

                                                                                                                                 59
capacity, and further decentralization is often constrained by the capacity of local governments to assume
new responsibilities. It is frequently most cost-effective to arrange capacity building programs on a national
basis, rather than in a piecemeal fashion by each municipality. However, it is not only the number and
skills of local staff (as important as this may be) that determine the institutional strengths/weaknesses of a
local government, but its performance is also a function of the policies applied, the manual and automated
processes and workflows used, and related financial allocations. In conjunction with capacity building
initiatives, it is therefore often opportune to also revisit policies and procedures, introduce reasonable
standards for service performance, and, to the extent possible, create concrete incentives for good
performance.

22.       The Central American countries need to strengthen their local capacity building by
enhancing their technological, human and financial capabilities. All Central American countries have
central agencies and/or local government associations providing technical assistance and capacity building
services to the municipalities in the respective country (See Box 2 for the approach to strengthening
municipalities in Guatemala through a municipal performance ranking). This is a critical role during and
following any governance change such as implementation of decentralization reform. Therefore, it is
recommended that central authorities pay further attention to strengthening and supporting these entities
and ensure that they can effectively execute their important functions. At the municipal level, it is essential
that adequate capacity – both in terms of human resources and financial capacity – exists to assume new
responsibilities. This remains a pre-requisite to make the devolution work without detriments (at least early
on) for residents and other beneficiaries. 39 This may involve realignment of the number of staff and their
skill sets, introduction of new procedures and computer applications, and related training. All Central
American countries have central agencies and local government associations providing assistance and
training to municipalities, functions which will be critical to ensure effective continued decentralization in
light of the challenges that municipalities already face. Continuous improvement programs at the municipal
level are also needed, for example as applied for some time in the municipality of Cartago in Costa Rica,
in COAMSS (San Salvador), and lately by Panama City in its attempt to become ISO certified.

23.      Central American municipalities need to be financially strengthened to play a more active
role in urban development. Municipal finance largely affects the ability of local governments to fulfill
their obligations. The financial autonomy of municipalities in Central America has decreased, while the
dependence on transfers from national governments has increased. While the scope of the functions
performed by municipalities has grown over time, the devolution of spending responsibilities has not been
matched by increased revenues. In the absence of adequate sources of revenues, the increase in
responsibilities has given rise to unfunded mandates. Municipal expenditure has not been increasing in
parallel with own-source revenues, leading to a deepening of the vertical imbalance. Decentralization of
functions in the region can be accompanied by a larger budgetary role in order for municipalities to build
on urban investments.

24.    Central American countries can build on existing transfer mechanisms to increase the
municipalities’ capacity to finance required investments while strengthening administrative and
technical capacity as well as accountability. As mentioned in the previous section, most Central American

  39 However, it is important not to make this an “excuse” for delaying decentralization indefinitely. Rather, concrete actions –

with support of the central government - should be taken to increase the local capacity, and enable the local authorities to retain
trained staff, maintain new processes, and apply capacity development continuously.

                                                                                                                               60
countries are using formula-based transfers as the main source of financial support for their municipalities.
This type of transparent and predictable inter-governmental fiscal transfer mechanisms are an important
component of a sound municipal finance framework. International experience offers examples of how
national governments can build on these foundations to develop programs that integrate financial support
to municipal investment, capacity building, and incentives for improved institutional performance at the
municipal level. An approach increasingly adopted by other countries to raise municipal resources is
through performance-based programs, a mechanism through which national governments allocate
investment grants to municipalities for local capital expenditures (see. Box 3 for an overview of the
international experience). A key element of these programs is the performance framework used to monitor
the municipalities’ performance annually and determine the transfers of performance-based capital grants.
Examples of such performance framework already exist in Central America (See Box 4 for a description of
the municipal performance ranking in Guatemala). These programs provide incentives to improve
institutional performance as resource transfers are conditional on a city’s performance on an array of areas,
including service delivery, accountability, participation, budgeting and planning. Comprehensive capacity
building support is also provided to municipalities and closely articulated to the municipal performance
framework. The introduction of transparent, equitable and predictable sources of finance for municipal
investment allows municipalities to shift from a piecemeal project-by-project approach, to a more
programmatic approach to municipal investment planning.




                                                                                                          61
BOX 4. PERFORMANCE-BASED PROGRAMS: INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCES

Over the last two decades, various countries across different regions have developed programs to
strengthen the institutional performance of municipal governments through performance-based
grants. One of the earliest example of such programs can be found in Indonesia. Since 2001 Indonesia
has gone from being one of the most centralized countries in the world in administrative, fiscal, and
political terms to one of the most decentralized, with local governments now carrying out more than
half of all public investment. Performance-based grants have also been introduced in India, Tanzania,
Uganda, Ethiopia, Vietnam and Tunisia.

These programs share the following characteristics:

• Support to municipal investment is channeled through capital investment grants using
  transparent, equitable and predictable allocation mechanisms.
• The use of grant funds is decided by the municipalities following a pluri-annual and/or annual
  participatory planning process aligned with the municipalities budgeting cycle.
• Eligible investments are defined through a menu of investments corresponding to the
  municipalities’ core functions.
• Municipalities’ access to the grants is conditioned on a set of minimum conditions that ensure the
  required level of fiduciary accountability from municipalities on the use of funds.
• Municipalities’ institutional performance in key areas is defined under a municipal performance
  framework, and participating municipalities are evaluated through an Annual Performance
  Assessment.
• Institutional performance improvements are incentivized through performance-based grants.
• Comprehensive capacity building support is provided to municipalities and closely articulated to
  the municipal performance framework.
The figure below shows a typical structure of a performance-based program.




                                                                                                        62
   BOX 5. MUNICIPAL PERFORMANCE RANKING IN GUATEMALA

   Since 2008, the Government of Guatemala has worked on developing tools for measuring municipal
   performance, with the objective to strengthen and advance the concept of governance. In 2012, the
   Planning and Programming Secretariat of the Office of the President of Guatemala (Segeplán, for its
   acronym in Spanish) proposed to institutionalize the National System of Planning (an articulation
   between the central and municipal governments’ planning and territorial development processes) by
   promoting a policy to strengthen municipalities. This paved thr way for the institutionalization and
   launching of the 2012 Municipal Management Ranking.
   Segeplán convened a working group composed of 21 public institutions to formulate the Municipal
   Strengthening Policy (Política de fortalecimiento de las municipalidades). The group agreed on the
   Municipal Management Ranking as one of the policy’s main instruments. The ranking of
   municipalities allows to have updated information on the performance of municipalities in an array
   of different subjects, and helps determine the progress and limitations of local governments in areas
   considered to be conducive to “good governance.”
   The 2013 Ranking collected information through 277 variables that were organized around six
   thematic indicators: 1) administrative management; 2) financial management; 3) basic municipal
   services; 4) strategic management; 5) citizen participation; and 6) disclosure of information to the
   public). Municipalities received a score based on their performance in each of these themes. The
   information that is gathered informs the Municipal Strengthening Policy, and is used to define or
   redirect the national government’s capacity building and technical assistance to local governments.
   Source: “Ranking de la gestión municipal 2013.” (2015). Subsecretaría de Planificación y Ordenamiento
   Territorial de Segeplán, Secretaría de Planificación y Programación de la Presidencia.


25.     Big cities should generally have more fiscal autonomy, and finance should follow function 40.
Certain characteristics of large cities and agglomerations have implications for metropolitan public finance.
For example, high population density could in some cases reduce the per capita cost of service provision
due to economies of scale, but large cities also concentrate a larger number of problems (e.g. congestion
and pollution) and expenditure needs (e.g. public transport and sanitation). Accordingly, large cities and
metropolitan areas generally have higher expenditures per capita than smaller municipalities. Local
governments usually also have stronger human resource capacity, and greater ability to raise revenues
(through taxes and fees). Therefore, they should generally have more fiscal autonomy than other areas, such
as in the application of user charges, property taxes, local income and/or business taxes, and fuel taxes,
among others. Such policies would be applicable to the capital municipalities of all the Central American
countries; in particular when new responsibilities are assigned to them.

Developing inter-municipal cooperation

26.      Cities in CA are becoming more interdependent with their surrounding areas, calling for
improved inter-municipal coordination and cooperation. As cities continue to expand beyond their
jurisdictional boundaries, the need for metropolitan-level management increases. Local governments must

 40 Reference for this section: Bahl, Roy W., Linn, Johannes F., and Wetzel, Deborah L. (Editors), “Financing Metropolitan

Governments in Developing Countries “, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2013

                                                                                                                       63
work collaboratively to ensure effective planning and equity in service delivery. Provision of some public
services, such as drainage, waste disposal, and sewage collection, are often fragmented, resulting in higher
costs and financing challenges for local governments in the region. A lack of any formal or informal
metropolitan arrangement tends to reflect missed opportunities in cost savings, which can be achieved
through a fair monetary contribution from all municipal governments sharing common issues. The essence
of a metropolitan approach is for local governments to cooperate on certain, not all, initiatives or services.
As a minimum, a forum for periodic inter-municipal dialogue among local government executives is
needed. See Box 5 for a variety of arrangements for metropolitan governance applied by cities around the
world.

27.     Municipalities can benefit from greater coordination among them on a number of different
subjects, including:

   •   Area-wide strategic planning and/or integrated territorial (land use) planning
   •   Coordinated area-wide economic development
   •   Joint arrangement for the delivery of one or more services (to gain efficiencies) or to address a
       specific sector or subject matter jointly (e.g. public transport system, flood protection, tourism
       promotion, disaster risk management, emergency service, etc.)
   •   Harmonization of local taxes or fees, or arrange some area-based revenue-sharing (beyond what
       is being addressed through the inter-governmental fiscal transfer system) to address inequality
       in service provision among the local jurisdictions
   •   Ad hoc coordination related to a particular event, incidence or matter concerning the
       metropolitan area as a whole

28.      Ensuring a basic legal framework and clarity on roles and responsibilities are key steps in
establishing a well-functioning metropolitan arrangement. “Metropolitan area,” as conceptually defined
in a country’s constitution or other legislation, gives credence to the concept, and forms a base for forming
institutional arrangements (depending on the actual legislative provisions). In most countries, as in all the
Central American countries, basic legal provisions do exist for local governments to form inter-municipal
cooperation arrangements to address their needs in the most efficient way. In any metropolitan governance
arrangement, there needs to be clarity about functions and responsibilities among the involved parties,
particularly if any new authority is introduced. This includes both what the expenditure responsibilities are
and what revenue sources a new entity would have. It needs to be effectively communicated to the
constituency in the area, for them to know who to hold accountable for what. If a metropolitan agency is
not given any independent authority (i.e. having an advisory function only), a risk of limited effectiveness
tends to exist. Box 5 below provides examples of metropolitan governance arrangements that Central
American countries can consider.




                                                                                                            64
   BOX 6. METROPOLITAN GOVERNANCE ARRANGEMENTS FROM AROUND THE
   WORLD

   A variety of arrangements for metropolitan governance are applied by cities around the world,
   albeit mostly in OECD countries. A classification of these institutional arrangements is presented
   below.
   A. Inter-Municipal Coordination - horizontal cooperation among local governments
     • Ad hoc cooperation / case-by-case joint initiatives / contracting among local governments
     • Committee, association, partner agreement, consortium agreement (e.g. in Brazil), etc.
     • Mancomunidad (legal entity)
     • Metropolitan Council, or “Council of Governments”, (e.g. common in the United States)
   B. Metropolitan Authority - sometimes called “special purpose district”
     •   Metropolitan authority, for a single or multiple sectors, such as a metropolitan planning
         authority, a service delivery authority, or a planning & service delivery authority (e.g. Buenos
         Aires Metropolitan Transport Agency)
   C. Second Level Metropolitan Local Government
     •   Second level metropolitan local government for certain functions (e.g. Metropolitan District of
         Quito)
   D. Consolidated Local Government
     •   Through territorial annexation or amalgamation of local governments (i.e. one local
         government covering all - or most of – its metropolitan area)
   E. Regional/Provincial Government
    •    Some metropolitan coordination needs being addressed by a regional/provincial government
         (e.g. by State Governments in Mexico and the Intendant of the Santiago Metropolitan Region).

Enhancing coordination between the central and local governments

29.      Enhanced coordination between the central and local governments is critical, but the scope
and emphasis depend on the local context. Municipalities and central government agencies work together
on a multitude of subjects, ranging from spatial planning and municipal finance, to shared local service
provision and emergency response. In some sectors, municipalities may have an executing function within
a national regulatory framework, with oversight by a central agency (e.g. education and health sectors). As
shown in Table 2, the scope of functional responsibilities devolved from the central government to the local
governments varies quite significantly among the countries in CA. Therefore, the need for and approaches
to coordination between the two levels of government may differ by country. In Panama and Costa Rica,
where the central government is carrying out most local public services, coordinated spatial (land use)
planning is critical, particularly related to transport and housing development. In Nicaragua and Guatemala,
where the municipalities already carry out most local services, emphasis need to be on finance in the vertical
relationship (i.e. effective tax regimes, and inter-governmental fiscal transfer system, ideally with built-in
incentives for good local governance revenue collection and expenditure management).

                                                                                                            65
30.      Municipalities and central government agencies need to coordinate their operational
activities on a multitude of functions. For example, major works on a street or local road need to get
synchronized with entities responsible for such services as public transit, power, water, and telecom.
Depending on the sector and country, the context is usually one of the following (in some sectors, more
than one of the situations may exist):

 •    Service provision at the local level is shared between the local and central governments. For
      example, functions such as policing, social protection, and cultural facilities. This requires ongoing
      coordination in addition to clarity on policies, responsibilities and rules.

 •    Central government agencies are carrying out their responsibilities within municipal jurisdictions.
      This may apply to implementation of capital investments and maintenance as well as ongoing
      service provision. An example is water supply in the capital cities in all the Central American
      countries, except Guatemala (and since 2015 in Honduras). These activities need to be done in
      coordination with any function the local government is performing in the area to prevent potential
      complications and inefficiencies.

 •    The municipalities have an executing function within a national regulatory framework, with
      oversight provided by a central agency (e.g. in the education and public health sectors). Coordination
      in these cases tend to include dialogue on policy development and compliance.

31.      The Central American countries need permanent forums and processes for coordinating land
use planning with economic development and investment plans. Since planning processes in CA is often
spearheaded by a central or a local government body, 41 coordination between the two levels of governments
is essential. Each CA country needs a pre-defined, permanent forum and process for periodic coordination
of particularly land use plans. A similar approach needs to be ensured for economic development plans,
capital investment programming, and by sector for transport and other infrastructure subjects where both
the central and a local governments are involved. Existing vehicles, such as the weekly meeting between
the central government and all mayors in Nicaragua, and the K’atun process in Guatemala can possibly be
built upon to this effect. 42




 41  In some metropolitan areas, significant planning functions are carried out by an NGO; for example, in New York Metropolitan
Area by the Regional Plan Association (RPA), and in the past in the Greater ABC Region in Sao Paulo,
  42 The K’atun 2032 process in Guatemala is a multi-level planning framework including prioritized investment projects, applying

a bottom-up approach, with financing being provided “top down” through regional Governors.

                                                                                                                             66
           6. REFERENCES

Andersson, M. (2014). Metropolitan Governance and Finance. Municipal Finances–A Handbook for Local
       Governments”, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA, 41-92.

Bahl, R. W., Linn, J. F., & Wetzel, D. L. (Eds.). (2013). Financing metropolitan governments in developing
       countries. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

OECD (2015), The Metropolitan Century, Understanding Urbanization and its Consequences, Paris: OECD
     Publishing,

ICMA. (2004). Situacion y Analisis de la Cooperacion Intermunicipal en El Salvador. Document prepared for
      USAID.

Inter-American Development Bank. (2014). Plan de Acción: Managua Sostenible

Inter-American Development Bank. (2016). Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela: Capital Sostenible, Segura y Abierta
       al Público.

INVU (2010). Plan de Ordenamiento Territorial de la Gran Área Metropolitana. National Institute for Housing and
      Urbanism, Costa Rica.

UNFPA (2009). Escenarios para la Región Metropolitana de Managua al Año 2020. United Nations Population
     Fund, Nicaragua.

Samad, T., Lozano-Gracia, N., & Panman, A. (Eds.). (2012). Colombia Urbanization Review: Amplifying the Gains
       from the Urban Transition. World Bank Publications.

Subsecretaria de Planificacion y Ordenamiento Territorial de Segeplan, Secretatia de Planificacio y Programacion
       de la Presidencia. (2015). Ranking de la Gestión Municipal 2013. Guatemala




                                                                                                             67
CHAPTER 3: MAKING CITIES INCLUSIVE BY IMPROVING ACCESS TO ADEQUATE
AND WELL-LOCATED HOUSING

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. THE ROLE OF HOUSING FOR CENTRAL AMERICA’S URBAN FUTURE .............................................. 71
2. TAKING STOCK: THE DELIVERY OF FORMAL AND INFORMAL HOUSING ........................................ 74
3. BUILDING FROM THE GROUND UP: HOUSING VALUE CHAINS .......................................................... 77
3.1.      LAND, PROPERTY AND PLANNING STANDARDS ............................................................................... 79
3.2.      CONNECTING HOUSING TO INFRASTRUCTURE ................................................................................ 83
3.3.      PARTS AND LABOR .......................................................................................................................... 85
3.4.      BUYING A HOME ............................................................................................................................. 87
4. ENABLING OWNERSHIP: GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN HOUSING .............................................. 91
5. A WAY FORWARD: HOUSING AS A CATALYST FOR URBAN PROSPERITY ........................................ 97
5.1.      PRIORITIES AT A NATIONAL LEVEL ................................................................................................ 97
5.2.      PRIORITIES AT A CITY LEVEL .......................................................................................................... 99
6.     REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................... 100


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Share of urban dwellers in slums (2007-2009) and GNI per capita, 2014 .................................. 72
Figure 2. A continuum of informality in housing ....................................................................................... 76
Figure 3. Supply and demand value chains for formal housing delivery.................................................... 78
Figure 4. Coverage of urban infrastructure for bottom income quintiles, 2009-2013 ................................ 85
Figure 5. Selected access to finance indicators, 2014, percentage of population ....................................... 88
Figure 6. Total outstanding mortgages as percent of GDP ......................................................................... 88
Figure 7. Estimated housing affordability gap for mortgage finance based on low or undocumented
income, select cities, 2011 .......................................................................................................................... 89
Figure 8. Improving housing delivery across income groups ..................................................................... 97

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Housing stock needed to reduce current overcrowding or resettlement ....................................... 74
Table 2. Housing tenure by country, 2009-2013......................................................................................... 75
Table 3. Time and costs to register property, subnational level, 2015........................................................ 80
Table 4. Obtaining construction permits, selected cities, 2015................................................................... 83
Table 5. Percentage of households with infrastructure coverage, 2013 ...................................................... 84
Table 6. Select indicators of the microfinance sector, 2013 ....................................................................... 91
Table 7. Housing policies in Central America ............................................................................................ 93

LIST OF BOXES
Box 1. Methodology and data sources ........................................................................................................ 79

                                                                                                                                                      68
Box 2. Colombia: Tools for linking planning with infrastructure finance .................................................. 82
Box 3. Slum upgrading: The case of FUNDASAL in El Salvador ............................................................. 87
Box 4. Extending housing finance to the urban poor .................................................................................. 90
Box 5. Access to housing through subsidies ............................................................................................... 92
Box 6. Linking housing subsidies with urban growth................................................................................. 95
Box 7. United States: Improving coordination for affordable housing provision ....................................... 96




                                                                                                                                         69
OVERVIEW

The availability of adequate and well-located housing is a key challenge for the region and directly
impacts economic competiveness, quality of live, human development, and urban resilience. Today,
more than a quarter of Central American residents live in slum conditions and a significant share of
housing stock is situated in hazardous areas and subject to conditions of overcrowding. The
proliferation of informal settlements with the low density urban expansion contributes to the
reduction in access to health and education services, aggravates congestion, and tempers the
economic benefits of agglomeration. Adequate and well-located housing provides long term social
and economic benefits to cities through enabling social inclusion, attracting investment and
supporting green growth.
This chapter focuses on the components necessary to produce and finance housing, drawing attention
to key constraints in the sector that policy makers can address to propel a more efficient, inclusive
and sustainable model for provision of housing, integrated with urban development. Section 1
portrays the role of housing in Central America’s future. Section 2 presents an overall diagnostic of
the situation of housing in the region. Section 3 offers a comprehensive value chain approach to
tackle the housing challenges. Section 4 delves into government involvement in the housing sector.
Lastly, section 5 identifies priorities at a national and city levels to leverage housing as a catalyst for
urban prosperity.
Key Messages

•   Housing policies need to strengthen the overall system of housing delivery to improve housing
    quality and affordability for all, across income groups.
•   Housing policies need to be better aligned and coordinated with national and local development
    planning, spatial planning and management in order to promote sustainable and inclusive cities.




                                                                                                              70
      1. THE ROLE OF HOUSING FOR CENTRAL AMERICA’S URBAN FUTURE

1.       Ensuring the availability of quality housing will help Central America maximize the gains of
urbanization. Where people live in a city is directly linked to the availability and access they have to jobs,
schools, health care facilities and other public services that cities provide. Cities in the region have been
expanding to accommodate migration and population growth, but the quality of the housing stock,
particularly in terms of infrastructure access, has not kept pace with the need. These conditions, along with
the incidence of overcrowding and the siting of new settlements in hazardous locations indicate that quality
housing is limited and inaccessible to the urban poor. The current trend of urban expansion in Central
America detailed in Chapter 1 has placed new housing further from employment centers and has raised the
cost to the government of providing infrastructure connections to these developments. Without
improvements to housing quality and affordability, residents will miss out on the economic and human
development and social benefits that cities can provide.

2.      Housing investment also plays a substantial role in promoting sustained and inclusive
economic growth. Across Latin America, housing investment comprised an average of 8.8 percent of GDP
from 2001-2011. Where data are available in Central America, housing supply averaged 4.6 percent of GDP
in Honduras and 15.5 percent of GDP in Panama during this period. Globally, housing investment increases
alongside GDP, with the highest rates of investment occurring between per-capita income levels of $3,000
and $36,000 in urbanizing countries (Dasgupta et al 2014). 43 Per-capita GDI levels in most of Central
America presently fall within this range, suggesting that housing investment and consumption is an
important component of economic growth, and, as incomes rise, households tend to spend more on housing.

3.      The housing sector also has important positive spillover effects into other parts of the
economy. Housing investment increases the demand for construction materials production, development
services and construction labor in addition to banking and other financial services, which stimulates
employment. In El Salvador, the construction sector has contributed to 46 percent of investment from and
6.7 percent of employment generated over the past decade (UN-Habitat 2014). In Costa Rica, the
construction industry grew nearly twice as fast (6.4 percent) as the overall economy (3.5 percent) in 2013
(MINVAH 2014). In Panamá, the construction sector generated either directly or indirectly 232,159 jobs,
or about 18 percent of total employment (CAPAC 2007).

4.      While cities are engines of growth, urbanization can contribute to the concentration of
poverty in slums and informal settlements. Urban land is expensive due to proximity to infrastructure
and employment opportunities, which in turn raises the cost of housing. These factors, along with low and
irregular incomes limit the resources households have to afford housing. As a consequence, informal
settlements emerge as response to a lack of affordable housing options, and are characterized by deficiencies
including non-durable structure, lack of tenure, overcrowding, and the lack of access to water and sanitation.
Across Latin America, the share of people living in slums has declined from 35 percent in 1990 to 23
percent (UN 2014). However, in Central America, the available data suggest that about 29 percent of urban
residents live in slums, which is close to the global average of 32 percent and higher than other regions
including East Asia and the Middle East. Figure 1 below compares the proportion of urban residents living
in slums to GNI per-capita and suggests a negative relationship between urban slum incidence and incomes.


 43   Above or below this interval, other consumption needs (food or durable goods) reduce the share of housing expenses.

                                                                                                                            71
                                                 Figure 1. Share of urban dwellers in slums (2005-2009) and GNI per capita, 2014

                                          50                                                                                        $12,000

                                          45




                                                                                                                                              GNI Per-Capita, Atlas Method, 2014
    Percent of Urban Residents in Slums




                                                                                                                                    $10,000
                                          40

                                          35
                                                                                                                                    $8,000
                                          30

                                          25                                                                                        $6,000

                                          20
                                                                                                                                    $4,000
                                          15

                                          10
                                                                                                                                    $2,000
                                          5

                                          0                                                                                         $0
                                               Nicaragua, 2007Guatemala, 2009   Honduras   El Salvador    Panama       Costa Rica

Source: Staff Calculations from UN-Habitat 2014; World Bank 2015. Color bars show share in slums, grey bars show
GNI per-capita.

5.      Cities have a critical role to play in ensuring access to quality affordable housing. While
housing policies are articulated at the national level, cities are key partners to help ensure the achievement
of policy goals. For example, cities can support housing markets by encouraging density and diversity of
land uses and the proximity of housing to transportation facilities and infrastructure connections. These will
not only improve the housing options available to residents, but will also make the city attractive to new
investment (as detailed further in Chapter 5). Cities can help assemble underutilized land for housing
investment and use value capture instruments to sustainably finance basic infrastructure and social services
to new developments (as discussed in Chapter 2). Standards and permitting functions can be improved to
reduce costs and uncertainty for housing developers and self-builders. Improved planning can enable future
growth to occur in areas with lower exposure to disaster risks such as earthquakes and flooding (as presented
in Chapter 4).

6.       However, there are several constraints to housing delivery across the region. The most
prevalent challenge is the lack of adequate infrastructure, especially in informal urban settlements, resulting
in relative deprivation in access to services. This qualitative deficiency is a result of (a) the under provision
of trunk infrastructure, particularly sewer systems, to new settlements, and (b) the inability of low income
groups to afford new formal housing. Second, housing subsidies do not reach the poorest groups and may
also be further encouraging urban expansion because they do not align with local level planning functions.

•                                         The lack of planning and enforcement at the municipal level has enabled low density expansion to
                                          areas where land costs are lower, including land at risk from flooding, landslide or earthquake
                                          damage. This trend also occurs through the formal sector through mortgage subsidy interventions
                                          that lower the effective price of housing, but which encourage developers to build in peripheral areas
                                          in order to lower unit prices.



                                                                                                                                                                                   72
•   Mortgage subsidies have been largely directed to middle and upper income groups, while the urban
    poor are often not eligible for these subsidies because of limited formal savings with banks and
    irregular or informal incomes.

•   There is a need to improve public sector coordination for strategic investments to support housing
    delivery. Quality housing delivery requires coordination between local and national level
    policymakers as well as across sectors and line ministries involved in infrastructure, finance,
    housing subsidies and market regulation.

7.       The qualitative housing deficit is a key challenge across the region. Informal housing covers a
range of both physical and structural conditions and degrees of legal and regulatory compliance. Slums
represent an extreme deprivation of infrastructure, land tenure and shelter quality. Nicaragua has the
region’s highest share of qualitative housing deprivation, particularly in terms of improved water and
sanitation access, and more than one third of Guatemalan households live in overcrowded conditions or in
homes that are located in hazard areas. Targeted infrastructure provision can improve housing quality and
support the formalization of low income settlements. For quantitative deficiencies, the supply and cost of
quality housing options needs to be expanded to relieve overcrowding and settlements in hazardous or
precarious areas may need to be assessed for resettlement options.

8.      Policies also tend to focus on supporting homeownership while overlooking alternative
solutions that could address the broader segment of the market. Homeownership is supported through
mortgage subsidies for the purchase of a new, complete house. While the subsidies have expanded
homeownership, they benefit mostly middle class households that have formal employment rather than low
income, informal sector workers. Other forms of expanding access to affordable housing include
neighborhood upgrading and rental programs.

•   Housing quality, in the form of infrastructure deficits, can be addressed through upgrading
    programs. National governments have recognized the importance of upgrading and improvement of
    informal settlements but the need remains far greater than what has been delivered. Community
    organizations and non-profits in partnership with local governments have also piloted examples of
    neighborhood upgrading but these projects have not achieved the scale necessary without sustained
    involvement from key ministries.

•   Renters constitute a significant proportion of urban residents, though housing policies do not support
    improvements to the quality and availability of formal rental housing supply as well as improving
    the regulatory framework for rental housing. Rental housing is a desirable option for new migrants
    who cannot afford to purchase a home or need flexibility to follow new employment opportunities.
    Informal rental arrangements provide flexibility for tenants and landlords, but preclude enforcement
    of standards for housing or fair rental agreements for either party.




                                                                                                             73
    2. TAKING STOCK: THE DELIVERY OF FORMAL AND INFORMAL HOUSING

9        In coming years the need for urban housing in the region will grow. A quantitative deficit is
the total amount of housing units required to meet the need for housing based on urban migration and
household formation rates, but which has not been addressed with the current supply of housing. Estimates
from UN data on projected urban migration and urban household formation suggest the need for housing
will be greater within the next fifteen years, leveling off by 2030. Precise long term estimates of quantitative
deficits are difficult to make due to changes in household formation rates which are influenced by a number
of different socioeconomic factors. Currently, formal housing production is limited in countries where need
will be highest; in Guatemala, the region’s most populous country, annual production is between 20 and
30,000 units, similar to that of Costa Rica. In Honduras, production averaged about 32,000 units per year
in the period 2000-2008, which only accommodated new demand, rather than expanding future supply.

10      About 10 to 20 percent of the current housing stock in the region is in high risk areas or is
overcrowded. Table below shows the most recent estimates of absolute need based on housing that is
located in a risk zone or which is overcrowded, which represents the share of housing units that need to be
replaced and built to meet existing need. It shows that lower income countries, in particular Nicaragua and
Guatemala, have the highest share of absolute housing need. Costa Rica has the lowest incidence – less
than 1 percent – of overcrowding or inappropriately located housing.

 Table 1. Housing stock needed to reduce current overcrowding or resettlement (as a share of total
                                number of households in country)

                                        Share of Dwelling in             Households in
          Country            Year                                                                       Combined
                                            Risk Zones               overcrowded conditions
         Costa Rica          2013                0.16%                           0.25%                    0.41%
        El Salvador          2013                4.20%                          12.50%                    16.70%
         Guatemala           2011                10.80%                         26.50%                    37.30%
         Honduras            2013                3.30%                           4.90%                    8.20%
         Nicaragua           2009                3.40%                          24.50%                    27.90%
         Regional
                                                  4.3%                          13.7%                     18.1%
         Average
     Source: SEDLAC 2015. Overcrowding defined as 3 or more persons per room

11       Homeownership is the most common housing tenure form. The majority of households report
owning their home or the plot on which their house is built (see Table). While renting is less common
overall, tenants do so for a variety of reasons, such as better access to job locations, students needing
temporary accommodations for university, or the high cost of mortgages. Indeed, global experience
suggests a wide variation in homeownership rates; homeownership in Latin America is around 64 percent
which is actually lower than other regions such as Asia and Eastern Europe. 44 Apart from Panama, most
who rent are in the lowest income quintile, and the majority of renters are in cities rather than rural areas
due to housing cost differentials (IDB 2012b). However, in a review of rental across the LAC region, a

 44 In Europe, renting comprises 30 percent of tenure with Germany and Switzerland having rental rates of over 40 percent. In

Latin America, Bolivia and Colombia have comparable rental rates (IDB 2014).

                                                                                                                         74
recent study finds that the incidence of renting does not necessarily decline as incomes rise, suggesting that
there may be demand for rental housing across income groups (IDB 2014).

                               Table 2. Housing tenure by country, 2009-2013 (%)

                                                 Owner             Rental/Rent
                             Country                                                       Year
                                                Occupied              free
                           Costa Rica             71.9                28.1                 2013
                           El Salvador            70.1                29.9                 2013
                           Guatemala              78.7                21.3                 2013
                            Honduras              80.1                19.9                 2013
                           Nicaragua              83.3                16.7                 2009
                             Panama               82.6                17.4                 2013
                       Source: SEDLAC 2015

12      More attention on current housing stock conditions and qualitative gaps is needed. Precise
estimates of future quantitative housing deficits are difficult to make due to data constraints and varying
assumptions about household formation, crowding and housing quality (Monkonnen 2013; Rojas and
Medellín 2011). 45 First, quantitative deficits assume a lack of housing units of a certain standard that is
often poorly defined or which may differ across countries. Second, household formation rates are likely to
decrease as incomes rise, urbanization continues, and population age, which also vary across countries and
over time (Bonvalet and Lelievre 1997). 46 Finally, quantitative deficits should not only be addressed
through the addition of new formal units, alternative considerations such as improving existing stock or
providing options for other tenure arrangements such as renting are critical. Furthermore, qualitative
housing deficiencies, including built structure, infrastructure connections, and overcrowding can be
addressed through targeted interventions, including access to land, planning and regulatory standards,
construction materials, and utility provision. These span both over ownership and rental tenures and also
permit different housing producers (self-builders, private developers) to accommodate different needs, and
allow governments to better target subsidies to low income groups.

13       Housing policies in the region are generally progressive, but interventions do not reach the
lowest income groups. Most government approaches to housing subsidies focus on homeownership,
mirroring the ABC (ahorro/savings, bono/subsidy, crédito/credit) approach pioneered in Chile during the
1980s. Under an ABC scheme, housing subsidies are allocated upfront and linked to a mortgage, typically
from a commercial bank, provided that beneficiaries meet certain savings or eligibility criteria, usually a
minimum down payment. While these types of mixed-finance programs could also be used for financing
home improvement and expansion, they are most often used for new home purchase. The subsidy increases
affordability for consumers and reduces risk for lenders, which creates incentives for the construction sector
to increase the supply of new units (van Lindert et al 2014).


  45 For example, INVUR, the Nicaraguan housing ministry, estimated a housing deficit of 400,000 units in 2005. By contrast, the

Central American Housing Association places the deficit at 745,000 units when distinguishing between qualitative and quantitative
deficits (Bredenoord and van der Meulen 2012).
  46 There is evidence that high urban housing costs can discourage new household formation among young adults (Haurin,

Hendershott and Kim, 1993; Ermish 1999). This can in turn actually increase the number of people per household in urban areas
compared to rural areas (Stinner 1977) which requires that estimates of household formation and, by extension, future housing need
be well-calibrated.

                                                                                                                              75
14      Urban planning and land administration are key challenges for governments in the regions.
Local governments have been afforded greater powers as part of a series of decentralization reforms
occurred during the 1980s and 1990s, but tend to lack technical and fiscal capacity to produce and
implement planning and investment activities in support of new growth, as described elsewhere in the report
(Nickson 2011; UN 2008). Indeed, from the period 2002-2005, local governments in Nicaragua, El
Salvador, Costa Rica, Panama and Honduras averaged total expenditures less than 10 percent of all
government spending; compared to Brazil (16.6), and Colombia (17.0). At the regional level, only San
Salvador and San José have a coordinating body charged with planning and land use decisions at the
metropolitan level. Local governments have an important role in identifying and implementing appropriate
land use plans, revenue capture tools and infrastructure access to ensure inclusive urban growth.

15       In Central America, a large segment of housing is produced and consumed informally.
Informal housing refers to units that do not meet legal and regulatory standards that govern the formal
access and use of land and buildings (UN-Habitat 2003). It also constitutes a wide range of housing
conditions which can include, but are not necessarily the same, as slums (see Figure 2 below). It includes
land tenure that is either perceived, contested or not held (squatting) as well as housing units that are built
without formal finance, and which do not meet applicable standards. By contrast, formal housing meets
standards, is consumed through mortgage lending or rental contracts and is built and maintained by a
specialized construction sector. Informal housing covers a range of physical and regulatory conditions, and
international experience has shown that the quality and security of informal dwellings can be improved
over time through both private investment, infrastructure upgrading, tenure regularization and flexible
building and planning standards (Bedonoord and van Linder 2014; Ferguson and Smets 2010).

                            Figure 2. A continuum of informality in housing




 Source: World Bank

16        Informal housing is especially prominent in urbanizing areas of lower income countries. In
nearly all countries, a third or more of urban households do not have access to improved toilet or sanitation
facilities. In El Salvador, 64 percent of homes were built progressively and 34 percent of poor households
report incremental investment in home improvement (UN Habitat 2014). Approximately 80 percent of
housing units in Nicaragua are in some degree of informality. In Guatemala, 39 percent of housing is
without permits; three quarters of which are built and occupied by those without tenure or who are squatters
on public lands or who live in hazardous locations, such as canyon slopes or areas prone to flooding. A
recent estimate in Panama identifies a total of 450 informal settlements housing approximately 185,000
people, nearly two-thirds of whom live in Panama City, the rest in other medium sized cities (IDB 2008).


                                                                                                            76
Similarly, in Costa Rica the majority of informal settlements are located on public land possessed by city
governments in and around the San Jose metropolitan area.

17      The lack of adequate housing is a combination of low incomes and weaknesses in the housing
delivery systems. Housing informality covers a wide range of shelter conditions and is a product of the
systems through which housing inputs (land, materials, labor and finance) function. Land is an important
component of housing (around 20 percent or more of total costs) and the function of land markets, along
with the regulations and rights afforded to land holders are critical for investment decisions. The cost of
materials and the quality of the construction sector also influence the price and quality of housing. The
availability of improved infrastructure (water and sanitation) along with schools and health facilities also
influence both housing prices and convey key long term benefits to household welfare. Finally, the options
for housing finance both on the developer and consumer side also influence the price, location and quality
of housing that can be built by developers or owner-occupiers.

    3. BUILDING FROM THE GROUND UP: HOUSING VALUE CHAINS

18.      A value chain framework can identify key constraints to the provision of quality affordable
housing. Housing is the product of a complex set of supply and demand value chains which directly
influence the quality and availability. Whether it is produced through formal or informal channels, housing
requires the same inputs (land, construction, materials, infrastructure and finance). In Central America,
housing costs and quality vary widely. A value chain approach allows for policy makers and stakeholders
in each to better understand particular links in the chain and their influence on housing delivery across
country contexts. This will improve and coordinate policy reforms aimed at improving access to quality
housing, particularly for the urban poor, who face the greatest challenges in finding adequate housing
options.

19.      The value chain approach highlights how housing is delivered (from both the supply and
demand sides) and identifies key areas of policy attention for improvement by highlighting the
linkages between supply and demand inputs. The supply value chain consists of key inputs such as land,
infrastructure and construction. The demand side consists of the finance options available to both
developers and to housing consumers. A formal housing delivery system is complex and requires an
integrated sequence of inputs (e.g. land, materials, and infrastructure) along with regulatory, institutional
and financial capacities to support them. Figure 3 below summarizes the conceptual relationships for the
delivery of formal housing, including links between the two chains where demand and supply links can be
mutually reinforcing.




                                                                                                          77
               Figure 3. Supply and demand value chains for formal housing delivery

                                  Demand                               Supply


                                                                      Land: Secure title
                                                                    registry and cadaster
                               Capital: Short and long                     records
                               term deposits; primary
                               and secondary finance



                                                                       Regulations:
                                                                       Planning and
                                                                     building standards
                               Regulatory framework:
                             Framework for lending and
                                     borrowing,
                                  collateralization

                                                                    Trunk infrastructure:
                                                                    Water, roads, power,
                                                                           sewage

                                   Market data:
                                Borrower screening
                               and creditworthiness

                                                                     Market data: Sales
                                                                      trends, effective
                                                                          demand


                                 Lending products:
                                   Loan servicing,
                                    enforcement                          Construction:
                                                                            Materials,
                                                                          technologies,
                                                                      professional capacity




                                                         Formal housing
                                                             unit


20.      Inputs such as land, infrastructure, design and construction proceed in parallel with a
corresponding set of demand side inputs related to housing finance. The supply side assumes that land
and property markets are active and widespread, that legal claims to property are clear and enforceable and
price information is widely known. Further, it also requires that a reasonable set of construction, planning
and infrastructure standards are supported by governments and to which private development activity
conforms. On the demand side, construction firms must also have access to large amounts of capital from
banks in order to assemble land and complete housing projects and to sell them to consumers via mortgage
products. In order for banks to create mortgages, they have to have both access to sources of long term
capital and must be supported by an appropriate financial regulatory system.

                                                                                                         78
       BOX 7. METHODOLOGY AND DATA SOURCES

       The chapter draws from a desk review of existing research, recent national-level household survey
       data from the Socio-Economic Data Base for Latin America and the Caribbean (SEDLAC) and two
       in-depth case studies. Unfortunately, housing data from this set do not fully cover Panama, which is
       not included in parts of the analysis, though current descriptive data is supplied where available. It
       also develops two country case studies (Nicaragua and Costa Rica) based on interview data with
       government, private sector, non-profit and civil society groups involved in the housing sector. The
       cases were selected to examine differences in housing policy and needs between two countries with
       very different poverty levels and per-capita GDI figures, but with a common border*
       Across the CA region, however, available data do not capture the full scope and scale of the housing
       sector, making it difficult to compare trends and needs across the region. Data on housing market
       activity, particularly new housing starts, prices, sales volumes, and numbers of rental, ownership or
       other tenure arrangements is limited. In poorer areas, housing is largely consumed informally,
       making analysis and stocktaking more difficult.
       * For Nicaragua, per-capita GNI is $1,850 (2014), with 42.5 percent of the population living below the national poverty
       line (2009). Costa Rica’s per-capita GNI is $10,124 (2014) with a national poverty rate of 22.4 percent (2014). In 2009
       the most recent year where comparable data are available, 10.8 percent of the population of Nicaragua was below the
       international poverty line of $1.90 and in Costa Rica 3.3 percent was below this line.


       3.1.      LAND, PROPERTY AND PLANNING STANDARDS
21.      Land administration responsibilities are fragmented across levels of government and
different ministries. 47 Land administration policies establish the rights and protections afforded to the
circulation and development of property and have direct consequences on investment levels and housing
affordability. Investment in housing, whether from formal developers or self-builders will be less likely
property rights are constrained, contested or unclear (Payne 2005). Diminished investment can reduce the
quantity and quality of the housing stock. Furthermore, land governance systems including maps and
registry databases tend to be incomplete (El Salvador) and not easily available to the public (Honduras,
Guatemala) (World Bank 2014; 2015). This reduces incentives for investment because information about
property availability is difficult to obtain and verify, and there is less clarity on property claims, which
discourages collateralization of property for mortgages or development finance.

22.      At the sub-national level, property registration practices tend to be consistent in terms of
time, procedures and costs. This is to be expected given land administration policies, such as property
registration, are dictated at the national level. Ease of property registration influences the cost and interest
in property investment. Registration procedures that are reliable and efficient can encourage investment or
collateralization of property for housing and or other type of private development. Table 3 summarizes
subnational rankings in the region related to property registration.48 It shows that city-level registration
procedures mirror country-level patterns to a large degree. However, there can be a large variation in time
required; registration in Choluteca takes three times as along as in other Honduran cities. Furthermore, apart

  47 Land administration refers to the legal/regulatory framework that applies to rights afforded to public and private lands. This
includes cadaster records, property registries, public land management as well as land use and zoning standards applied to land.
  48 The rankings exclude four cities from the Dominican Republic that are included in the sample. For this reason, positions 14,

15, 16 and 19 are omitted.

                                                                                                                                 79
from Tegucigalpa and Managua, capital cities tend to rank highest, with fewer procedures (5-6) and time
required for obtaining registration (about a week).

         Table 3. Procedures, Time and Costs to Register Property, Subnational Level, 2015

                                                         Procedures     Time        Cost (% of
                     City (Country)             Rank
                                                          (number)     (days)     property value)

           San José (Costa Rica)                  1           5          19             3.4

           San Salvador (El Salvador)             2           5          31             3.8

           Panamá (Panama)                        3           7         22.5            2.4

           Quetzaltenango (Guatemala)             4           6          25             3.6

           Escuintla (Guatemala)                  5           6          24             3.8

           Guatemala (Guatemala)                  5           6          24             3.8

           Cobán (Guatemala)                      7           6          25             3.8

           San Miguel (El Salvador)               8           6          21             4.1

           Santa Ana (El Salvador)                9           6          23             4.1

           Soyapango (El Salvador)                10          6          30             4.2

           Puerto Cortés (Honduras)               11          6          25             4.7

           San Pedro Sula (Honduras)              12          6          27             4.7

           Tegucigalpa (Honduras)                 13          6          22             5.7

           Choluteca (Honduras)                   17          6          66             4.7

           Estelí (Nicaragua)                     18          8          54             3.9

           Managua (Nicaragua)                    20          9          58              5

           Juigalpa (Nicaragua)                   21          9          73             4.2

           León (Nicaragua)                       22         10          62             4.4
        Source: Doing Business 2015

23.       The lack of a strategic urban planning framework encourages low density expansion. Low
cost land on urban fringes drives both formal and informal housing development. However, this type of
growth places additional burdens on transportation networks as commute times to the central business
district increase. It also increases the marginal cost for governments to provide networked infrastructure to
these areas. In San Jose, a study found that population density in the built-up area of the metropolitan region
from 1997-2010 actually increased slightly from 71.4-75.3 persons per hectare. However, in comparative
terms it is still more dispersed than most major cities in Latin America due in part to a consolidation of
formerly disparate settlements (Pujol-Mesalles and Pérez 2013). Between 1990 and 2000, population
densities (in terms of persons per hectare) in the built up areas of both Guatemala City and San Salvador
have declined 7 percent and 2 percent respectively which, while modest compared to most major cities in
developing countries, still suggests a trend toward population dispersion (Angel et al. 2010).

                                                                                                            80
24.      Urban planning and land use regulations are applied unevenly. Planning regulations can
increase the cost of formal housing. Regulations of building material types, construction permits, minimum
lot sizes, and density requirements can unnecessarily add to the cost of construction by imposing additional
costs to developers for compliance. A recent study found that among households that cannot afford housing
in San Salvador, twenty percent identify the minimum lot size requirement (60m2) as the main impediment
(IDB 2012b). In Nicaragua, for example, planning and construction regulations are often ignored by
informal builders and smaller towns lack the technical capacity to review projects for compliance. They
may also be incompatible with efficient land use principles; central city areas of Managua and San José for
example, tend to have large, wide lots, buildings with two stories or less and a lack of street hierarchies,
worsens circulation and increases housing costs.

25.      Without enforcement of existing plans or coordination with utility and service providers,
local governments have few tools to direct urban growth, capture revenue from land or to encourage
infill development in areas that can be connected to infrastructure. Rather, the lack of available urban
land along with rising congestion costs (in terms of commute times, environmental degradation and so
forth) encourages new development in fringe areas due to the low cost of land. Infrastructure and
transportation connections are then expected to follow these investments though resources for the public
investments required may be absent for years. Apart from Costa Rica, local level planning in the region is
often disconnected from regional or national level plans, or lack medium or long term strategic goals. For
example, urban land development issues in Guatemala are addressed from several agencies, including the
Planning and Programing Secretariat of the Office of the President, (Segeplán) the Municipal Development
Institute (INFOM) and the Ministry of Communications which can have overlapping or competing goals
and priorities (World Bank 2015). Box 2 reviews Colombia’s experience with a legal framework that
provides municipalities with mechanisms to harness urban growth to finance public infrastructure while
cities grow. This allows local governments, service providers and developers to coordinate investment
priorities.




                                                                                                         81
    BOX 8. COLOMBIA: TOOLS FOR LINKING PLANNING WITH INFRASTRUCTURE
    FINANCE

    Colombia’s Territorial Development Law 388 (passed in 1997) provides a strong foundation for
    improving planning in infrastructure investment across the country. The law provides a framework
    for the development of coordinated spatial and sector plans for municipalities and also permit these
    entities to plan at the neighborhood level through overlay zones with an emphasis on urban design
    and land use. To date, more than 90 percent of cities have completed local plans. The law also
    provides that, public actions that improve urban land (e.g. zoning changes and increasing density)
    also allow local governments to capture a share (30-50 percent) of the resulting increase in market
    land values (plusvalías). These gains can be used to offset infrastructure costs for servicing newly
    designated areas for development. The law also provides other tools for land value capture, such as
    the auctioning of underutilized public lands and land readjustment.

    Medellín in particular has experimented with land pooling/readjustment approaches to both improve
    density, redevelop vacant or abandoned space and provide quality housing (Smolka 2014). Land
    pooling/readjustment is also an option for Colombian cities providing infrastructure to informal
    settlements while minimizing resident displacement and necessary government expenditures. Under
    a land readjustment approach, residents allow for the redistribution of their parcels, provided that a
    portion of each parcel is pooled together for infrastructure corridors and community facilities.
    Governments pay the upfront costs for infrastructure, but can recover costs through sale of excess
    land. While residents receive a smaller plot, its value is increased due to the infrastructure
    improvements.


26.      The steps required for obtaining building permits can add substantially to costs and time
required for completing new construction. This can deter investment and discourage full compliance
with standards. However, there is substantial variation in the time and costs for these regulatory activities
within countries. Table details sub-national indicators for ease of obtaining construction permits for a
warehouse facility. This can be used to assess permitting and regulatory capacity 49, which are also land and
infrastructure intensive.

27.       The results suggest a large variability in the standards and review procedures employed at
the local level. For example, while Leon (Nicaragua) ranks the lowest in property registration (see above),
it issues construction permits three times faster than Managua and for about one quarter the cost of Juigalpa.
Guatemalan cities rank at or near the bottom of the region with approval times of more than 130 days and
costs of up to 14 percent of the project value. In Costa Rica for example, new housing developments can
take between 3-4 years for final completion, with permit reviews representing 7.4-13.9% of the project cost.
In El Salvador, new housing developments can take up to 850 days (and up to 3.5 percent of the total project
value) for completion, varying on the size of the project and the institutions involved (UN-Habitat 2014).




  49 Construction permits for the Doing Business indicators examine warehouse development. Residential developments, however,

are similarly land and infrastructure intensive. This comparison is used as a general proxy for planning and permitting capacity.

                                                                                                                             82
                         Table 4. Obtaining construction permits, selected cities, 2015


                                                           Procedures      Time      Cost (% of
                      City (Country)             Rank
                                                            (number)      (days)       value)


             León (Nicaragua)                      1           11          62              2

             San Pedro Sula (Honduras)             2            9          68             4.8

             Puerto Cortés (Honduras)              3           14          32             3.2

             Estelí (Nicaragua)                    4           16          41              2

             San José (Costa Rica)                 5           13          113            1.7

             Panamá (Panama)                       6           15          101            2.1

             Santa Ana (El Salvador)               8           15          132            3.1

             Juigalpa (Nicaragua)                  9           14          70             7.6

             Tegucigalpa (Honduras)               12           15          82             7.2

             Guatemala (Guatemala)                13           11          158            7.9

             San Miguel (El Salvador)             14           18          144            3.7

             Managua (Nicaragua)                  15           16          207            2.7

             Soyapango (El Salvador)              16           17          163            5.6

             Quetzaltenango (Guatemala)           17           15          210            5.2

             San Salvador (El Salvador)           19           25          115            4.6

             Choluteca (Honduras)                 20           13          100            17.6

             Cobán (Guatemala)                    21           22          133            9.5

             Escuintla (Guatemala)                22           18          196            14.1

           Source: Doing Business 2015

    3.2.       CONNECTING HOUSING TO INFRASTRUCTURE

28.      Infrastructure is an important determinant of housing quality, though access is limited
especially to the urban poor. Infrastructure, both in terms of trunk utility connections and basic services
including health, education and public safety are important determinants of housing value and quality of
life. For example, targeted investments in water, sanitation has demonstrable effects in improving literacy
and incomes while reducing household health care expenditures (Parikh et al. 2015; Duflo et al. 2012).
However, infrastructure investments are large and capital intensive, especially when they are provided after
housing settlement has occurred. A study of slum upgrading in Brazil found that basic infrastructure
upgrading is 2.5 times the cost of providing these investments prior to development (Abiko 2007). This
underlines the need for coordination of planning and infrastructure investments before supporting new
housing development.

                                                                                                         83
29.     Access to improved sanitation is the most critical infrastructure deprivation for poor urban
households in the region. Across the region, electricity access is nearly universal and for most countries
approach or match averages across Latin America. Potable water access, especially in urban areas, also
approaches regional averages. However, improved sanitation systems, especially sewers, are absent from a
substantial share of urban dwellers, even in wealthier countries such as Costa Rica. Table shows the
percentage of households with infrastructure coverage both for urban and rural areas. Figure 4 below
summarizes infrastructure coverage for the poorest 40 percent of urban residents. It shows that while a
majority have access to clean water at levels that approach urban averages, most poor households do not
have improved restrooms and sewer connections. In Nicaragua, the urban poor have about half the level of
coverage, in Guatemala and El Salvador it is twenty percent less than the average for all urban households.
Improved sanitation systems, particularly contained sewage networks, reduce the incident of contamination
and exposure to communicable diseases. Unprotected and untreated sewage may otherwise seep into
groundwater, rivers or storm runoff.

                    Table 5. Percentage of households with infrastructure coverage, 201350

                               Water           Hygienic restrooms         Sewerage       Electricity
       Geography                                     Toilet in
                          Urban      Rural   Urban               Rural   Urban Rural    Urban    Rural
                                                     dwelling

       Costa Rica         99.9%      97.9%   99.5%    99.3%      94.4%   34.0%   8.2%   100.0% 99.1%
       El Salvador        85.0%      56.7%   71.2%    72.2%      15.3%   57.6%   0.8%   97.9%   90.6%
       Guatemala          90.0%      57.3%   74.8%    77.1%      15.3%   69.5%   7.7%   95.0%   71.6%
        Honduras          96.6%      77.2%   73.5%    73.5%      23.3%   60.9%   4.5%   99.0%   74.9%
       Nicaragua          89.8%      25.3%   46.1%    47.8%      2.6%    35.3%   0.3%   98.0%   45.0%

      LAC Region          94.4%      68.9%   84.8%      --       45.2%   62.1%   8.1%   99.1%   85.5%

 Source: Authors calculations, from SEDLAC, 2015




 50   Data for Panama are not available.

                                                                                                         84
       Figure 420. Coverage of urban infrastructure for bottom income quintiles, 2009-2013

            100
             90
             80
             70
             60                                                                      Improved Water
             50
                                                                                     Improved Restrooms
             40
                                                                                     Sewage Connection
             30
             20
             10
              0
                   Costa Rica   El Salvador   Guatemala   Honduras       Nicaragua


           Source: Authors calculations from SEDLAC, 2014
           Note: data for Nicaragua is from 2009, all others from 2013

30.     The lack of trunk infrastructure connections is reflective of weaknesses in planning and
coordination. This impacts both new formal developments as well as incremental, self-built housing.
Housing development should proceed in line with infrastructure planning and provision, but in the case of
informal settlements, infrastructure comes last. However, infrastructure access remains a barrier even for
formal developers. In Nicaragua, for example, private developers cite the lack of finance and technical
capacity by state-run utility providers as a major impediment to infrastructure provision in new
developments, along with the limited revenue capture capacity afforded to local governments in order to
extend municipal services to newly built developments (urbanizaciones).

31.      Infrastructure investment also has deep impacts on urban land markets. Commitments to
extend infrastructure or publication of development plans can spur speculative development that will
capture the enhanced market value that these services will provide. In select cities across Latin America,
serviced urban land is worth five times more than un-serviced urban land (in San Salvador, the value is 2.6
times higher) (IDB 2011 pg. 148). This cost is reflected in the market value of housing units, which reduces
affordability for lower income groups. The retroactive extension of network infrastructure connections to
these areas can be both disruptive to residents and even more expensive for governments due to additional
construction and possible resettlement costs. The declining access to services speaks to the importance of
establishing proper rights of way and prioritizing infrastructure expansion during the urban growth that CA
is experiencing. It also underscores the important link between reliable tenure security and infrastructure,
since most basic services are unlikely to expand into areas where people may not have secure tenure or the
capacity to pay for these services. The extension of these services can be seen as a signal of de-facto
formalization and can in turn drive land speculation and displacement.

    3.3.       PARTS AND LABOR
32.     The construction sector is a major economic driver across the region. In most countries, the
construction industry has grown consistently, likely due in part to housing policies that encourage new
housing construction through mortgage subsidies (or in the case of Panamá provide tax holidays), along

                                                                                                          85
with growth in the higher end residential markets and the influx of remittances for consumption. 51 In El
Salvador since 2004, about six percent of the labor force is engaged in construction work, but of these 84
percent are in the informal sector (UN-Habitat 2014). Formal and informal construction sectors also draw
from the same labor pool and in lower income countries such as Nicaragua, construction laborers, engineers
and architects tend to pursue higher paying work either domestically in resort or luxury projects or abroad
(such as Panamá or Costa Rica) where wages for the same work are higher.

33.      New formal housing units are targeted toward middle and lower-middle income groups with
access to finance. The lowest cost formal house provided by developers in the region ranges from between
$12,000-25,000 USD. 52 Outside of Managua for example, new fringe subdivision developments offer
housing units starting at $18,000 (for 38m2) ranging to more than $60,000 for larger units. In El Salvador,
such starter units would start at $28,500 (UN Habitat 2014). 53 While these units allow expansion, the
structures do not support an additional story. By contrast, used houses in Managua usually cost at least
$50,000 due to the location premium they afford. This reduces the tendency for older homes to filter to
lower income groups over time and effectively prices lower income groups out of the market. Furthermore,
consumer mortgage subsidy programs create incentives for developers to supply new houses and to reduce
prices in order to fit into eligibility criteria, often by purchasing and subdividing low-cost peripheral land.

34.     Non-profit and community groups have partnered with governments for housing purchase
and upgrading programs. Non-profit providers supporting self-built housing can assist with housing
quality improvements for less than the cost of new housing. El Salvador’s FUNDASAL pioneered an
approach later adopted by governments and NGOs in neighboring countries (See Box 4 below). Through
donor assistance beginning in the 1980s, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala and Honduras
each established housing development organizations that provide technical assistance and act as second tier
finance organizations for banks, MFIs and cooperatives (Stein and Vance 2007). Habitat for Humanity, a
non-profit developer, provides self-help 40m2 housing units for families in smaller towns and the urban
periphery of Managua for a cost of about $175-200 USD/m2 (excluding land cost and infrastructure
connections). 54 These are based on prefabricated designs utilizing a concrete floor, brick walls and
corrugated zinc roof panels.




  51 Honduras is an exception, where political instability and a macroeconomic downturn has steadily contracted the level of formal
construction activity since 2009.
  52 These figures come from interviews with commercial developers and a review of available figures in secondary sources.
  53 Data on comparative costs of housing inputs are scarce, though across the region costs for the same inputs may vary

considerably; in San Salvador, infrastructure and administrative costs on new units comprise 40 percent of the total unit cost but in
Buenos Aires these inputs are only 20 percent. By contrast materials and labor are half the total unit cost in San Salvador while
they are three quarters of the cost in Buenos Aires (IDB 2012b)
  54 Habitat has also piloted the introduction of mini-septic systems to replace unimproved latrines. These units cost $600 and can

be built and maintained by beneficiary households.

                                                                                                                                 86
      BOX 9. SLUM UPGRADING: THE CASE OF FUNDASAL IN EL SALVADOR

      FUNDASAL (Fundación Salvadorena de Desarrollo y Vivienda Minima) is an NGO that was
      organized in 1968 to address housing need following urban flooding damage in San Salvador. The
      organization experimented with pilot projects in financing and upgrading low income neighborhoods
      through organizing residents and providing access to serviced land to allow incremental self-built
      home improvements. In 1974 they obtained a World Bank loan to take the program to a national
      scale, benefiting 12,000 households over nine years. Since its inception and with the support of the
      World Bank and European donor agencies the organization has financed the construction and
      improvement of 44,868 houses, benefiting 267,650 people.
       More recently, FUNDASAL has developed a microfinance arm (Credihábitat) for housing
      improvements targeted to low income and informal sector workers with home-based enterprises.
      Loans are used for home purchase, incremental construction and land purchase or regularization.
      FUNDASAL provides technical assistance including site planning, and design and sells construction
      materials for use at a discount. The case demonstrates both the complementary role that civil society
      actors can have in sustainable low income housing provision and also the existing technical capacity
      and institutional experience in large scale upgrading schemes including lot purchase and legalization,
      basic service provision and progressive housing improvements.


35.      Most basic building materials are sourced locally and are not a major impediment to
affordability. Cement bricks are the most common building materials and are made locally or distributed
through large suppliers such as Cemex and Holcim. 55 Imported materials include steel, ceramics and
furnishings. Quarried stone (piedra cantera) and adobe are also used by lower income groups as a less
costly alternative, especially in rural areas, though the quality and strength of these blocks is not inspected.
Newer building technologies for houses, such as cold form steel frame construction, are new and
comparatively more expensive, but reduce construction times and offer strength and durability especially
to weather or seismic hazards that occur in the region. Most informal builders do not obtain permits or
inspections for construction, especially in smaller towns where technical capacity is low.

      3.4.      BUYING A HOME
36.      Apart from Costa Rica, access to formal finance in the region is low. Figure 5 below shows
housing-related indicators of finance penetration. It shows that Costa Rica, Panamá and Guatemala have
the highest levels of formal finance participation. However, across the region, the proportion of the
population (older than 15) with a savings account is at or below 20 percent. Among the poorest 40 percent,
it is even lower; just 4.1 percent in El Salvador and 2.9 percent in Nicaragua. Mortgage penetration is also
low, averaging 9.7 percent across the region or about one third the rate of OECD countries. This is also
shown in Figure 6 where national level mortgage to GDP levels are slightly higher than the regional average
and comparable to that of Georgia, a country of similar per-capita GDP, but far below that of Spain. In El
Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala, mortgage debt among the wealthiest 60 percent is nearly twice as
common as among lower income groups. The difference is smaller in Costa Rica, Panamá and Nicaragua
which have introduced mortgage subsidy programs to make these loans more affordable.

 55   In El Salvador for example, only 10 percent of concrete is imported (UN-Habitat 2014).

                                                                                                               87
         Figure 521. Selected access to finance indicators, 2014, percentage of population

70.0



60.0



50.0



40.0



30.0



20.0



10.0



 0.0
        Costa Rica      Panama        Guatemala       Honduras        El Salvador        Nicaragua    Rest of LAC
                                 Account at a financial institution
                                 Saved at a financial institution
                                 Saved at a financial institution, income, poorest 40%
                                 Outstanding mortgage
                                 Outstanding mortgage, income, poorest 40%
                                 Outstanding mortgage, income, richest 60%
Source: Global Findex

                        Figure 6. Total outstanding mortgages as percent of GDP

         70

         60

         50

         40

         30

         20

         10

          0
              Panama Costa RicaEl Salvador Honduras Guatemala Nicaragua         Rest of       Spain   Georgia
                                                                                 LAC

       Source: Hofinet Note: Data are current values and are from most recent year (Costa Rica: 2009; Panama
       2012: other CA countries 2013; Spain: 2012 and Georgia: 2013)

                                                                                                                    88
37.      Formal mortgages are not within reach of the informal sector and low income groups.
Mortgage terms range between 15-25 years, require down payments of between 5 and 20 percent and feature
interest rates of between 8 and 15 percent. These terms are favorable for middle and upper income
consumers given typical housing costs, but they would represent significant burdens to poor households. 56
Commercial mortgages in El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Panamá, Costa Rica can be - and sometimes
are only - issued in dollars. Lower income groups, especially those in the informal sector, are not paid in
dollars and should they have the option to obtain a mortgage in local currency, as in Costa Rica, the interest
rate can be twice as high as the dollar-backed alternative (IDB 2012).

38.     Lower income groups also tend to work in the informal sector and lack proof of or regularity
of income. Figure 7 below shows the estimated urban population that would not be able afford a sample
house with a mortgage due to income and access to finance constraints 57, and the extent to which mortgage
finance is unavailable to households due to either low or undocumented incomes, compared with other
major cities in Latin America, showing that in most cases these factors are significant barriers for would-
be home owners. Proof of property ownership is required for mortgage lending, which is often difficult to
obtain in informally or illegally settled areas or where and registries are incomplete. For example, in El
Salvador, 16.6 percent of informal households own their unit but not the land it is on (UN-Habitat 2014).
In Guatemala, some 39 percent of homeowners do not have title (IDB 2011), while in Nicaragua 80 percent
of owners have at least partial claim to their land but lack title registration (Stein and Vance 2007).

         Figure 722. Estimated housing affordability gap for mortgage finance based on low or
                               undocumented income, select cities, 2011

                 60

                 50

                 40

                 30

                 20

                 10

                  0




                      Source: IDB 2011



  56 For example, the lowest cost formal housing unit in San Jose, Tegucigalpa and Guatemala are equivalent to about one year’s

average household income in those cities respectively; ranging from between $USD12,000 – 18,000 (IDB 2011). Given standard
mortgage finance assumptions at these income levels, the houses would likely not present an affordability challenge.
  57 The table shows the estimated percentage of urban households that would be able to purchase a formal house. The estimates

are based on data compiled from city-level household surveys measuring expenditures compared to a hypothetical formal housing
unit price. The unit price of is a composite estimate based housing prices compiled from formal housing costs drawn from cities
across the region; construction costs are assumed to be $11,000 after $4,000 for land acquisition, giving a final price of $15,000.
Finance terms are 10 percent down payment, with a 6 percent interest rate over 20 years. Housing affordability is calculated as a
maximum of 30 percent of household income for housing/mortgage expenditure (IDB 2011, pg. 61).

                                                                                                                               89
    BOX 10. EXTENDING HOUSING FINANCE TO THE URBAN POOR

    Nicaragua: Rafcasa
    RAFCASA began in 2007 with the goal of introducing informal sector workers (particularly those
    earning 4 minimum salaries or less) to financial access.1 The company provides a platform for
    demonstrating household savings capacity with the purpose of developing credit history for mortgage
    loans. They require steady savings for a period of 24 months for an amount of approximately $1500,
    with interest accrued to the participant. The organization works with a large commercial bank (Banco
    de Finanzas, BDF) which provides mortgages to program participants who complete the program
    without missing a savings installment, of which 98 percent of participants pay fully and on time. The
    bank has also partnered with five private housing developers to link beneficiaries with new units for
    purchase. Participants may also be eligible for mortgage subsidies, including the down payment
    subsidy and mortgage interest subsidy provided the value of the house meets eligibility requirements.

    Colombia: Credifamilia
    Credifamilia began in 2011 with a focus on extending housing finance to low income groups that
    have traditionally been unable to access commercial mortgages through strategic partnerships with
    developers and microfinance lenders. They have developed innovative tools such as assistance to
    clients in estimating estimate household earning and savings patterns, requiring small savings
    contributions for loan eligibility and using an innovative credit scoring system using that includes
    records of payments for utilities and other services as a proxy for payment reliability. Participants
    are also able to apply for government subsidies applied to their down payment which further reduces
    the cost of home purchase. Credifamilia also offers a range of products from small loans of $3,000
    over 5 years for home improvement to larger loans of around $30,000 (15 years) for home purchase
    or construction. After three years of operation, the company disburses between 3 and 4 million per
    month in mortgages 80 percent of which are directed to the poor (IDB 2014).

39.      Low income groups rely on savings, informal borrowing or microcredit for home
improvement and expansion. While mortgage finance is concentrated among higher income groups,
foreigners and expatriates, most lower income groups access finance for housing through personal savings,
remittances, credit cooperatives and microfinance sources. As Table 611 below demonstrates, microfinance
is popular in Nicaragua, Guatemala and Honduras, where there are many providers and loans tend to be
small. Higher income countries such as Costa Rica and Panama have fewer providers, but loans tend to be
larger. Remittances are also an important source of household consumption generally and for housing in
particular. Nicaraguans received $1.07 billion in remittances in 2015 (BCN 2015). UN-Habitat (2014;
xviii) estimates that $390 million in remittances are used for housing investment in El Salvador each year.




                                                                                                        90
                          Table 611. Select indicators of the microfinance sector, 2013

                                                                             Gross Loan         Outstanding
                                      Number of            Active
                Country                                                       Portfolio         Portfolio Per
                                        MFIs              Borrowers
                                                                               (USD)            Capita (USD)
                Costa Rica                 14                25,032           74,184,950              2,964
                El Salvador                11               139,787           368,458,455             2,636
                Guatemala                  15               356,825           189,154,072              530
                Honduras                   23               181,109           387,892,273             2,142
                Nicaragua                  22               316,024           313,034,496              991
                Panama                      6                43,473           178,961,839             4,117

               Source: MixMarket

40.      Housing microfinance products have gained traction as an option for home improvement and
expansion. In Nicaragua, several MFIs offer housing microfinance bundled with technical assistance
provided by non-profit organizations such as Habitat for Humanity and PRODEL. These loans are typically
around US$1,000 with an interest rate of 30 percent and a term of 18 months to two years. The target market
are households with incomes at around 300 dollars per month, or around 3-4 minimum salaries. The high
interest rate is a reflection of the risk undertaken by the MFI for these loans as they do not require collateral
or a guarantor but rather a credit assessment based on borrowing history with the institution. Furthermore,
MFIs undertake additional costs in borrowing from secondary capital markets to package these longer term
loans, which lenders cited as a major impediment to reducing the cost and availability of the products,
which constitute only about US$20 million of the country’s microfinance portfolio.

     4. ENABLING OWNERSHIP: GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN HOUSING

41.     All countries have a housing policy that aims to provide housing to low income groups by
placing the government as a housing sector facilitator. All countries have constitutional provisions for
a national housing policy with emphasis on providing housing for low income and vulnerable options
(Cuenin et al 2012). 58 The key differences between policies are the depth of the role of government in
housing provision; El Salvador, Panama and Costa Rica have tended toward supporting the private
provision of housing foundational support for housing markets including securing property rights for land,
improving the flexibility of regulatory standards and developing a supportive legal framework for housing
finance. Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua have also experimented with these interventions, though at a
policy level, adequate housing is viewed more explicitly as a right for all citizens worthy of more direct
intervention. In the past, this included government-built social housing, though this is no longer wide spread
in the region. These policies are broadly consistent with an “enabling approach” toward housing that
provides government a role in overseeing housing markets, and correcting their failures (World Bank 1993;
Buckley and Kalarickal 2006). 59


  58El Salvador has had a consistent policy of ensuring housing provision for all residents (UN-Habitat 2014). Similarly, Panama’s
Constitution (Article 117) allows for government involvement in housing. Guatemala’s 2004 National Housing Policy provided
citizens the right to decent housing and obligated the government in its provision (Ward 2015).
  59 This contrasts with an interventionist approach where the government provides housing directly at below market prices, provide

large or hidden subsidies through poorly designed interest rate subsidies, the application of price or rent ceilings or other market
distortionary measures (Chiquier and Lea 2009).

                                                                                                                                91
42.      Intergovernmental coordination and continuity is a key challenge for housing policy
implementation. National level housing agencies also tend to be primarily involved in implementing
subsidy programs and typically operate independently of the needs or demands of municipal governments.
There is little incentive to coordinate subsidy disbursements, with for example, parallel investment in
infrastructure or transportation, or in areas identified in local long-term planning documents. For example,
while Costa Rica’s housing policy calls for the participation of municipal governments alongside the
Ministry of Housing and Human Settlements, there is little incentive for them to do so in practice. While
Guatemala has recently updated its housing policy, the lack of coordinating authority has slowed
implementation. Nicaragua has also faced a discontinuity and a short term horizons in housing policy
priorities, which is further limited a lack of legal clarity, limited budget resources and a shifting set of public
sector actors charged with implementing housing policies since the 1990s.


   BOX 11. ACCESS TO HOUSING THROUGH SUBSIDIES

   Costa Rica is the only country in the region that has been able to consistently meet or exceed
   quantitative formal housing deficits, largely through its direct demand subsidy program (Held 2000).
   The subsidy program is the product of a longer term commitment to improving social welfare
   outcomes, including housing since the 1950s, (Gutierrez et al. 1993). The centerpiece of Costa Rica’s
   approach to housing is a one-time subsidy to qualifying households (bono familiar de vivienda),
   introduced in 1986 during a period of economic instability and political pressure for more affordable
   housing (Jenkins and Smith 2001).

   Under this system, the Ministry of Housing and Human Settlements oversees a two state owned
   financial institutions, the National Housing Finance System (SFNV) which channels subsidies in
   partnerships 23 banks, credit cooperatives and other lending organizations and the Housing Mortgage
   Bank (BANHVI) a second tier lender capitalized by international donors and a 3 percent budget set
   aside which provides financing for the mortgage subsidies
   Developers propose housing projects to the SNFV for subsidy eligibility based on the unit cost,
   receiving short term development finance to complete construction. Low-income families are
   eligible for a one-time subsidy in the amount of USD$12,000 to cover the purchase of a completed
   house, a plot or self-construction, with any remaining portion requiring a commercial loan (the
   subsidy amount depends on the household income though those making more than USD$ 2,820 are
   not eligible). In cases of extreme poverty or emergency, households can receive a subsidy of up to
   USD$50,000. A savings contribution of 15 percent of the housing cost is also required. Since the
   beginning of SNFV, more than 260,000 subsidies have been disbursed. Subsidies for developers
   support the delivery of around 10,000 units annually.




                                                                                                                92
   BOX 5 (CONTINUED). ACCESS TO HOUSING THROUGH SUBSIDIES

   While the subsidies are well targeted to low income groups, there remain several challenges to the
   long term sustainability of the SNFV. First, there is no coordination between housing project location
   and subsidy criteria. Developers indicated that the high cost of urban land must be integrated into
   the unit cost, which raises prices and makes the units less affordable to low income groups (even
   with the subsidy). Indeed, the cost of housing encourages many families to use the bono to acquire
   a plot rather than a completed unit; since 2001 52 percent of subsidies have gone for plot purchase
   and housing and 63 percent have been used in rural areas (IDB 2011).Second, the subsidy relies in
   part on a budget commitment which has steadily declined in recent years as the government has
   sought to reallocate funds or has simply been slow to disburse them (IDB 2011). Finally, there is a
   risk that subsidized mortgages could crowd out competition; currently subsidized mortgages
   comprise about 53 percent formal housing and the nearly all mortgages are between 15 and 20 years.
   A guarantee mechanism could support greater competition among commercial banks to offer longer
   term loans at lower interest rates.


43.      Table below summarizes major housing programs from the region. It shows that subsidies
for mortgages, both on the consumer side (through down payment assistance) and on the lender side
(interest rate subsidies and mortgage guarantees) are common. Settlement upgrading programs are also
typical (though they are relatively small in scale and as a share of government investment in housing) as
are support for plot acquisition and home improvement, though these also tend to be more modest in scale
and public investment compared to mortgage subsidies. Apart from Panama, supply side interventions such
as the direct provision of housing are rare. The majority of workers do not have access to formal banking
and are unlikely to meet the qualifications for commercial mortgages to access subsidies.

                                Table 7. Housing policies in Central America

               Government-as-housing supplier             →          →          →      Government-as-market-enabler

 Summary of      Financing                                         Consumer     Financing     Support
                                 Settlement                                                                   Subsidies for
                 for a unit                     Finance for home   mortgage        for           for
 Housing        with a price
                               upgrading and
                                                  improvement       subsidy    incremental   subdivision
                                                                                                            lenders (interest
 Programs                      infrastructure                                                              rates, guarantees)
                   ceiling                                           (cash)   improvement      of land

 Costa Rica                         ✓                 ✓               ✓                                           ✓
 El Salvador                        ✓                                 ✓                          ✓                ✓
 Guatemala                                            ✓               ✓           ✓                               ✓
 Honduras                           ✓                 ✓               ✓                                           ✓
 Nicaragua                          ✓                 ✓               ✓           ✓                               ✓
 Panama             ✓               ✓                 ✓               ✓           ✓                               ✓
Source: IDB 2012, with updates

44.     Despite the need for settlement upgrading, efforts to date do not meet current and future
need. In El Salvador, government-led neighborhood upgrading programs have benefitted just 8,626 families
from 2004-2010 (UN Habitat 2014). Similarly, Honduras’ Housing Solidarity Program (Programa de

                                                                                                                        93
Vivienda Soldaria) started in 2006, has only improved 3,500 units for low income families. Guatemala’s
national subsidy program, which includes several subsidy-based schemes for housing purchase, and
reduced financing options for home improvement and land acquisition, disbursed for only 13,466 units in
2014. Nicaragua’s Neighborhood Improvement Program (Programa de Mejoramiento de Barrios) has
upgraded neighborhoods in 14 cities since 2012, with contributions from the government, municipalities
and each households ($2,600 per lot) to provide street lighting, drainage, power, sanitation and water
treatment for 3,902 households. In each case subsidies are targeted to low-income communities and assist
with improving housing quality, but at a scale too small for significant improvement of the housing stock.

45.      Mortgage subsidies reduce the cost of housing, but units remain unaffordable to the urban
poor. Housing affordability is assessed in terms of household income dedicate for housing costs such as
rent or mortgage service. International experience suggests that housing is unaffordable when it consumes
more than 30 percent of expenditures. In Nicaragua, 47 percent of households earn less than $350 per month
(Habitat for Humanity 2008). Assuming receipt of the $1,500 down payment assistance and a 3 percent
interest rate subsidy for the first 10 years, the initial monthly payments of $132 would exceed the
affordability levels for most households in this group. 60 In El Salvador, only the top 2 quintiles could afford
subsidized monthly mortgage payments of $118 required for a qualifying house (UN-Habitat 2014). 61 This
may account for the slow take up of mortgage subsidies for low income groups; only 63,039 have been
disbursed since 1992; a total expenditure of $115 million (UN-Habitat 2014). The IDB (2011b) estimates
that 90 percent of demand for improved housing is in El Salvador and Costa Rica among households earning
4 minimum wages (about $800 and $900, respectively) or less. In Panama half of housing need is for
households making less than $250 per month.

46.      National level housing policies and programs need to be coupled with improvements in local
urban planning and management to avoid distorting land markets and urban development patterns.
As discussed in Chapter 2, improving the coordination and planning capacities among local governments
and national level agencies, could improve the efficiency of housing subsidies and reduce urban service
investment costs. Nicaragua’s mortgage subsidy is tied to housing value, which encourages developers to
reduce sale prices in order to allow consumers to qualify. However, where materials, labor and permitting
costs tend to be fixed, developers have focused on the urban fringe where land is cheap. In two new peri-
urban developments near Managua, the highest demand is for units that are eligible for the mortgage interest
rate subsidy (up to seventy percent or more of all units are financed with the subsidy, which is linked to
unit price, not consumer income). 62 The developments also lack proximity to commercial and service uses,
have limited public transportation services and require commutes of up to an hour each way. Mexico
provides a case of how subsidies can be directed to encourage densification and infill development rather
than continued low-density urban expansion.



   60 Assumptions include: $18,000 unit cost, 10 percent down payment, $1,500 subsidy, mortgage interest subsidy of 3 percent for

first 10 years of 20 year mortgage. Commercial lending rate of 12 percent interest for the final 10 years.
   61 Assumptions include 25% affordability threshold, housing price of $14,868. 5 percent down payment and 25 year mortgage

term at 9 percent interest.
   62 The subsidy is targeted to loans of $32,000 or less, with deductions from the market interest rate ranging from 3.5-2.5 percent

depending on the value of the loan for 10 years. The larger the loan, the lower the interest rate subsidy awarded. Linking the subsidy
to housing value makes it difficult to estimate how many more low income households are able to purchase a unit that otherwise
could not afford it. It is possible that the subsidy is providing access to formal housing to those who could otherwise afford a
market-rate mortgage.

                                                                                                                                  94
BOX 12. LINKING HOUSING SUBSIDIES WITH URBAN GROWTH

Since 2000 both the types and overall volume of government subsidies in the Mexican housing sector
has grown markedly. For example in 2000, a total of 400,000 mortgages were originated and by 2008
there were 1.4 million, with more than 60 percent coming from housing finance subsidy programs
aimed at reducing the cost of mortgages for consumers and providing subsidies and guarantees for
lenders.
Between 1980 and 2010, the urban population of Mexico doubled, but the urban footprint expanded
seven times (SEDESOL 2011). This low density growth not only exacerbated deficiencies in
infrastructure coverage as piecemeal or leapfrogging development but also distorted land markets by
increasing speculation and reducing available green space and agricultural land.
In 2013, the government has reconsidered the subsidy allocations by including a spatial criteria which
increases the size of subsidies based on housing development in areas that are within or proximate
to urban zones. The purpose of this adjustment was to control urban expansion, reduce housing
deficits and promote urban mobility and connectivity.
The criteria include
  1) Location (within one of three designated “zones” contornos)
  2) Density (based on proposed density or Floor Area Ratio of the project)
  3) Services (the presence of services and infrastructure connections)
  4) Competitiveness (proposals that provided sustainable financial models)
In exchange satisfying these criteria, a developer can receive technical assistance for environmental
review and permitting, infrastructure financing guarantees, housing subsidies and preferential
support from land banks.
Despite the changes, developers have been slow to produce housing in urban contornos and that
which has been built is not affordable for the lowest income quintile. There two main reasons for
this. First, serviced land, even in vacant or underutilized urban spaces is expensive to assemble and
develop, which reduces the incentive for developers to utilize the subsidy programs because it will
not cover development costs. Second, the subsidy program originates at the federal level and local
governments have had little involvement or incentive. Improving the coordination of local
government involvement with land use regulations, land assembly and development controls or
incentives could lower the cost and risk for developers in providing housing in areas with existing
proximity to infrastructure and jobs.




                                                                                                         95
BOX 13. UNITED STATES: IMPROVING COORDINATION FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING PROVISION

The HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) is an affordable housing program supported
through the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The program was launched in 1990
and provides federal support to various affordable housing options for low income populations
through a system of block grants to state and municipal governments. The annual budget for the
program is about $1 billion, 40 percent of which is shared among 50 state governments and the rest
is allocated to local governments. Governments access the money by forming a “participating
jurisdiction” (of which there are 643) which may include multiple governments across administrative
boundaries and by partnering with an experienced non-profit group to implement the proposed
housing project.
The HOME program focuses on improving the quality and availability of housing for low income
groups by providing funding for local governments to implement projects that would be too costly
to otherwise complete. State governments develop their own housing needs assessments and plans
based on local market and demographic needs for low income groups. These criteria include the
incidence of poverty, housing affordability gaps, the overall quality of housing stock (age,
overcrowding, infrastructure connection). Grants vary in size and are awarded for proposals based
on how well they meet these plans and require a commitment to match 25 percent of the requested
amount with other funding sources, which can include donations of money, property or labor.
Eligible activities include:
•   Support for financing assistance for home purchase for low income households
•   Support for developers to build or renovate housing to accommodate low income renters or
    buyers, including the offset of land assembly, demolition or relocation expenses necessary to
    complete the project. A certain portion of the developments must be set aside for low income
    households
•   Rental vouchers for eligible low income tenants
The block grant approach provides support and flexibility to local governments in determining how
best to address the scarcity of quality affordable housing. It relies on local governments to identify
particular needs and work in partnership with civil society groups and the private sector to determine
the location, scale and type of housing solution given local demands and market conditions. Since
1992 the program has provided support to 274,944 renters and has produced over 1.1 million physical
units, 42 percent of which are occupied by households with incomes less than 30 percent of the Area
Median Income (AMI), the target beneficiary group.

Source; Gramlich, 2014.




                                                                                                         96
    5. A WAY FORWARD: HOUSING AS A CATALYST FOR URBAN PROSPERITY
47.     The recommendations are linked to bridge the gap between the informal and formal housing
delivery. There are three overlapping areas of policy intervention at the national level that provide an entry
point to housing sector reform. These areas (detailed in Figure 8 below) aim to strengthen the overall
housing sector for all markets and housing types, reduce the cost of purchasing or financing formal housing
and improve the quality of informal housing for the poor.

                    Figure 823. Improving housing delivery across income groups




    5.1.    PRIORITIES AT A NATIONAL LEVEL
48.     Cross-cutting interventions can improve the overall function of the housing sector. This
includes improvement in land administration and property registration systems used by municipal
governments as well as introducing flexible or graduated standards to support incremental housing
improvements and encourage density and infill development. Setting up national level housing
observatories can be instrumental in tracking land and property markets, particularly with data on prices,
volumes and sales trends. These data can assist both banks and private developers and can be useful for
developing and targeting subsidies to low income populations. Additionally, housing policy support for
formalized rental housing provides an additional option and greater locational flexibility for residents.

49.       Reforms to the banking sector to reduce the cost and risk for formal housing delivery Finance
is an important component for both housing production and consumption. Governments can introduce
reforms to encourage competition in mortgage lending and identify screening, and alternative qualification
criteria for low income borrowers. Support for development finance for rental housing or linking mortgage
subsidies to housing location can better align housing supply with needs. Reforms can support smaller


                                                                                                           97
lenders such as microfinance institutions and credit cooperatives to scale up lending for housing
consumption for middle and lower income groups.

50.     Targeted infrastructure upgrades can improve housing quality for low income groups.
Mapping and assessment of conditions in informal settlements can direct investment in basic services to
those who need them the most. A national level initiative for informal settlement mapping and pro-poor
targeting of investments can assist municipal governments in identifying and addressing service gaps.
Housing policy support for self-building, such as targeted subsidies for small loans and in-kind construction
materials, or serviced “core” or “starter” units that can be incrementally expanded by owner-builders or
local contractors will also improve access to quality housing for the poor.

51.      Housing policies need to incorporate and strengthen links between national level programs
and subsidies and the tools and capacities of local governments. They must also provide a framework
for coordination between sub-national governments and relevant ministries including housing,
transportation, finance and infrastructure with the purpose of improving low-income neighborhoods. This
will both reduce overlapping or redundant public investments and direct housing subsidies to urban areas
that will be more environmentally and economically sustainable. Partnerships and alliances between local
governments (mancomunidades) discussed previously would provide an important convening role for these
dialogues. Similarly, housing policies should also support a plurality of housing and tenure options (apart
from privileging single-family detached houses) in line with local and regional needs. Local governments
should also obtain the tools and capacities to develop plans that would better allow them to coordinate long
term investment and housing needs planning with neighboring jurisdictions.

52.      Housing interventions should be linked with land use planning in order to promote density.
As discussed previously, primary cities in the region have been growing through low-density urban
expansion, which reduces the economic advantages offered by urban agglomerations. Planning and land
value capture tools can play a major role in improving the quality and stock of housing in large cities. This
can be enhanced further when national level housing programs or subsidy schemes include links to local
land use and capital investment plans. In this way, local governments can direct subsidized housing
investment dense, serviced and built-up areas of the city, rather than the urban periphery that lack
infrastructure. However, there is currently little if any legal or institutional support at the national level for
developing these approaches for municipal governments.

53.      Improving the quality of informal housing can encourage inclusive urbanization. Most
countries have also provided subsidies for home improvement and expansion and given the predominance
of this approach in informal settlements, these efforts are worth bringing to scale through linking with
technical assistance and community-upgrading programs. A stocktaking of the location and housing
conditions within informal settlements could be used to guide priorities and targeting criteria for upgrading.
More policy support at the national level should be given to non-bank financial institutions such as MFIs
and savings groups as well as the role of housing cooperatives as an option for financing and developing
low income units. For most of the urban poor, these organizations represent the only option for developing
savings or credit histories and would be well placed to leverage the extensive remittances received by
households with migrant laborers. These institutions would benefit from a legal and regulatory framework
that would allow for leveraging these sources of income and savings and would enable alternative
creditworthiness assessments for the informally employed, such as the case of RAFCASA.


                                                                                                               98
    5.2.    PRIORITIES AT A CITY LEVEL
54.     Cities can have a key place in developing an inclusive housing system. The differing sizes and
form of primary and secondary cities in the region should inform the policy options for supporting housing
delivery in each. For primary and capital cities, a diversity of housing types in proximity to existing job
centers and services is needed. Growing secondary cities will need to improve planning and coordination
to ensure that new urban growth provides residents access to services and reduces the incidence of new
informal settlements. The recommendations in the next section provide a general overview of solutions.
More detailed, country-specific diagnostics of the housing sector would be needed to provide more specific
recommendations and action plans for each country.

55.      With proper support, municipal governments can assemble public land for private housing
development. For example, vacant parcels can be taxed at higher rates in order to encourage development,
as has been done in Mexico. Requests for proposal (RFPs) mechanisms can encourage competitive bids to
build low cost housing on underutilized local government land. Other tools such as Tax Increment
Financing can encourage infill development by allowing cities pay for infrastructure improvements through
borrowing against future tax revenues. Informal settlements can be improved through the use of land
readjustment, where residents release a portion of their plot to allow for infrastructure provision and receive
a slightly smaller, but serviced (and higher value) plot at the same location.

56.     Cities also need to explore options for promoting or formalizing low cost rentals. Large cities
also tend to be the most supportive of rental markets, which can be an affordable alternative to home
purchase. Legal protections and obligations for tenants and landlords can be further developed, along with
subsidies or tax exemptions for petty landlords to let out spare rooms or units. Rental voucher programs
can be included in housing policies and would allow lower income renters additional mobility and choice.

57.      Secondary cities will need prospective planning to accommodate new population growth. As
urbanization trends continues, these local governments will play an important role in providing quality
housing. Local governments will need technical support and capacity building to coordinate land use
planning and housing by identifying areas for infrastructure provision and rights of way, a process called
guided land development (Angel 2012). This will signal to housing developers where future public
investments, such as sites and services, will be directed. At the same time, municipalities must also explore
ways to use urban land to sustainably finance infrastructure and urban service investments to new areas.
Such tools could include impact fees and special assessment districts where private developers share the
cost of infrastructure provision. Local governments can also create and enforce plans to identify hazardous
areas prone to natural disasters in order to discourage housing development in these places.

58.     Cross-cutting interventions can support the function of the housing sector across income
groups. Governments, especially at the local level, have an important role in developing the framework
through which housing markets can function more equitably and efficiently. Strengthening land
administration systems including land registries and cadasters that local governments use can reduce the
time and costs for getting necessary approvals required for transferring or collateralizing property. For low
income groups, municipal governments can adopt a regulatory framework that allows for graduated
standards or alternative materials and construction types encourage the formalization of self-built units
without unnecessarily high costs.



                                                                                                            99
            6. REFERENCES



Angel, S. (2012). Planet of cities. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.


Angel, S., Parent, J., Civco, D. L., & Blei, A. M. (2010). The persistent decline in urban densities: Global and
       historical evidence of sprawl. Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Working Paper.

Bonvalet, C., & Lelièvre, E. (1997). The transformation of housing and household structures in France and Great
       Britain. International Journal of Population Geography, 3(3), 183-201.

Bonvalet, Catherine., and Lelievre, Eva. (1997). The transformation of housing and household structures in
       France and Great Britain” International Journal of Population Geography Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 183-207


Bredenoord, J., & van der Meulen, B. (2014). Self-help housing and upcoming policies for affordable housing in
       Nicaragua. Affordable Housing in the Urban Global South: Seeking Sustainable Solutions, 300.

Bredenoord, J., & van der Meulen, B. (2014). Self-help housing and upcoming policies for affordable housing in
       Nicaragua. Affordable Housing in the Urban Global South: Seeking Sustainable Solutions, 300.

Camera       Panamena       de      la      Construccion     (CAPAC).         2014.     “Estadisticas   de
         Empleo” http://www.capac.org/index.php/2015-03-17-15-34-21/estadi-sticas-de-empleo-agosto-2014

Chiquier, L. and M. Lea (2009) Housing finance policy in emerging markets. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Cuenin, F., Piedrafita, C., Rojas, E. and Nadin Medellin. (2012). Hammering out a housing policy that works in
       Bouillon, C. (editor) Room for Development: Housing Markets in Latin America and the
       Caribbean. Washington DC; Inter American Development Bank. Pp 239-280


Gramlich, E. (2014). HOME Investment Partnerships Program. National Low Income Housing Coalition.

Gutierrez, J., Van Vliet, W. Arias, E and Rosendo Pujol. (1993). In defence of housing: Housing policies and
        practices in Costa Rica. Habitat International vol. 17, no. 2, pp-63-72.

Hábitat para la Humanidad. (2008). Información clave sobre La Situación Actual de la Vivienda Social en
        Nicaragua. Retrieved January 28, 2016 http://www.habitat.org/lc/lac/pdf/situacion_vivienda_nicaragua.pdf

Held, G. 2000. “Políticas de vivienda de interés social orientadas al mercado: Experiencias recientes con subsidios
       a la demanda en Chile, Costa Rica y Colombia.” Proyecto Interdivisional CEPAL “Instituciones y
       Mercados” Santiago de Chile.



                                                                                                               100
Housing Finance Information Network (Hofinet). Hofinet note. http://www.hofinet.org/index.aspx

IDB. (2008.) Programa de Mejoramiento de las Condiciones Habitacionales. Proyecto PN-L1002
IDB. (2011). The Missing Foundations of Housing Finance: Incomplete Markets, Fragmented Policies and
       Emerging Solutions in Guatemala. Technical Notes, No. IDB-TN-286. Inter-American Development Bank
       .Washington, DC.

IDB. (2012). Housing Finance in Central America: What is Holding it Back. Technical Notes, No. IDB-TN-285.
       Inter-American Development Bank .Washington, DC.

IDB. (2012b). Room for development: Housing markets in Latin America and the Caribbean. Inter-American
       Development Bank. Washington, DC.

IDB. (2014). Se busca vivienda en Alquiler: Opciones de política en América Latina y el Caribe. Inter-American
       Development Bank: Washington DC.

Ministerio de Vivienda y Asentamientos Humanos (MIVAH). (2014). Compendio Estadistico de Vivienda
2014. http://www.mivah.go.cr/Biblioteca_Estadisticas.shtml


Monkonnen, Paavo. (2013). Housing deficits as a frame for housing policy: demographic change, economic crisis
      and household formation in Indonesia. International Journal of Housing Policy Vol. 13, No. 3, pp.247-
      267


Nickson, A. (2011). Where is Local Government in Latin America? A Comparative Perspective. Working Paper
       No. 6. Swedish International Center for Local Democracy.

Pujol-Mesalles, R. and Pérez Molina, E. (2013). Urban Growth in the Metropolitan region of San José, Costa Rica:
       A Spatial and Temporal Exploration of the Determinates op of Land Use Change, 1986-2010.

R.M. Buckley, J. Kalarickal. (2006). Thirty years of World Bank shelter lending: What have we learned?
      Washington, DC: World Bank.

Rojas, E., & Medellin, N. (2011). Housing Policy Matters for the Poor.

SEDESOL. (2011). La expansión de las ciudades 1980-2010. SEDESOL. Mexico City

Stein, A. and Vance, I. (2008). The role of housing finance in addressing the needs of the urban poor: lessons from
        Central America. Environment and Urbanization Vol. 20, no. pp. 13-30.


Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and the Caribbean (SEDLAC). Center for Distributive, Labor and
       Social Studies (CEDLAS) / World Bank. (2015)




                                                                                                               101
UN Habitat. (2014). Perfil del Sector de Vivienda de El Salvador. UN-Habitat: Nairobi.

UN-Habitat. (2003). Global Report on Human Settlements 2003: The Challenge of Slums Earthscan: London.
UN. (2014). World Urbanization Prospects 2014 Revisions United Nations.

United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG). (2008). Decentralization and local democracy in the world: First
       Global Report by United Cities and Local Governments. UCLG: Barcelona


World Bank (1993) Housing: enabling markets to work. Housing Policy Paper, Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2014). Mejora de la Gobernanza de la Tierra en Honduras: Implementación del Marco de Evaluación
       de Gobernanza de la Tierra. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2015). Mejora de la gobernanza de la tierra en Guatemala: Implementación del Marco de Evaluación
       de la Gobernanza de la Tierra – LGAF. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. (2014). Global Findex Database. http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinc




                                                                                                         102
CHAPTER 4: MAKING CITIES RESILIENT TO REDUCE CENTRAL AMERICA’S
VULNERABILITY TO NATURAL DISASTERS

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. DISASTER RISK IN CENTRAL AMERICA ..................................................................................... 106
2. ENABLING FACTORS FOR DRM AND URBAN RESILIENCE ......................................................... 112
2.1 AVOIDING FUTURE RISK .................................................................................................. 113
2.2 REDUCING EXISTING RISK ...................................................................................................... 118
2.3 FINANCING INEVITABLE RISK ................................................................................................. 120
2.4 UNDERSTANDING DISASTER RISK ........................................................................................... 123
3. MOVING FORWARD IN BUILDING RESILIENT CITIES ................................................................. 128
4. REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................ 130


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Number of events per hazard in Central America ..................................................................... 106
Figure 2. Damages and losses provoked by selected floods, tropical storms (TS) and earthquakes (EQ) in
Central America ........................................................................................................................................ 107
Figure 3. CDRP Building Exposure Model for Panama City, Panama..................................................... 108
Figure 4. CDRP building characteristics - external wall distribution of dwellings in Central America ... 110
Figure 5. Urban and rural Annual Average Loss in 2015 for earthquakes (EQ) and hurricanes (HU) in
Central America (US$ million) ................................................................................................................. 111
Figure 6. Annual Average Loss (AAL) - Estimation of potential losses per year averaged over possible
hazard scenarios ........................................................................................................................................ 111

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Exposed asset values of Central America classified by urban/rural/capital areas (% of the total
exposure) ................................................................................................................................................... 109
Table 2. Historical earthquakes in Central America (1851-2001) ............................................................ 112
Table 3. Risk financing mechanisms in Central America ......................................................................... 121

LIST OF BOXES
Box 1. Building risk information for decision-making: The development of the Country Disaster Risk
Profiles for Central America ..................................................................................................................... 108
Box 2. El Salvador: Linking local development and disaster risk planning tools .................................... 114
Box 3. Updating the regulatory and methodological frameworks for implementation of risk sensitive local
land use plans in Panama .......................................................................................................................... 115
Box 4. Integrating DRM considerations into the review process of all investment projects in Costa Rica


                                                                                                                                                           103
Box 5. Disaster risks as a planing tool to support development planning in “Mancomunidad del Suir” in
Guatemala ................................................................................................................................................. 118
Box 6. The first Mayan city in century XXI: A preventive resettlement experience in Guatemala ......... 120
Box 7. Panama leads the way in the region toward an integral DRFI strategy ......................................... 123
Box 8. Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Program ......................................... 125
Box 9. Promoting data sharing and inter-institutional collaboration: The case of the DRM Geonode in
Panama ...................................................................................................................................................... 128




                                                                                                                                                           104
OVERVIEW

Making Central American cities more resilient is critical to reduce the long term impact of natural
disasters on the population and economies in the region. Natural disasters not only have a significant
negative impact on the lives of the urban residents in the region -especially the poor- but they hinder
the national growth trajectory. Cities already represent 70% to 80% of the assets at risk in the
different countries, and this concentration will further increase in the future along with increasing
urbanization, rising population, and economic growth. Poorly managed urbanization leads to
increased vulnerability to natural disasters: i) precarious settlements usually develop in risk prone
areas; ii) inadequate building standards increase vulnerability to earthquakes; iii) sprawling urban
areas with inadequate infrastructure increase flood risks.

This chapter focuses on characterizing the risks and exposure to risk in the region, especially in the
urban areas. Section 1 presents an overall diagnostic on how vulnerable to disasters the countries in
region are, and what type of assets are at risk in urban areas. Section 2 discusses how countries have
the opportunity to strengthen disaster risk management (DRM) and increase urban resilience by
promoting actions to better UNDERSTAND urban patterns and disaster risk, AVOID the generation
of future risk, REDUCE existing risk, and develop instruments to FINANCE inevitable risk.
Finally, Section 3 proposes a series of recommendations moving forward in building more resilient
cities in Central America.

Key messages

There are clear opportunities to promote policies that can avoid the generation of future risk, as well
as reduce and manage the existing risk.

•   To prevent future risk, municipalities need to be provided with adequate information capacity
    and incentives, to play the role in incorporating DRM criteria into local territorial development
    plans, investments plans, and building regulations.

•   Reducing existing risk will require investments that will need the financial support of the central
    governments. However, cities will need to lead the prioritization of investments in new risk
    mitigation infrastructure, and retrofitting of existing critical infrastructure and buildings.

•   To enhance the understanding of disaster risk, national governments need to improve the
    knowledge base of vulnerability exposure and hazard profiles at the city level and its availability
    to local actors.




                                                                                                      105
     1. DISASTER RISK IN CENTRAL AMERICA

1.       Central America’s geographic location makes it remarkably prone to disasters from adverse
natural events, including hurricanes, droughts, floods, El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), and
earthquakes. In the past 50 years, based on data from the International Disasters Database – EM-DAT 63,
the number of recorded natural events has increased (See Figure 1) in Central America, affecting almost all
countries with different impacts and hindering, in certain cases, their capacity to foster sustainable growth..
Large scale floods are the most recurrent disaster, with almost 40 events occurring throughout the region
only between 2006 and 2010. Likewise, storms have repeatedly affected the region: in 1998, Hurricane
Mitch directly affected around 6.7 million people, resulting in a death toll of 14,600 deaths, and causing
more than US$ 8.5 billion in damages in Nicaragua, Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador. More recently,
in October 2011, Tropical Depression 12-E hit the coasts of El Salvador and Guatemala and affected most
of the countries in the region, with damages amounting to nearly US$1 billion. 64

                           Figure 1. Number of events per hazard in Central America




                     Source: Emergency Events Database – EM-DAT, The International Disaster Database

2.       Over the period 1970-2010, major adverse natural events like earthquakes, hurricanes and
large floods have caused accumulated damages and losses that exceed US$ 80 billion 65. Figure 2
presents how selected events drive the majority of damages and losses in the region, especially in urban
areas given their accumulation of highly vulnerable structures in hazard-prone areas. While disasters
originated by hydro-meteorological hazards (including ENSO) are more frequent, their accumulated impact
has represented US$ 22 billion. Seismic events are less frequent, but have had more devastating impacts
and provoked damages and losses amounting to US$ 58 billion over the period (72 percent of the total
damages and losses). On the other hand, long-term cyclical events such as droughts have an impact in
productive sectors, causing economic losses that could reduce the ability of urban areas to build resilience
to disasters.

  63To be included in EM-DAT, a disaster must meet at least one of the following criteria: 10 or more people reported killed; 100

or more people reported affected; Declaration of a state of emergency; or Call for international assistance.
  64 ECLAC 2011, “Regional Assessment of the impacts of Tropical Depression 12E in Central America”
  65 US$ 2000. The data presented here on the economic impact of historic events is based on the Post Disaster Need Assessments

(PDNA), which account for direct damages to assets and buildings (i.e. damages) and indirect losses due to variation in prices or
revenues (i.e. losses). This methodology is very different from the one presented in the sub-section “What is at risk in urban areas
in Central America?” and results cannot be compared. Data on the historic impact of disasters has been compiled by CEPAL
(2014), “La estimación de los efectos de los desastres en América Latina”, Serie Medio Ambiente y Desarrollo 157.

                                                                                                                               106
       Figure 2. Damages and losses provoked by selected floods, tropical storms (TS) and earthquakes
                                         (EQ) in Central America

                     4,500                                                                                       LEGEND:
                                                                                                                 NG: Nicaragua
                     4,000                                                                                       HN: Honduras
                                                                                                                 GT: Guatemala
                     3,500                                                                                       ES: El Salvador
                                                                                                                 CRI: Costa Rica
US$ millions, 2010




                     3,000

                     2,500

                     2,000

                     1,500

                     1,000

                      500

                        0




                                                       DAMAGES        LOSSES
Source: Authors, based on PDNA assessments; Damages and losses associated with hydro-meteorological events are pictured in
blue/ orange and those associated with geophysical events are pictured in green/yellow. To ensure legibility, only selected events
are depicted here.

3.       Climate change is expected to modify current weather patterns, which could translate into an
increased frequency and intensity of extreme hydro-meteorological events in the region. More
frequent and intense hurricanes, tropical storms, floods and droughts could affect the provision of water
(both in quantity and quality) and the alteration of ecosystem services within the impacted areas. While the
increase of floods could have a larger direct impact in urban areas, droughts could also affect the urban
population’s food security.

What is at risk in urban areas in Central America?

4.        Quantifying disaster risk is a first step toward understanding and better managing risks. Box
1 presents the Central America Country Disaster Risk Profile project 66, which has the objective of
contributing to this goal by assessing the potential direct economic losses from adverse natural events. A
first step toward understanding what is at risk in Central America is assessing the building exposure. This
means recognizing the elements that are exposed to adverse natural events by knowing the location of assets
and their key characteristics, including the type of construction (material, age, and structural characteristics)
and their value. Based on the results of the Country Disaster Risk Profiles for Central America (see Box 1),
we can conclude that cities concentrate the large majority of exposed assets and exposed value in the region.
Figure 3 shows the building exposure model for Panama City, where most of the value of building stock is


  66 This project was been funded by the World Bank through a Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)

grant (TF014499) from the Government of Australia (AusAid) under the CAPRA Probabilistic Risk Assessment program
(P144982).

                                                                                                                              107
concentrated in the downtown area. Table 1, which differentiates the building stock value between urban
and rural areas for all Central American countries, shows that most of the building exposure is in urban
areas, concentrating more than 70% of the total built-up in the region. For example, almost 80% of the
built-up are in El Salvador is urban, of which 42% is in San Salvador.

               Figure 24. CDRP Building Exposure Model for Panama City, Panama




                                Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)



   BOX 14. BUILDING RISK INFORMATION FOR DECISION-MAKING: The Development
   of the Country Disaster Risk Profiles for Central America

   What is a country disaster risk profile?
   Probabilistic disaster risk profiles provide risk assessments and estimates of potential damage to
   property caused by severe natural hazards. These profiles outline a holistic view of financial risk due
   to natural hazards, assisting governments in long-term planning and preparedness. A Country
   Disaster Risk Profile (CDRP) presents a probabilistic estimate of risk aggregated at the national
   level.
   The Country Disaster Risk Profile (CDRP) presents information on:
   •   Occurrence exceedance probability curve (OEP), which indicates the probability that the
       economic loss level indicated on the curve will be exceed by any event in any given year.
   •   Annual average loss (AAL) for both earthquake and windstorm risk, giving an estimation of the
       potential losses per year averaged over a number of years
   •   Probable maximum loss (PML) for a 250 year return period, estimating the potential losses for
       an event with a return period of 250 years, or a 1/250 annual probability of exceedance.




                                                                                                         108
   BOX 1 (CONTINUED). BUILDING RISK INFORMATION FOR DECISION-MAKING: The
   Development of the Country Disaster Risk Profiles for Central America


   What is innovative in the CDRP for Central America?
   The CDRP project gathered information to characterize and build an exposure model of the building
   stock in Central American countries using a top down approach with a country-level resolution. This
   model consists of a building inventory stock model which captures important attributes such as
   geographical location, urban/rural classification, type of occupancy (e.g. residential and non-
   residential), building typology (e.g. wood, concrete, masonry, etc.) and economic (replacement)
   value. This exposure model is developed using freely available (or available at minimum cost)
   datasets.

   Source: CDRP for Central America & Gunasekera et al. (2015)


      Table 1. Exposed asset values of Central America classified by urban/rural/capital areas
                                      (% of the total exposure)

                       Total (2005-
     Country                           Capital City        Urban        Total Urban           Rural
                       USD million)

    Costa Rica            80,059           53.5%            24.9%           78.3%             21.7%
    El Salvador           37,054           42.0%            37.9%           80.0%             20.0%
    Guatemala             70,369           39.3%            33.8%           73.0%             27.0%
     Honduras             27,565           21.0%            50.2%           71.2%             28.8%
    Nicaragua             22,067           33.7%            42.7%           76.5%             23.5%
      Panama              45,853           48.7%            30.4%           79.1%             20.9%
 Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)

5.      Certain building characteristics prevalent in Central America are highly vulnerable to major
adverse natural events. Most of the external walls of dwellings in Central American countries are built
with concrete block, brick and stone – up to 84% in urban areas in El Salvador. Pre-fabricated concrete
panels (and other cement wall materials) are the second most used material in Nicaragua’s urban dwellings
and Costa Rica’s dwellings located throughout its territory. However, the presence of adobe, wood, and
mud walled buildings in the region increase the risk of urban areas to disasters such as earthquakes and
hurricanes. These building types are present in many urban areas of the region (see Figure 4).




                                                                                                      109
    Figure 425. CDRP building characteristics - external wall distribution of dwellings in Central
                                             America




  Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)
  Note: El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua data refer to dwellings in urban areas, while Costa Rica, Guatemala and
  Panama data refer to dwellings in the whole country


6.       The largely unplanned and poorly managed urban growth over the past decades has resulted
in a high share of urban population living in precarious settlements, contributing to the accumulation
of high-vulnerable structures. Often located in hazard-prone areas and with limited access to basic
services—such as adequate drainage—these settlements are the most vulnerable to disasters such as
landslides and floods. This is particularly true for urban areas where most of the exposure value is located.
CDRP’ results at the country level quantifying earthquake and hurricane risk, and differentiating them
between urban and rural areas 67 (see Figure 5) shows that catastrophic risk is highly concentrated in urban
areas in five out of the six countries. Figure 6 provides an example of the concentration of earthquake risk
in Managua represented by the Annual Average Loss (AAL) 68. Honduras is the only country that
concentrates most of its catastrophic risk in rural areas, and where hurricane risk is higher than earthquake
risk. Annual average loss from earthquake risk in urban areas is particularly high in Costa Rica and El
Salvador, amounting to US$327 million and US$232 million, respectively. Overall, AAL in Central
America resulting from earthquake risk in cities equals nearly US$800 million. Table 2 presents a summary
of major historical earthquakes that have impacted each country in the region, and estimates of the potential
economic impact if similar events were to happen today.




  67 Aubrecht, C., R. Gunasekera, J. Ungar, O. Ishizawa (2016) Consistent yet adaptive global geospatial identification of urban-

rural patterns: The iURBAN model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), in preparation.
  68 The AAL is a risk metric commonly use which represent the mean value of a loss exceedance probability (EP) distribution.



                                                                                                                            110
Figure 5. Urban and rural Annual Average Loss in 2015 for earthquakes (EQ) and hurricanes (HU)
                               in Central America (US$ million)

                                100%
                                 90%
      Average Annual Losses


                                 80%
                                 70%
                                 60%
                                 50%
                                 40%
                                 30%
                                 20%
                                 10%
                                  0%
                                                                                                                 Central
                                         Costa Rica   Honduras   Guatemala   Nicaragua   Panama    El Salvador
                                                                                                                 America
                              HU Rural      0.2         28.3       12.0        16.6        0.0        1.3         58.4
                              HU Urban      0.1         20.1        9.7         9.7        0.0        1.6         41.2
                              EQ Rural     80.5         10.8       91.5        15.7       10.9        42.4        251.8
                              EQ Urban     327.0        14.7       232.6       73.3       18.6       133.6        799.7

    Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)




   Figure 6. Annual Average Loss (AAL) - Estimation of potential losses per year averaged over
                                   possible hazard scenarios
                                   Earthquake risk profile of Managua           Hurricane risk profile of Tegucigalpa




                               Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)




                                                                                                                           111
                   Table 12. Historical earthquakes in Central America (1851-2001)

                                                                  Potential Economic Losses In
            Year       Magnitude                Location
                                                                          2015 (In U$)

                                           Honduras, not far
           1851     6.2 earthquake                               490 million, 3% of GDP
                                           from Tegucigalpa

                                                                 810 million, 1.8% of GDP (not
                                           Panama, northern
           1882     7.8 earthquake                               considering potential losses to
                                           coast
                                                                 the Panama Canal)
                                           Guatemala, near
           1902     7.5 earthquake                               3,000 million, 4.6% of GDP
                                           Quetzaltenango
                                           Costa Rica, near
           1910     6.5 earthquake                               3,800 million, 8% of GDP
                                           Cartago
                                           Nicaragua, near
           1972     6.2 earthquake                               550 million, 5% of GDP
                                           Managua
                                           El Salvador, near
           2001     7.6 earthquake                               1,810, 7% of GDP
                                           San Salvador
         Source: CDRP (World Bank, 2015)


    2. ENABLING FACTORS FOR DRM AND URBAN RESILIENCE

7.        An integrated approach to urban resilience, including how to avoid future risk, reduce
existing risk, increase financial protection, and understand the trends and current patterns of risk,
is key to build more resilient cities for the future. Today, Disaster Risk Management (DRM) policy and
regulatory frameworks in the region are in place at national levels, but the establishment of municipal and
sectorial responsibilities for DRM remains under–develop. This opens an opportunity to tackle urban
resilience with a more robust/comprehensive approach. First, avoiding generation of future disaster risks
emerges as a central task for local governments, through the implementation of land use planning and
building permits processes, responsibilities which are mostly decentralized across the region. Reducing
existing disaster risk in urban environments in the region will require sectorial investment, channeled
mainly through the central government. Resilient public investments requires coordinated efforts between
the national investment systems and the urban planning units, thus ensuring the inclusion of disaster risk
criteria in the investment cycle. At the same time, disaster financial protection becomes a critical aspect of
economic resilience for countries and cities in the region, mostly managed from central governments, but
with cities as main beneficiaries. Finally, understanding the levels of disaster risk faced by increasing urban
face of the region remains as the basic and fundamental enabling factor to manage the increasing disaster
risk and thus, strengthening urban resilience, in Central America.




                                                                                                          112
    2.1 AVOIDING FUTURE RISK

A STRATEGIC AND MAJOR ROLE FOR CITIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN A
CONTEXT OF ONGOING DECENTRALIZATION

8.       In a context of rapid urbanization, where Central American cities are expected to host over
50 million people by 2050, land use planning, building regulations, and disaster risk sensitive
investments are key to build future urban resilience. Initial location of safe sites is inherently more
economical than relocation of existing settlements. It is also recognized that disaster resistance can be
achieved through new construction at a considerably lower cost than through retrofit of existing vulnerable
construction. Moreover, implementation of risk sensitive urban planning, building regulations and strategic
investments will be essential to prevent the expansion of settlements (formal and informal) in hazardous
areas. New construction with appropriate design can be made disaster-resistant for a small percentage of
construction cost on the order of five to 10 percent, while the retrofit of existing vulnerable structures may
require major expenditure, in the range of 10 to 50 percent of building value (WB-GFDRR, 2015). While
reducing the risk in existing buildings will be likely a long-term priority and focused on a few critical
portfolios, the development of regulatory capacity for new construction will provide a foundation for the
inspection and improvement of existing buildings.

Risk Sensitive Land Use Planning

9.       Urban and local development planning are under the domain of local governments and offer
an important entry point to influence DRM and urban resilience. Most of the countries of the region
have now decentralized responsibilities for urban development planning in the municipality’s mandates.
Among these responsibilities, the incorporation of disaster risk criteria in the elaboration of the urban and
territorial plans, are concrete opportunities for local governments to contribute to build more resilient cities.
This will require the strengthening of local planning capacities of the municipal teams with technical
support from technical and research institutions, as well as availability of disaster risk data in adequate
formats to support the decision making process.

10.      DRM is an essential part of a comprehensive urban development planning. The process of
generating local DRM plans are becoming important tools to raise awareness among local authorities and
communities. However, they are still somehow detached from other relevant planning processes currently
undertaken by municipalities. This is also compounded by the fact that most of the municipalities currently
do not follow standardized mechanisms to ensure that small DRM investment projects are prioritized to
support community development plans. In this context, DRM plans need thus to be included and inform the
set of planning instruments that are guiding municipal local development, than rather become an isolated
and specific plan. The experience of El Salvador Local Government Strengthening Project (PFGL) provides
valuable insights into the need to articulate local DRM plans within other broader and relevant planning
tools for local development (see Box 2).




                                                                                                            113
   BOX 15. EL SALVADOR: LINKING LOCAL DEVELOPMENT AND DISASTER RISK
   PLANNING TOOLS


   One of lessons learned of the World Bank’s technical assistance “El Salvador Local Government
   Strengthening Project (PFGL)” is the need to articulate the DRM plans within the various local
   planning instruments. One of the components of the PFGL supports the development of Municipal
   Development Plans (MDPs), focusing on local economic development and articulating it within the
   regional and national economic context, including key investments that both communities and
   municipal leaders have identified and have agreed upon as priority investments. The other
   component supports the development of DRM Municipal Plans in the 262 municipalities of the
   country. During the initial stages of these MDP and the DRM plans it became evident the need to
   ensure an integrated approach for the methodological development of both instruments. Under this
   approach the disaster risk scenarios identified for the DRM plans could inform the diagnostic and
   prioritizing of investment in the MDPs. This new approach has helped to capitalize the participatory
   planning process for both tools in many municipalities in El Salvador, factoring disaster risk into the
   vision of local development and prioritization of municipal economic activities.


11.      Local level hazard information needs to be developed for effective inclusion of disaster risk
criteria in land use planning. The incorporation of hazard zoning, as a criteria for defining land use
planning in cities, is a concrete prospective disaster risk reduction tool for building urban resilience in the
region. Hazard maps are mostly available at low resolution national scales, and therefore not adequate to
inform the diagnostic stages of local land use plans, especially for small and medium size cities. A range
of methodological approaches that suits different levels - from realized risk maps, based on historical
impacts, to probabilistic risk assessments - need be considered to materialize the inclusion of risk
identification in land use planning and spatial zoning.

12.      Local capacity needs to be developed for effective disaster risk reduction through land use
planning. The challenge is how to promote systematic improvement of spatial planning that includes
disaster risk information to reduce future exposure to hazards and future risks. There is recent progress in
policy frameworks in terms of including risk analysis in land use planning regulations (see Box 3), but
capacity building is needed to implement these reforms at the local level. In that sense, human resources in
central planning offices should gradually support and translate these knowledge and capacities to local
governments, especially in small and medium size municipalities. A similar effort can be made to build the
capacity of technical teams of main municipalities, which are in better position to undertake the
implementation of these planning tools alone.




                                                                                                          114
   BOX 16. UPDATING THE REGULATORY AND METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORKS
   FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF RISK SENSITIVE LOCAL LAND USE PLANS IN PANAMA


   In Panama, the national regulatory framework and guidelines for elaboration of local land use plans
   only integrated DRM criteria beginning in 2010, and did so only nominally, without any practical
   content or methodological references on how to factor risk identification and reduction criteria in the
   plans. With support of a GFDRR grant, the regulatory framework was updated in 2015 by means a
   of a new Resolution enacted by the Ministry of Housing and Land Use Planning (MIVIOT), which
   is applicable to all local, regional and sub-local land use plans in the country. A new section was
   included with explicit guidelines for including risk identification during the diagnostic stage.
   Whether based on historical disaster occurrence databases, or more sophisticated probabilistic
   studies, when available, the plans require now the identification of hazards, as well as exposed assets
   in terms of buildings, heritage, natural conservation and critical infrastructure. The concepts of “non-
   mitigable risk zones” (where risk reduction measures for an existing population are not viable) and
   “high-hazard exclusion zones” (where construction may not be permitted) are incorporated as part
   of the zoning criteria. Concurrently with the new ministerial resolution, the implementation of a
   gradual administrative decentralization has begun recently in the country.
   For example, the District of Boquete, located in the volcanic and agricultural high lands of Panama,
   has been hit many times by destructive flood. Under the leadership of its municipality, Boquete is
   undertaking measures for risk identification and reduction through a local ordinance drafted
   according to the criteria set in the new DRM resolution for local and regional plans. The ordinance
   establishes economic incentives for development in low gradient zones outside of river flood plains
   and restrains land uses and new construction on zones know to be prone to floods and landslides.
   Both MIVIOT and Boquete’s initiatives illustrates the complementary and differentiated central and
   local government roles in promoting disaster risk reduction from national regulation to local
   application on the ground.
   Source: Experiencias en la inclusión de la Gestión de Riesgos en los procesos de Ordenamiento Territorial en
   Panama. WB., GFDRR- 2016.


Building Codes and Regulation

13.      Post-disaster experience provides the awareness levels for updating and strengthening
building regulatory mechanisms. These efforts are often driven and delivered by a wide range of
stakeholders and specialized NGOs. Such initiatives should be considerably expanded, coordinated, and
institutionalized in pre-disaster scenarios. They should aim at demonstrating the benefits of meeting safe
building practices and creating the buy-in for a wider culture of code compliance. In the aftermath of a
major disaster, there is broad recognition of the necessity of construction quality improvement and the
implementation of effective building regulatory mechanisms. Often, as a component of reconstruction
funded by external agencies, some building standards are directed, as a precondition of funding. There is
also sporadic training of local construction workers in improved resilient construction. However, these
measures are short lived without the institutionalization of a permanent building regulatory authority with
capacity for effective code implementation and maintenance.


                                                                                                              115
14.       There is a need for further funding, staffing, and execution to implement building regulation
at the local level. While most of the countries have national building codes which include disaster risk
criteria, one of the generalized problems is the lack of funding and support for the implementation and
supervision of building regulation at the local level 69. Permit-related and inspection services are usually
expensive, and inefficient, sometimes acting as a deterrent to meeting code requirements. This can actually
encourage building informality, thus increasing the vulnerability of the local urban population in the context
of significant seismic risks. Nicaragua, where obtaining a construction permit took 189 days in 2005, has
tackled this problem through the implementation of “municipal simplification projects” in three pilot
municipalities 70. This reduced compliance costs of operating and construction permits by 30 percent on
average, and increased business formalization seven-fold. Building permits and inspections can be major
enabling factors for urban resilience but require specific support in terms of training of building officials,
as well as funding mechanisms for appropriate compensation for those adhering to the codes.

Disaster Risk Sensitive Investments

15.     Promoting resilient investments in cities will require coordinated efforts between national
investments systems and municipal planning units. Inclusion of disaster risk analysis, as part of the
project investment cycle, is a key aspect toward building resilient investment strategies. Conceptual
and methodological frameworks aimed at integrating disaster risk considerations into public investment
have been developed and promoted in the region, mostly for the process of pre-investment disaster risk and
cost benefit and cost efficiency analysis. These efforts have been promoted by intergovernmental
organizations (such as CEPREDENAC) and UN agencies, within the national public investments systems,
but without major involvement of planning units of municipalities at this stage. For instance, in Costa Rica,
these developments have crystallized in regulatory reform, making risk analysis a mandatory aspect of the
public investments processes (see Box 4). However, for the rest of the region, they are still part of general
methodological guidelines.




 69  A recent WB-GFDRR publication “Building Regulation for Resilience: Managing Risk for Safer Cities” explores and
documents the factors that have limited the incidence on effective disaster risk reduction of land use and building regulations in
low and middle income countries.
  70 This case is profiled in Strategic Communications for Business Environment Reforms, IFC, 2007.



                                                                                                                             116
   BOX 17. INTEGRATING DRM CONSIDERATIONS INTO THE REVIEW PROCESS OF
   ALL INVESTMENT PROJECTS IN COSTA RICA

   Costa Rica has integrated risk management considerations into the review process of all investment
   projects for the country. The Ministry of National Planning and Economic Policy (MIDEPLAN)
   recently added a disaster risk review in the project proposal format for national investments, through
   Executive Orders 34 694-PLAN-H of August 2008 (Public National Investment System), 35 098-
   PLAN of March 2009 (National Public Investment Plan) and 35 374-PLAN of July 2009 (Technical
   Standards, Guidelines and Procedures for Public Investment). Under this measure, government
   agencies submitting investment projects for approval by MIDEPLAN are now required to conduct a
   disaster risk assessment of the proposed investment and include mitigation measures in case the
   project is exposed to adverse natural events. The country is currently assessing systems that could
   assist public officials in the decision-making process by assessing the disaster risk of planned
   investment projects. Additionally, MIDEPLAN implemented an ambitious training program, which
   includes risk assessment, for public functionaries involved in the public investment process.
   Source: Disaster Risk Management in the Latin American Region - Country Notes, Costa Rica. GFDRR.



16.     Beyond the important advocacy work done in the region with the public investments systems,
there remain some methodological challenges for effective inclusion of DRM criteria in the
formulation of public investment projects. Including specific risk sensitive criteria into pre-investments
assessments will require a different set of sectorial and hazard specific guidelines which need to developed
and tested. Additionally, current timings for formulation of public investment projects do not factor the
need for incorporating disaster risk analysis (IDB, 2013). Major work to build capacities and socialize these
methodological guidelines needs to be undertaken before it can be materialized in resilient investment in
cities.

17.      Effective resilient investments at the local level also requires coordination and planning at
the supra-municipal level. One of the attributes contemplated in the decentralization frameworks in the
region is the faculty of the municipalities to conform inter-municipal associations with other neighboring
municipalities (mancomunidades). This is particularly important to be able to manage hazards such as
floods, landslides, forest fires and other hazards, which can be triggered in a municipal jurisdictions but
manifested with adverse impacts in others. A clear example is that deforestation and environmental
degradation processes in high river basins exacerbate floods in medium and low river basins. Disaster risk
information should be part of the planning tools to support the work of “supra-municipal coordinating
bodies”, and thus contribute to improved overall governance and resilient investments in urban areas,
particularly in a context where subnational/provincial levels are weak. The case of “Mancomunidad del
Sur” represents one of a few, but very inspiring examples in that direction (see Box 5).




                                                                                                         117
   BOX 18. DISASTER RISKS AS A PLANNING TOOL TO SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
   PLANNING IN “MANCOMUNIDAD DEL SUR” IN GUATEMALA


   The Guatemala City Metropolitan Area (GCMA) is the most important urban concentration in
   Guatemala with an estimated population of 2.7 million, or 20% of the total. The Statistics Institute’s
   (INE) estimates suggest that by 2020 six of its Municipalities (Mixco, Amatitlán, Villa Nueva, San
   Miguel Petapa, Santa Catarina Pinula, and Villa Canales), will house around 1.7 million people, or
   10% of the national population. These six municipalities located in the south of the GCMA have
   recently created a metropolitan association – the Mancomunidad del Sur (MS)- with the main goal
   of developing a common regional planning strategy (Gran Ciudad Del Sur: Vision 2022). The
   strategy consists of moving away from a mono-centric spatial development toward a multi-centric
   metropolitan region, while addressing their common problems and taking advantage of possible
   synergies. To support this effort, a project supported by the WB will address an important limitation:
   the lack of updated geo-referenced spatial information on land use, infrastructure and risk, as well as
   socio-economic, housing and mobility data, to inform metropolitan planning and investment
   programs in the GCMA. This effort in metropolitan planning is unprecedented in Guatemala and is
   expected to set the basis for future efforts in regional and spatial integration.
   Source: Disaster Risk Management in the Latin American Region


18.      Budget allocation tracking, or systematic tracking of disaster risk reduction (DRR) spending
is an important step toward effective disaster risk sensitive investments. Currently it is still very
difficult to assess the resources allocated to disaster risk reduction investments and correlate them with
public reforms and monitoring of disaster risk reduction policies. Such tracking must also compare budget
allocations with actual expenditures, and against targets and actual accomplishments. Guatemala and
Panama have developed budget allocation tracking systems that are providing valuable lessons learned to
inform similar developments in other countries. While still premature, future consideration must also be
given to replicating budget allocation tracking systems at the local level to examine DRR resource
availability and use.

    2.2 REDUCING EXISTING RISK

CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR URBAN RISK REDUCTION IN THE REGION

19.      Reducing existing risk requires addressing the historical construction of vulnerability in the
region, and could be achieve by developing effective systems to prioritize infrastructure correction,
retrofitting and, in extreme cases, promoting preventive resettlements. Urban disasters are
manifestations of existing levels of risk accumulated in urban contexts. Additionally, rapid urbanization is
often associated with environmental degradation which exacerbates disaster impact in cities. For instance,
deforestation and wetlands damage are among the underlying factors that explain historical construction of
disaster risk levels in Central American cities today, while recent natural hazards, such earthquakes,
cyclones, and floods, have revealed different vulnerability levels of the built environment. Effective tools
to identify and prioritize infrastructure correction, retrofitting and conducting preventing resettlements are
key to reduce existing vulnerability.

                                                                                                          118
Prioritization of Infrastructure Correction and Retrofitting

20.      In a context of limited resources available to local governments, major corrective disaster
risk reduction measures prioritized in DRM Municipal Plans need to be negotiated and supported
by central governments. As mentioned in the previous section, most of the DRM municipal plans are
somehow detached from other planning instruments. At the same time, since local governments can only
assign limited resources to implement corrective measures, these remain mostly diagnosis tools rather than
operational plans that can guide and support major initiatives to reduce existing levels of disaster risk,
unless they are backed by resources provided by the central governments. Local governments can play an
important role in fostering participatory process through the DRM planning exercises, but coordinated
action with the central government is required to undertake major risk reduction measures.

21.      The Central Government will still play a major role in reducing disaster risk of local public
services provision. In addition to local government commitment, engagement by the central government
and ministries remains critical to support financing disaster reduction plans, as part of a broader disaster
risk reduction strategy of the country. The limited penetration of DRM responsibilities in sectorial
regulatory frameworks, compounded by the slow decentralization of public services (see Chapter 2), results
in low capacity of local governments to develop disaster resilient public services. In this context, there is
work to be done within the ministries in line and central entities providing public services to update their
sectorial regulatory frameworks so they include explicit responsibilities to identify and reduce disaster risks.

22.       Reducing existing urban risk also requires the availability of local risk assessments along with
political commitment for public investments. In a context of other pressing socio-economic priorities for
local authorities, the decision of undertaking corrective disaster risk reduction measures needs to be
supported by a robust disaster risk assessment, providing the social, economic and political elements to
make the case for action of the local and national authorities. As adaptation to climate change and
strengthening of urban resilience are emerging as relevant policy aspects within political agendas of the
cities, corrective disaster risk measures can provide concrete means to achieve those comprehensive goals,
at least in the short and medium term.

23.      Retrofitting existing infrastructure to reduce vulnerability is of critical importance. Most of
the major urban agglomerations in Central America are located in seismic prone areas, including all the
capitals, which all have been affected by destructive earthquakes at different times in history. In that
context, removal, replacement, and retrofit of existing unregulated and unsafe buildings requires an
incremental approach that can reduce disaster risk over a reasonable period of time. Focusing on critical
infrastructures, such as schools, hospitals, potable water treatment plants, bridges and drainage systems, as
a prioritization strategy for identification of opportunities for retrofitting infrastructure, can facilitate the
engagement of local and national governments. Recent seismic risk assessment studies have been
undertaken for a group of major cities of the region and there is a critical mass of local technical capacities
and expertise that could help to inform retrofitting plans.

Preventive Resettlements

24.      Addressing preventive resettlements is a disaster risk reduction opportunity for local
authorities. Given the social, legal and political implications of resettlements, implementing a planned re-
localization as disaster risk reduction measure is a step that governments usually take only after assessing
the feasibility of other risk management options. But as result of increasing levels of exposure of vulnerable

                                                                                                            119
human settlements to localized hazards (such as landslides), where risk mitigation is technically not feasible
or the risk levels are beyond thresholds of “acceptable risk”, preventive resettlement or planned re-
localization is increasingly becoming a potential option assessed by local authorities. There are some
experiences of preventive resettlement in the Central America, which underscore that resettlements should
be incorporated into a comprehensive disaster risk reduction policies and plans, and institutional capacity
should be built.


   BOX 19. THE FIRST MAYAN CITY IN CENTURY XXI: A PREVENTIVE
   RESETTLEMENT EXPERIENCE IN GUATEMALA

   As a result of the impact of the tropical storm "Stan" in 2005, 17,000 homes were either totally
   destroyed or declared uninhabitable. In response to the disaster, the government launched the
   “National Reconstruction with Transformation Plan” to reconstruct the economic and social
   infrastructure destroyed, and to create 80 new urban centers.
   The government used this opportunity not only to provide houses to the affected people but also to
   resettle non-affected people who lived in disaster prone-areas. One of these cases was documented
   in the compilation of case studies on experiences from Latin America on preventive, resettlement,
   which was published by the World Bank in 2011. Even though the experiences analyzed belong to
   the rural districts of Panajab and Tz’anchaj of the Department of Solola, the case showed important
   lessons that could be applied to preventive resettlement in urban areas, such as the importance of: (i)
   coordination of national, departmental and municipal levels;(ii) incorporation of the resettlement
   plans into the land use plans; (iii) incorporation of social and cultural dimensions in the formulation
   and implementation of resettlement plans; (iv) participation and community organization; and (iv)
   accountability mechanisms, among others.
   Source: Preventive Resettlement of Populations at Risk: (GFDRR, 2011)



    2.3 FINANCING INEVITABLE RISK

INCREASED FINANCIAL RESILIENCE OF GOVERNMENTS, PRIVATE SECTOR AND
HOUSEHOLDS THROUGH FINANCIAL PROTECTION IS KEY FOR URBAN RESILIENCE

25.      In a context of rapid concentration of population and assets in Central American cities,
financial resilience is key to protect people and assets of existing and future disaster risks. Increased
financial resilience of governments, private sectors and households through disaster risk financial protection
is an inherent component of urban resilience. Potential disaster impacts in main urban centers of the regions
(as it has happened with all capitals of Central America at different times in its history), will directly and
indirectly affect the financial and development stability of these countries. As mentioned in Section 1, over
the period 1970-2010, major adverse natural events like earthquakes, hurricanes and large floods have
caused accumulated damages and losses that exceed US$ 80 billion. In this context, actions toward reducing
the negative financial effects of disasters in a way that protects both people and assets are becoming an
important process of an overall disaster risk management strategy for governments.



                                                                                                          120
26.      Local governments are among the main beneficiaries of financial protection, but the task for
promoting and ensuring disaster financial protection still remains a central government’s
responsibility. The central government has a major role in disaster emergency relief, recovery and
reconstruction in Central American countries, and thus, in addressing disaster risk financial protection and
insurance concerns. Reconstruction of uninsured or underinsured public infrastructure in cities -including
low income housing- typically accounts for the majority of public spending following disasters. Whether
or not the government is legally required to provide this support, social and political pressure can make
such support an implicit contingent liability (WB-GFDRR, 2015). Due to the lack of clear cost sharing rules
between local and national government, the national governments is de facto called to act as the lender of
last resort in case of disasters.

27.      Noteworthy progress in risk retention mechanisms in recent years in the region has allowed
for a more efficient response to urban disasters. The governments of the region have strengthen in recent
years the financial mechanisms to manage disaster risk. Contingent credit is a financial instrument that
allows governments to secure funds in advance of disasters to be available immediately in case of
emergency. The World Bank launched in 2008 the first such a loan called Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option (CAT-DDO), and Costa Rica became the first country to obtain such loan. From that same year
onwards, the rest of the Central American countries had access to different contingent credit facilities.
Contingent credits complement other such as national reserves to finance high frequency, low severity
events. Panama established a sovereign wealth fund in 2012 (Panama Savings Fund, FAP), and designated
disaster losses larger than 0.5% of GDP (excluding insurance coverage and the amount of contingent credit
lines), as of the three triggers for a payout.
                        Table 3. Risk financing mechanisms in Central America

                               Contingency loan        Contingency loan
            Country                (IADB)              (CAT-DDO– BM)          Emergency Fund
                                 US$ millions            US$ millions
          Costa Rica                    -                    US $65                   ✔
          El Salvador                   -                                             ✔
          Guatemala                     -                    US $85                   ✔
          Honduras                   US $100                    -                      -
          Nicaragua                  US $186                    -                     ✔
          Panama                     US $100                 US $66                   ✔
          Source: World Bank, IADB


28.      In contrast, there is only incipient progress in risk transfer mechanisms to protect public
assets of cities. The domestic insurance market and insurance solutions for the agricultural sector are part
of the risk transfer mechanisms in the region, but only a small percentage of public assets of cities are
insured against disasters, and the quality of the insurance coverage is uncertain. Costa Rica shows progress
in terms of insurance requirements for social housing programs (Bonos de Vivienda Social), and Panama
has developed a co-insurance scheme to transfer the risk of public assets, where all state institutions must
have a risk management system that consider the Government a single client, so ensuring that a

                                                                                                        121
standardized, collective and centralized scheme exists. Specific catastrophic insurance and market based
transfer mechanisms are not yet developed, but the region is currently tackling on opportunities for regional
risk pooling. Central America committed in 2014 to join a Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
(CCRIF), which will allow aggregating the risk into larger, more diversified portfolios between Central
American countries, to reduce the cost of accessing international insurance markets.

29.      Progress in financial protection has not been informed by a comprehensive strategic
approach to financial disaster risk and insurance. Despite the recent progress in adopting financial
protection tools in the region, governments still address financial effects of disasters on an ad-hoc basis
following the events. The establishment of financial protection tools by governments of the region has not
been guided by a strategic view of optimizing the combination of risk transfer and risk retention
mechanisms, based on their risk profiles. So far, only Panama has recently adopted a Strategic Framework
for Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance, which was developed with the support of regional and
international entities, including the CEPREDENAC, the World Bank, the Inter-American Development
Bank, and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery-GFDRR (see Box 7).




                                                                                                         122
   BOX 20. PANAMA LEADS THE WAY IN THE REGION TOWARD AN INTEGRAL DRFI
   STRATEGY

   With promulgation of Decree 578, 2014, the Government of Panama (GoP) formalized its guiding
   framework for the management of fiscal risk in the event of disasters related to the impact of natural
   hazards, making Panama the first country in the region to implement such a framework. Panama
   DRFI (Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance) Strategy represents the culmination of a series of
   public reforms, consultations, and studies undertaken by the GoP in recent years, which includes the
   updated mandates on disaster risk protection conferred to the Directorate of Investment, Concessions
   and Risk of the Ministry of Finances (DICRE). These efforts have created a strong legal mandate in
   Panama for establishing a financial management strategy that addresses disaster risks. The document
   incorporates important lessons learned from international experience: (i) include disaster risks as part
   of an integrated framework of fiscal risk management; (ii) ensure that governments have access to
   immediate funds following a disaster; (iii) consider the creation of a national disaster fund; and (iv)
   reduce the government’s contingent liabilities against disasters associated with the impact of natural
   hazards by insuring critical public assets and promoting the private insurance market for catastrophic
   risks and.
     Layered Financing Strategy for Disasters Associated with the Impact of Natural Hazards




   Source: Panama Strategic Framework for Financial Management of Disaster Risk (GFDRR, 2015)

    2.4 UNDERSTANDING DISASTER RISK

MANAGING DISASTER RISK AND BUILDING URBAN RESILIENCE REQUIRES A CLEAR
UNDERSTANDING OF THE URBAN PATTERNS AND DISASTER RISKS

30.      Improving the knowledge base of vulnerability exposure and hazard profiles at local levels is
a basic condition to implement policies and measures to reduce disaster risk and improve urban
resilience. Understanding disaster risk implies in first place a comprehensive knowledge of the natural
events that could have a negative impact on peoples and assets in the territory, including attributes such as
occurrence frequency, returning periods, probabilities and intensities (understanding the hazard). Secondly,
it is necessary to identify people and assets that are exposed to those hazards (understanding exposure),
which is a very dynamic aspect in a context of rapid urbanization processes. Thirdly, once the exposed
segment of population and assets are identified, the assessment of their specific vulnerability to specific

                                                                                                          123
hazards needs be determined (understanding vulnerability), to finally assess the likelihood of a negative
impact (understanding disaster risk).

31.      Institutional arrangements for generating hazard information are diverse in the region. Some
countries such as Guatemala, Nicaragua and El Salvador have centralized technical institutions that
generate primary information on geological and hydro-meteorological hazards, with different degrees of
autonomy and without an explicit mandate to assist in the generation of territorial and sectorial risk
assessments. Panama lacks a national hydro-meteorological service, and the relevant information on
geological hazards is produced by a geosciences institute belonging to the University of Panama. In Costa
Rica, there are two technical centers providing seismic and volcano monitoring services. Only El Salvador,
following the earthquake that struck the country in 2010, created a specialized institution (SNET, now the
Environmental Observatory), based on the CENAPRED 71 model of Mexico. In most cases, these
institutions lack clear mandates to provide technical assistance for disaster risk assessment to local
governments.

32.      Sound disaster risk assessments for cities need modeling and monitoring of natural hazards
supported by strengthened national networks. In order to provide the information services, the national
networks of hydro-meteorological and geological monitoring stations need to be strengthened to generate
baseline data for risk studies. Particularly the strengthening of the climate services is crucially important in
a context of changing climate and the needs to inform locally designed disaster risk and adaption measures.
All national hydro-meteorological monitoring networks in Central America are below the density coverage
ratio established by the WMO, and in overall terms, they lacking the required human and financial resources
for an adequate maintenance (CRRH-SICA, 2015).

33.      Development of robust “public assets exposure databases” is key to support exposure analysis
and vulnerability profiles for public portfolios at city level. In the case of the housing sector, physical
attributes such as the construction type, occupancy, or the age of the building are essential to assess the
vulnerability and potential losses (as replacement values) in case of disaster occurrence. At the national
level, public assets databases are still weak and incomplete in the region, so the situation is even weaker
for cities and municipalities, compounded by the needs of the exposed infrastructure in geospatial data
format. Usually when the hazard information is available, assessing the exposure and vulnerability becomes
a limiting factor to conduct risk assessments for specific sectorial portfolios.

Probabilistic Risk Assessments

34.      Probabilistic risk assessments studies have been conducted in a number of cities in Central
America but only as pilot initiatives. Seismic risk assessments using the CAPRA platform (see Box 8)
were implemented in David (Panama), Guatemala City, Managua, Panamá city, San José, San Salvador and
Tegucigalpa. Most of these studies assessed the disaster risk for the housing, education (schools), and health
(hospitals) portfolios, and involved an inter-institutional coordinated effort, involving the work of technical
institutions and line ministries. Beyond the concrete results of these studies, their implementation was
focused on building the capacities of a network of practitioners and researchers from the public sector in
probabilistic risk assessments, setting the basis for a regional network on DRM.



  71 CENAPRED was established following the earthquake of 1976 in Mexico City, which a robust mandate and technical

capacities to generate the risk information to all territorial levels in Mexico.

                                                                                                              124
35.      The experience so far from implementing the pilot studies confirms some perceptions
mentioned previously about the risk assessment processes in the region. These are: i) the studies
required the set-up of ad hoc multi-sectorial and multidisciplinary teams, as well as finding an institutional
champion (which varied for every study) to coordinate and steer the whole process; ii) building the exposure
data to assess the vulnerability component proved to be among the most challenging task, revealing the lack
of good public assets databases and updated infrastructure geo-referenced information in key sectors; iii)
while there are good technical capacities in technical institutions and universities, risk assessments are not
part of the regular institutional mandates; iv) even though the results were focused on cities, it was difficult
to raise awareness and engage local government authorities; v) in most cases, the results of the studies have
not influenced decision making, or lead immediately to disaster risk reduction plans or strategies for the
sectorial portfolios assessed in the study.


   BOX 21. CENTRAL AMERICAN PROBABILISTIC RISK ASSESSMENT (CAPRA)
   PROGRAM

   The CAPRA Program was created in 2008 as a collaborative initiative between the Centre for the
   Coordination and Prevention of Natural Disasters in Central America (CEPREDENAC), the United
   Nations International Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR), the Inter-American
   Development Bank (IDB), the World Bank (WB), the Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction
   and Recovery (GFDRR) and the Australian Development Agency (AusAID).
   From its inception, CAPRA has sought to strengthen the institutional capacity to assess, understand
   and communicate disaster risk, aiming to generate relevant information to be incorporated into
   development programs and decision-making strategies. At the operational level, CAPRA utilizes a
   modular freeware environment which enables technical professionals from different disciplines to
   carry out probabilistic Disaster Risk Assessments.
   The hazard modules comprising CAPRA’s freeware –which can be used to assess earthquakes,
   hurricanes, rainfall, volcanoes, floods, landslides and tsunamis– are based on sound peer reviewed
   databases of hundreds of historical and simulated events. The information generated from those
   hazards’ assessment is then combined with: (i) the exposure databases including assets-at-risk
   (infrastructure and population); and, (ii) the vulnerability associated to those assets-at-risk. Finally,
   the main module ‘CAPRA-SIG’, combines the hazards’ scenarios, the exposure databases and the
   vulnerability information and estimates the loss exceedance curves (both for economic and human
   losses).
   The information generated from those hazards’ assessment is then combined with: (i) the exposure
   databases including assets-at-risk (infrastructure and population); and, (ii) the vulnerability
   associated to those assets-at-risk. Finally, the main module ‘CAPRA-SIG’, combines the hazards’
   scenarios, the exposure databases and the vulnerability information and estimates the loss
   exceedance curves (both for economic and human losses).




                                                                                                           125
   BOX 8 (CONTINUED). CENTRAL AMERICAN PROBABILISTIC RISK ASSESSMENT
   (CAPRA) PROGRAM

   Graphically, one of the main outputs is a set of risk maps which could potentially turn into a useful
   asset to provide essential information for a future preventive management of disaster risk. The figure
   below presents a probabilistic earthquake risk damage distribution map of the city of Santa Tecla,
   El Salvador, for the housing and commercial sector –expressed in terms of annual average losses.




   Source: CAPRA team, World Bank, 2016


36.     Comprehensive risk assessment studies at the urban level are gradually incorporating
probabilistic approaches but more articulation with the decision-making process is needed. The
ultimate benefit of risk modeling and hazard mapping initiatives, such as CAPRA, cannot be realized
without effective mechanisms to ensure application of hazard information to safe siting and improved
construction for urban development. There is still a major challenge to improve the ways to communicate
the technical outputs of disaster risk assessments to local and national authorities so they can lead to
concrete disaster risk reduction measures. Ideally, a combination of probabilistic risk assessments and
participatory risk assessment processes, involving risk perception and the determination of the politically
and socially accepted level risk, can lead to decision of making an investment in disaster risk reduction
measures in urban contexts.

37.      There is also a need to match increased demand on risk assessments associated to hydro-
meteorological hazards. There has been a major development and focus research in the region on tools to
assess seismic risk. However, the most frequent events in Central America are those associated to hydro-
meteorological hazards. Modeling these risks for localized scenarios entail significant methodological
challenges and access to information that is not easily available, mostly due to a historical lack of systematic
collection of data and deficient monitoring in the region. There is growing interest in the integration of
climate scenarios as part of the climate risk assessment processes, which also represent major
methodological challenges. In a context of relatively small countries regional cooperation still plays an
important role, through initiatives such as the Central American Climate Forum, championed by the Central
American Hydraulic Resources Committee, CRRH.


                                                                                                           126
Geospatial Data

38.     As tools and platforms for probabilistic risk assessments, previously under the domain of
insurance companies, become increasingly available publicly, opportunities for improved geospatial
data widen. There is also an increasing offer of open source geospatial data platforms that can help to
overcome some of the difficulties above-mentioned about the lack of institutional drivers for risk
assessments and risk mapping, in a context where the needed public reforms would take some time to
materialize. These open source platforms can promote data sharing and collaboration between diverse
actors such as government agencies, the private sector, academia and civil society. One example is found
in Panama, where a few institutions, guided by the World Bank Open Data for Resilience Initiative team
(OpenDRI) and its broader Open Data Initiative, have developed a DRM GeoNode (see Box 9).

39.      These kinds of initiatives are particularly important in contexts where disaster risk data is
dispersed and atomized in various institutions, with absence of spatial data interoperability and
institutional exchange protocols. These promote the identification of existing risk data that represents
relevant exposure, hazard and vulnerability data at local levels. Given the relatively high penetration of
internet and mobile cellular coverage in Central American countries, there is a high potential to capitalize
on cities-crowdsourced disaster risk mapping initiatives, adding to what it should be an increasing trend of
using these open source tools for urban resilience.

40.      Development of cities’ disaster risk exposure database is also fundamental for furthering
financial risk protection strategies. A lack of knowledge about cities’ exposure to risk – and about the
cost of this risk- can lead to sub-optimal investment decisions to protect welfare. Historical records of how
disasters affected public finances in the past and information on probabilistic financial and actuarial analysis
such as modeled disaster losses are key inputs for evidence-based decision making in financial protection
that can affect urban resilience. The building capacities process on risk assessment, particularly on
probabilistic methods and tools, as well as the development of public assets exposure data-bases of main
cities in the region, is essential to inform the development of sound disaster risk financing strategies that
ultimate build economic resilience in an increasingly urbanized Central America.




                                                                                                           127
   BOX 22. PROMOTING DATA SHARING AND INTER-INSTITUTIONAL
   COLLABORATION: THE CASE OF THE DRM GEONODE IN PANAMA

   Recognizing a series of factors that are limiting the sharing of disaster risk related geospatial
   information in Panama, the Ministry of Finance (MEF) and the Ministry of Housing and Land Use
   Planning (MIVIOT), with support of the GFDRR, led the develop of a GeoNode, an open source
   web-based application and platform for developing and sharing geospatial information. So far the
   GeoNode has helped to concentrate in an open repository the existing basic cartography, hazard
   mapping and catalogues of earthquakes, data from the Panama Desinventar disaster database,
   mapping of development indicators and the results of the probabilistic disaster risk assessments that
   have been undertaken in last few years (CAPRA studies in David, Panama City and Boquete).
   MEF is gradually feeding into the GeoNode public assets information toward the building of a public
   assets exposure layer, while MIVIOT has provided spatial information on urban and land use plans
   recently developed by the institution. Inspired by this overture, the Municipality of Panama City has
   implemented a GeoNode whose data include the original inventory and repository of data and it has
   been expanded with a wide range of urban planning and DRM related information, including the
   cadaster. In a context of institutionally dispersed and not easily accessible disaster risk information,
   and still incipient development of data sharing initiatives, the DRM GeoNode has proven to be an
   effective tool to share relevant existing disaster risk information and engage institutions and local
   governments which become providers and users of DRM information.


    3. MOVING FORWARD IN BUILDING RESILIENT CITIES

41.      Modern and comprehensive regional and national policies for DRM have been developed in
the last five years. After a long and comprehensive consultative process, countries adopted the Central
America Comprehensive Policy for Disaster Risk Management in August 2010 (known as PCGIR, by its
Spanish acronym), which set policy guidelines for the governments of the region to further update and
establish modern policy and strategic frameworks for disaster risk management in their territories. Since
then, Panama, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua have adopted new national policy and
planning frameworks informed by the PCGIR and addressing the different DRM processes.

42.     Despite regional and national progress, legislative development of DRM responsibilities at
subnational and local levels is needed. While the national DRM frameworks, and in particular, the recent
national policies identify the role and promote local responsibilities for DRM, this is not yet reflected in the
diverse policy frameworks of decentralization in Central America. Only Panama, which its decentralization
framework enacted in 2009 and entered in force in 2015, establishes “…the integral disaster risk
management for protection of the population and implementation of national policies on disaster prevention
and mitigation” as a municipal level responsibility. Thus the work of the Municipalities in disaster risk
reduction is not yet inscribed in their own regulatory frameworks and it is mostly promoted as a new task
from national DRM frameworks.

43.      The measurement of risk seen as a basis for intervention is relevant when the population
recognizes and understands that risk. Despite recent progress at a national level, most Central American
cities do not have enough technical and financial resources for the measurement and representation of local

                                                                                                           128
risk, there is a lack of models, maps, and indexes in a local-urban level. The evaluation of risk that is needed
would include the evaluation of hazards, the different aspects of vulnerability when faced with these hazards
and estimations as regards the occurrence of possible consequences during a particular exposure time.

44.     In terms of risk reduction, the region lacks of resources specifically allocated for the execution
of structural and non-structural prevention-mitigation measures. This with the aim of diminishing the
economic, social and environmental impact of potentially dangerous physical phenomena. It implies
planning processes but, fundamentally, the execution of measures that modify existing risk conditions
through corrective and prospective interventions of existing and potential future vulnerability, and hazard
control when feasible.

45.     Financial protection is fundamental for the sustainability of development and economic
growth in Central America. This implies an adequate allocation and use of financial resources for the
management and implementation of appropriate strategies for the retention and transference of disaster
losses. Most countries in the region have created reserve funds or budget procedures when facing natural-
triggered disasters; nevertheless at a local-urban level, there is a lack of resources for designing
comprehensive financial protection strategies based on probabilistic estimates of risk.

Main areas to focus on include:

•   Identifying urban vulnerability and resilience drivers; lack of, and opportunities for increased
    capacity/resources; and barriers and opportunities to implement urban centered and national level
    disaster risk resilient investments.
•   Decentralization reforms to strengthen DRM responsibilities within the regulatory frameworks of
    territorial entities and sectors.
•   DRM planning tools at local level need to be developed and integrated as part of the broader local
    development planning of the municipalities, with focused on land use planning and building permits.
•   Local governments can promote dedicated building resilience standards and certification systems, as
    supporting mechanisms for risk reduction, by providing incentives, especially non-financial incentives
•   Ensure that specific infrastructure investments incorporate measures to manage disaster risk impacts,
    across the lifetime of an infrastructure investment, from design through construction, maintenance and
    contingency planning.
•   Implement targeted interventions in vulnerable communities to effectively minimize physical, social
    and financial disaster and climate risk.
•   Deliver technical assistance to facilitate specific infrastructure investments and a sector wide approach
    that values extending the lifetime of public infrastructure.
•   Focus on maintaining quality and functionality of assets thereby reducing average annual losses
    resulting from disaster risk and caused by growing vulnerability of infrastructure due to poor upkeep.
•   Develop comprehensive disaster risk financing strategies by quantifying the financial value of disaster
    reserve fund needs. This is done by assessing explicit and implicit contingent liabilities, identifying
    opportunities to streamline post disaster budget execution, and exploring opportunities for growth of
    the non-life insurance market.

                                                                                                           129
           4. REFERENCES


CRRH- SICA. (2015).Diagnóstico de capacidades, umbrales de referencia para el monitoreo y lineamientos de
     SAT en sequía para Centroamérica.

Gunasekera, R., Ishizawa, O., Aubrecht, C., Blankespoor, B., Murray, S., Pomonis, A., & Daniell, J. (2015).
       Developing an adaptive global exposure model to support the generation of country disaster risk
       profiles. Earth-Science Reviews, 150, 594-608.

IDB (2013).Integración de la Gestión de Riesgo de Desastres y la Adaptación al Cambio Climático en la Inversión
       Pública Centroamérica. NOTA TÉCNICA IDB -TN-509.


Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and the Caribbean (SEDLAC). Center for Distributive,
       Labor and Social Studies (CEDLAS). World Bank. http://sedlac.econo.unlp.edu.ar/eng/statistics-
       detalle.php?idE=35


World Bank- GFDRR. (2016). Experiencias en la inclusión de la Gestión de Riesgo de Desastres en el
      Ordenamiento Territorial en Panamá: desde la implementación del marco normativo nacional a su
      implementación a nivel local.

World Bank-GFDRR (2015). Strategic Framework for the Financial Management of Disaster Risk. Ministry of
      Finances, Panama.

World Bank-GFDRR (2016) Disaster Risk Management in the Latin American Region- Country Notes, Costa Rica.
World Bank-GFDRR. (2011).Preventive Resettlement of Populations at Risk of Disaster: Experiences from Latin
       America. Elena Correa Editor.

World Bank-GFDRR. (2015). Building Regulation for Resilience: Managing Risk for Safer Cities.

World Bank. (2007). Strategic Communications for Business Environment Reforms: A Guideline for Stakeholder
       Engagement and Reform Promotion. International Finance Corporation.

World Bank. (2015). Country Disaster Risk Profiles for Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua
       and Panama.




                                                                                                           130
CHAPTER 5: FOSTERING COMPETITIVE CITIES: OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOCAL
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (LED) IN CENTRAL AMERICA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. WHY LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT MATTER FOR CENTRAL AMERICA ............................... 133
2. IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS IS CRITICAL TO SUSTAIN ECONOMIC GROWTH IN CENTRAL
AMERICA .................................................................................................................................................. 134
3. BUILDING ON LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT – LESSONS FROM GLOBAL COMPETITIVE CITIES
   137
4. WHAT CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES CAN DO................................................................................... 140
4.1.       INSTITUTIONS AND REGULATIONS ................................................................................................ 141
4.2.       INFRASTRUCTURE AND LAND ....................................................................................................... 142
4.3.       SKILLS AND INNOVATION ............................................................................................................. 143
4.4.       ENTERPRISE SUPPORT.................................................................................................................... 144
5. HOW TO DO IT? PRIORITIES FOR DEVELOPING LED POLICIES IN CENTRAL AMERICA ................ 146
5.1.       UNDERSTANDING THE LOCAL ECONOMY THROUGH BENCHMARKING AND ANALYSIS ................. 147
5.2. FACILITATING A LONG-TERM VISION AND A COMPETITIVENESS AGENDA THROUGH ACTION-
ORIENTED PUBLIC-PRIVATE DIALOGUE (PPD) ......................................................................................... 148
5.3. TRANSLATING STRATEGIES INTO ACTION THROUGH SUBNATIONAL CAPABILITIES AND INTRA-
GOVERNMENT COORDINATION .................................................................................................................. 149
6. REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................... 151


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Growth rates needed to achieve the benchmark in GDP per capita and Gini in 2030 for Latin
American countries ................................................................................................................................... 135
Figure 2. The Different industry structures and needs of cities at different levels of income .................. 139
Figure 3. Competitive cities know their own competencies relative to other stakeholders, and prioritize
their efforts accordingly ............................................................................................................................ 140
Figure 4. Ease of doing business in Central America ............................................................................... 141

LIST OF BOXES

Box 1. Competitive cities drive job growth and increase income and productivity ................................. 138
Box 2. The case of Aeroman: Local partnership for skills improvement ................................................. 144




                                                                                                                                                        131
OVERVIEW

Central American cities have a central role to play in boosting economic growth and generating
employment opportunities for their residents. As urbanization leads to an increasing concentration
of economic activities in cities, improving competitiveness at the city level becomes increasingly
important, and international experience shows that a subnational lens to economic development can
make a significant impact. Competitive cities are able to sustain economic success by engaging in
proactive Local Economic Development (LED) policies to support the growth of existing firms,
attract outside investors, and stimulate the creation of new businesses.

This chapter discusses how effective LED can contribute to raising competitiveness in Central
America. Section 1 analyses the different growth models at play in the region and explains why
improving competitiveness is critical to sustain economic growth in the region. Section 2 presents
lessons learned from global competitive cities which illustrate how local policies can support
competitiveness. Section 3 identifies specific examples and areas of opportunities for Central
American cities. Lastly, Section 4 presents a set of policy recommendations on how to go about
developing and implementing effective economic development strategies at the local level.

Key messages

•   Through effective LED policies, Central American cities can improve their competitiveness and
    facilitate economic growth and job creation in their territories.

•   Critical success factors for LED are a clear understanding of local economic advantages, the
    development of a strong Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) at the local level, and the development
    of local capacity at the appropriate geographical scale.




                                                                                                 132
    1. WHY LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT MATTERS FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

1.       The region must continue to expand sources of inclusive growth in order to reverse
widespread inequality and poverty. Taking full advantage of a massive demographic dividend 72 will
require increased efforts from Central American countries to accelerate the shift toward higher value added
production activities. The extent to which an economy competes in a globalized environment is defined by
how the productivity of firms and workers compares to others. Productivity-led growth refers to improving
the efficiency by which the private sector uses an economy’s human, capital and natural resources. This
path involves consistent efforts by national governments toward macroeconomic stability, but there are
additional policies to promote Private Sector Development (PSD). For example, from enhancing productive
capacities and improving investment climate conditions, to more outward-oriented policies such as
expanding and diversifying exports markets and support the integration of local businesses into global value
chains. The policies that governments design and implement can be categorized according to the scope and
the type of intervention. PSD policies can apply to businesses in specific industries (vertical) or to all firms
irrespective of the industry they belong to (horizontal), while instruments, whether a market intervention
or a public input, are based on the market failures being addressed (Fernández-Arias, 2010).

2.       A subnational lens to economic development provides Central American countries with new
avenues for policymaking in supporting the region’s economic transition. Economic development
efforts in the region is led by central governments – despite cities generating two thirds of GDP in the
region – and have gravitated primarily around investment climate regulation. Zooming in at the subnational
tier of economic development policy provides unique opportunities for policy makers to unleash
transformative and high productivity-led growth by strengthening local and regional competitiveness
factors. Multiple reasons make cities and regions particularly well suited to facilitate and implement PSD
support mechanisms. The geographic scale of cities and regions can match the spatial agglomeration of
firms around networks of suppliers, producers and buyers sharing similar needs in hard infrastructure, or
access to knowledge or a talent pool. This scale makes it easier to convene a range of local stakeholders
and facilitate inclusive consultation processes.

3.       By developing Local Economic Development (LED) policies, Central American countries can
leverage the potential of cities to contribute to long term economic growth. LED is an approach to
economic development that involves strategies through which cities or regions can support economic
activity and employment creation at their territorial scale. Policy interventions are generally categorized
within one or more of these four areas: (i) institutions and regulations that improve the business
environment, (ii) provision of adequate infrastructure and land for economic activities, (iii) programs and
policies aimed at developing skills and innovation, and (iv) enterprise support and finance. A World Bank
global analysis on competitiveness shows that cities that are fostering economic growth and job creation
are able to build effective partnerships between public and private actors (growth coalition) and to
implement strategies that combine actions across the four areas mentioned above. The emergence of LED,
irrespective of the existing local capabilities, important lessons that can be leveraged by subnational actors
aiming to mainstream spatial economics considerations into their local development plans.



  72 The “demographic dividend” refers to opportunities derived from changes in age structure as a country’s economy gradually

develops. When average life expectancy increases and the size of families is progressively reduced, there’s a period of time in
which a large pool of young educated people enter the labor market.

                                                                                                                          133
      2. IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS IS CRITICAL TO SUSTAIN ECONOMIC GROWTH IN
         CENTRAL AMERICA

7.       Moderate performance of Central American economies has been driven by consistent trade
reform and favorable external conditions. During Latin America’s foreign debt crisis in the 1980s known
as the lost decade, compound annual growth in Central America averaged 1.1 percent (Porter, 2002). Later
during the 1990s, the regional economies flourished as the consolidation of peace 73, sound macro-economic
policies and pro-trade reform, expanded foreign investment and positioned the region to take full advantage
of the commodity boom. More recently, the region suffered the effects of the last global debt crisis indirectly
through the U.S., due to the country’s importance as the region’s major trade partner, investor and source
of remittances (Guillen, 2011). Partly explained by sound macroeconomic policies, the crisis has not eroded
financial markets in Central America as much as in other regions, but fiscal deficits and public debt have
remained high since its outset in 2008 (IMF, 2012). Mid-term growth projections remain stable, positively
influenced by low oil prices 74 and a sooner-than-expected recovery of the US economy. IMF forecasts
indicate that Panama could be the best performer in Latin America with 6 percent average growth during
the next 3 years, followed by Nicaragua with 4 percent and Costa Rica. El Salvador, Honduras and
Guatemala, will remain stagnant at a band of 1 to 3 percent growth.
8.      However, most Central American countries would need a per capita growth of real income
of between 6 and 14 percent to close the gap with the world’s most prosperous countries by 2030.
Latin America, as a whole, would need a per capita growth of real income of 7.5 percent annually to close
the gap with the most prosperous countries by 2030, keeping the same pace of inequality reduction observed
in recent years. That is more than twice the 3.1 percent achieved from 2003 to 2011, the period of higher
growth in the region. Assuming a continuation of the 3.1 percent rate and the same pace of inequality
reduction, Latin America would need 41 years to close the gap with global top performers, while it would
take 51 years if inequality were to remain constant at the 2011 level (World Bank, 2013). For Central
American economies, the needed growth is even higher. Figure 1 shows that, excluding Panama, Central
American countries would need to growth between 6 (Costa Rica) and 14 percent (Honduras) in order to
close the gap with the most prosperous countries by 2030.




 73  Progressively during the early and mid-1990s, Central American countries ended long periods of civil conflict and political
unrest, including major civil wars, a regional war between Guatemala and Honduras and the involvement of the region in the Cold
War. Remarkably, being center stage in cold war disputes boosted inflows of international aid, which each government used very
differently. While Honduras expanded military capacity, Costa Rica prioritized education, health and housing investments.
  74 Unlike the rest of LAC, Central America is a net importer of oil and therefore overly dependent on hydrocarbon prices as 40%

of electricity production relies on fossil fuels.

                                                                                                                            134
Figure 126. Growth rates needed to achieve the benchmark in GDP per capita and Gini in 2030 for
                                   Latin American countries




      Source: World Bank. (2013b) “Shifting Gears to Accelerate Shared Prosperity in Latin America and the
                                                 Caribbean.”


9.       Other indicators portray a region with profound socio-economic drawbacks, and not well-
equipped to create the necessary jobs for a booming young demographic. GDP per capita in the region
has increased well below the global average of middle-income economies and, compared to the rest of Latin
America, the region has underperformed in poverty reduction 75. Central America’s pace of decline in
income inequality has been largely stagnant over the last decade, hindering the region’s capacity to lift
people out of vulnerability and into middle class layers of society. In Panama and Costa Rica, where
economic growth has been highest, inequality remains flat or even widens76. By the mid-2000s, countries
in the Northern Triangle –Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala- suffered mounting crime and emigration
to other countries, especially to the US. Out of the 3 million Central American immigrants living in the US,
90 percent relocated from these countries (MPI, 2013) and in 2012. Factors such as outbound migration
and the weight of the informal economy continue to distort unemployment data, which ranges between 4-6
percent, except in Costa Rica where unemployment hit 8 percent in 2014. Underemployment, however,
remains high 77, with 63 percent for the population under 30.

7.       Central American economies showcase different growth trajectories, but on average, their
competitive advantage has relied on the region’s natural endowments and proximity to the US. Recent
economic history in Central America is explained, to an extent, by the ability of each country to capitalize
on these two factors. A combination of favorable climate and ecological diversity facilitated agricultural
development and a competitive tourism industry, while foreign investment boomed in sectors where rapid
response through shorter lead times and lower labor costs constituted key success factors to serve the U.S.
market. The economies of Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua are still relying heavily on
these economic drivers, while Costa Rica and Panama have managed to diversify their economies and
transition to more productive sectors.


  75 44% of the population still lives on less than $4 a day, only a 9% reduction since 2000 compared to a decline of 40% in the

LAC region for the same period.
  76 Costa Rica and Panama went from being the one least unequal countries in LAC in 2000, to being around the median by 2012.
  77 Underemployed workers are either (i) highly skilled employees working in low-pay low-skilled jobs or (ii) part-time workers

that would prefer to work full-time. In the Northern Triangle this figure is within 30-40%.

                                                                                                                           135
8.      Although production in most of Central American countries has been increasingly moving to
manufacturing, jobs are still concentrated in low-skill productive sectors that are expose to external
shocks. It is estimated that in countries such as El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala and Nicaragua, more
than 50 percent of the workforce is concentrated in low-skill activities related to commerce and agriculture,
while only 15 percent is employed in manufacturing. The region’s natural endowments, such as favorable
climate for year-round production, competitive hours of sunlight per day and the quality of soil, constitute
strong comparative advantages for the production of coffee, sugar and fruits. However, these are extremely
vulnerable to natural disasters, price volatility and other shocks. On the other hand, the textile and apparel
Maquila industry, are linked to Free Trade Zones or zonas francas, given the existence of lower import and
export duties, and, in the case of Honduras, is the second largest GDP contributor after remittances.
However, Maquilas are exposed to the price of commodity inputs and the volatility of Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI).
9.       Services account for a growing share of the GDP across the region, ranging from 52 percent
in Nicaragua to 75 percent in Panama. Broadly-defined, the services category includes non-traded
business activities such as commerce or retail, consolidated industries like tourism, as well as emerging
ones like business process outsourcing (BPOs). Following the expansion of cloud-based business models
and consequent demand for outsourced sales, the reduction in telecom rates, and a considerable pool of
bilingual labor force has positioned Central America as a competitive location for the call center industry.
Although the aggregated industry turnover is still low, it is growing at an impressive pace. Moreover, today
tourism is a major source of income for countries in the region, ranging from 5-10 percent of GDP.
International tourism amounts to 7.6 percent of the GDP in Costa Rica and 4.3 percent in El Salvador.

10.     The exports basket in Costa Rica is dominated by high technology-based exports and
knowledge-intensive services. A sound trade liberalization reform and a relatively high-skilled labor pool
allowed Costa Rica to nurture a vibrant exports sector. Today the country is globally recognized for its
success stories in FDI. Exports account for 55 percent of GDP, from 27 percent in 1980, and the share of
high-tech products and ICT is one of the highest when compared to upper-middle-income peers.
Agricultural production declined from 13 percent of GDP in the early 1980s to 5 percent today, while the
manufacturing sector has stagnated at a 20-22 percent GDP contribution for the past 25 years and decreased
in terms of employment (from 25-12 percent).

11.      Panama’s growth is heavily influenced by the operation and consecutive renovation phases
of the Panama Canal. This emblematic infrastructure positions Panama as transport hub and unique
economy when compared to other Central American countries. It explains the country’s specialization in
logistics and distribution services and makes more difficult any comparison on sources of economic growth
with other countries in the region. The Colon Free Trade Zone is home to 2,000 enterprises and 15,000
jobs. In 2014, Panama surpassed the $10 billion mark in export of services, led by canal-related transport
services ($5.4 bn), tourism ($3.4 bn) and financial, insurance and business services ($1.2 bn altogether)
(ITC, 2014).

12.      To create more and better jobs, Central American countries must strengthen the
competitiveness of the private sector. Successful economic development, capable of raising income and
living standards simultaneously, is ultimately driven by improved firm-level competitiveness. Governments
around the world have different levers to improve the context in which firms expand and innovate. They
exercise monetary and fiscal powers to foster macroeconomic stability, but they also apply innovative

                                                                                                          136
policy tools to promote Private Sector Development (PSD) by improving the business environment in which
firms operate. Traditionally in Central America, these measures have been led mostly by national
government agencies, and have geared toward improving the investment climate. Notwithstanding the
success of these policies, concentrating economic development policies to the work of national Investment
Promotion Agencies (IPAs) is in fact a missed opportunity. The impact of top-down PSD initiatives is not
maximized when these work in isolation. It is the lack of a more comprehensive policy framework to
address the challenges of the local business fabric that limits the capacity of Central American governments
to strengthen the business environment and country competitiveness through alternative policy innovations.

    3. BUILDING ON LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT – LESSONS FROM GLOBAL
       COMPETITIVE CITIES

13.      Global interest on LED policies has grown parallel to rapid urbanization patterns. As city
leaders are increasingly posed with significant socio-economic challenges, job creation in urban areas has
become a priority in global economic development (WDR, 2013). A thriving economy creates conditions
for prosperity in the form of higher incomes and widespread improvements in the standard of living. The
international community is coming to realize that LED policies can have considerable impact in a local
economy. A recent World Bank study benchmarking the world’s largest 750 cities identifies a set of
common principles applied by cities showing outstanding economic performance. That is, above-average
growth in private sector job creation, disposable incomes, and labor productivity. Acknowledging that city-
level policies can make a difference in the competitiveness of the local private sector, which generates 75
percent of all jobs and 80 percent of gross value added in cities worldwide, has important policy
ramifications. Understanding what makes these cities succeed, as well as the subsequent analysis of best
practices, will inform the discussion on potential LED policies in Central America.




                                                                                                        137
   BOX 23. COMPETITIVE CITIES DRIVE JOB GROWTH AND INCREASE INCOME AND
   PRODUCTIVITY

   Competitive cities sustain economic success by engaging in action-oriented policies across three
   channels of firm-level growth: the growth of existing firms, the attraction of outside investors,
   and the creation of new businesses. In addition to attracting outside investment successful cities
   assist existing firms in addressing different constraints to growth, and support the formation of new
   businesses. Competitive cities are characterized by above-average economic performance
   measured through specific indicators:
   •   Accelerated economic growth: The top 10 percent of cities achieved 13.5 percent annual GDP
       per capita growth, compared to 4.7 percent in an average city;
   •   Outstanding job growth: The top 10 percent of cities achieved 9.2 percent annual jobs growth,
       compared to 1.9 percent in the remaining 90 percent.
   •   Increased incomes and productivity: The top 10 percent of cities increased the average
       disposable income of their households by 9.8 percent annually.
   •   Magnets” for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI): The top 5 percent of cities obtained as much
       FDI as the bottom 95 percent of cities combined.


14.      There is a link between LED policies and a city’s income level and economic structure. As
figure 2 shows, local economies generating $2,500 per capita, or less, are driven primarily by business
activities such as consumer services, wholesale and retail. These can be labeled “markets towns”. Industrial
activity tends to dominate in lower-to-middle-income ‘production centers’ with levels of per capita GDP
between US$2,500 and US$20,000. When cities graduate from this category they tend to transition toward
creative and financial centers. The analysis concluded that, in navigating this economic transformation,
cities use similar or differentiated policy levers to maximize the outcomes of their LED interventions. At
lower levels of income, policies emphasize structural transformation, namely building institutional
capacity, pushing regulatory reform and investing in basic infrastructure. As the city develops, the focus
shifts scaling up productive output by improving the efficient use of the resources in the economy, for
instance through high-end services. Improving human capital tends to be a permanent goal in the economic
development agenda, but cities may often need to choose between more jobs or better jobs depending on
the stage in the transformation cycle of the economy they are.




                                                                                                        138
    Figure 227. The Different industry structures and needs of cities at different levels of income




Source: World Bank (2015) “Competitive Cities for Jobs and Growth” World Bank Report. Analysis of Oxford
Economic Data 2000-12. See Firki and Zhu 2015.

15.     Competitive cities focus their interventions across four broad policy levers, or tools, to
influence local determinants of competitiveness. These levers are strongly intertwined, and together
provide a comprehensive framework to assess what policy options can LED practitioners deploy to create
jobs while raising incomes and productivity. Subnational tools for policy action can be summarized in four
categories:

   •   Institutions and regulations: taxes, licenses, duties, legal regulation, promotion and branding;
   •   Infrastructure and land: roads, electricity, water, sanitation, transport, communications, and land
       (including colocation arrangements for similar firms);
   •   Skills and innovation: basic education, vocational training and workforce development, and
       innovation networks;
   •   Enterprise support and finance: access to capital, subsidies, incentives, export assistance, and
       capacity development for operational activities (legal, financial, administrative).
16.      Success in LED is largely based on the convergence of pro-active city leadership and adequate
policy capabilities to facilitate action in several competitiveness areas. City leaders generally have
different avenues to push for the implementation of economic development initiatives. Figure 3 lists some
of the competencies usually available to a city’s government (or “city wedge”). Bringing these initiatives
to fruition will require collaborating with other stakeholders through permanent or temporary “growth

                                                                                                           139
coalitions” of public and private stakeholders, in addition to pushing for intergovernmental coordination.
While personal leadership and trust among different stakeholders is essential, the establishment of
facilitating institutions and assignation of responsibilities for implementation prove to be more effective
forces in driving sustainable LED. These structures can emerge for the implementation of a single action
or become permanent.

  Figure 328. Competitive cities know their own competencies relative to other stakeholders, and
                                 prioritize their efforts accordingly




Source: World Bank (2015) “Competitive Cities for Jobs and Growth” World Bank Report

    4. WHAT CENTRAL AMERICAN CITIES CAN DO

17.    An overview of LED opportunities in the region unveils specific areas of opportunities for
Central American cities to improve their performance across the different key areas of local
competitiveness:

    •   Institutions and regulations: Local governments can learn from each other to further improve the
        business environment at the local level.

    •   Infrastructure and land: The impact of local territorial development plans and investment on Local
        Economic Development can be improved by bringing an economic development lens into the
        territorial and investment planning processes.

    •   Skills and innovation: Local partnerships can help bridge the region’s skills gap by helping match
        the supply and demand for specific skills.


                                                                                                       140
    •    Enterprise support: The effectiveness of existing enterprise support services can be improved by
         developing a more strategic approach to investment promotion and improving local firms’ access
         to business support services.

    4.1. INSTITUTIONS AND REGULATIONS

LEARNING FROM EACH OTHER TO FURTHER IMPROVE THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
AT THE LOCAL LEVEL
18.     Local institutions and regulations shape an important part of the business environment at the
city level. For example, they often determine how easy it is for firms and entrepreneurs to start a new
business, obtain a construction permit, or register a property. The regional Doing Business for Central
America (World Bank, 2015b) compared business regulations at the local level in the 6 Central American
countries and the Dominican Republic. It found substantial variations in business regulations and their
implementation across the countries, and also among cities within the same country. Figure 4 below
presents the performance of several cities across the three areas surveyed (starting a business, obtaining a
construction permit, and registering a property), and reveals opportunities for reform and exchange of good
practices.

                           Figure 429. Ease of doing business in Central America




Source: World Bank (2015b) Doing Business in Central America and the Dominican Republic

19.      Central and local governments in Central America are working on improving the ease of
doing business at the local level. In Costa Rica, municipalities in the San Jose metropolitan area compete
in attracting investment by establishing one-stop shops or ‘single window’ systems to expedite business
registration procedures and construction permits, making city regulations easier to navigate for businesses

                                                                                                        141
and entrepreneurs. As noted in Chapter 2, this type of initiatives relies on increased capacity at the local
level and coordination between central and municipal governments, and can benefit from cooperation
between Municipalities. Panama City has created a single window for processing construction permits that
is overseen by the Ministry of Housing and Territorial Development (MIVIOT) based in the Municipality’s
office. In El Salvador, building on the experience of OPAMSS, the Vice Ministry of Housing has created
of Territorial Planning and Management Offices (Oficinas de Planificacion y Gestion Territorial). These
technical units are set up at the level of associations of municipalities (Mancomunidades), which gain from
the economies of scales required to make them sustainable at the local level.

    4.2. INFRASTRUCTURE AND LAND

BRINGING AN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LENS TO LOCAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS
20.     International experience shows how competitive cities are able to identify and deliver
infrastructure investments through effective partnerships between the public and private sectors,
and between different levels of governments. CA cities can improve the impact of infrastructure
investments on local economic development through greater involvement of local governments and local
economic actors in the planning process. As noted in Chapter 2, city development plans are often prepared
with limited involvement and ownership of local governments. Greater involvement of local governments
in the preparation of local development plans could not only improve the coordination between spatial
planning and infrastructure investment at the city level, but it can also ensure the involvement of local
economic actors in the process.

21.     Local “growth coalitions” can help cities identify key priorities, and leverage investments
from the national government. For example, Bucaramanga, in Colombia, was able to successfully lobby
the central government for infrastructure upgrades that were most needed for the city’s economy. A
partnership between the city government and the local private sector led to the identification of
transportation as a key constraint to the growth of local firms. The city government used a study prepared
by the city chamber of commerce to persuade the national government to fund specific infrastructure
investments. Tangier, in Morocco, leveraged national investments in a new port to attract foreign
investments through coordinated efforts from the national and local investment promotion agencies.

22.      Connectivity infrastructure is an example of national investments that can be leveraged at
the local level. An analysis of logistics bottlenecks in Central America (World Bank, 2012) identified urban
congestion, along with border wait times as one of the main causes of delays in the shipping of goods in
the region. The absence of bypassing routes accounts for approximately 12 percent of transit time on routes
passing through Guatemala City and Panama City. Urban bypass roads are an example of a major
investment requiring the financial support of the central government, but with potentially large impacts on
a city’s spatial and economic development. Investing in this type of infrastructure opens up new areas for
development to be planned in connection with a citywide spatial development strategy, enabling new
economic activities and contributing to a more sustainable urban development. The introduction of bypass
routes can also significantly improve livability in the city itself by relieving traffic congestion and air
pollution associated with freight traffic passing through the city.

23.     Efforts to improve infrastructure for economic activity have mainly focused on specific areas
with limited connection to city-wide development strategies. Through the creation of Special Economic


                                                                                                        142
Zones, Central America countries have been offering improved infrastructure along with favorable fiscal
conditions in order to attract investments in targeted export-oriented sectors. The section below on
enterprise support discusses how Central American countries can improve the long-term impact of these
initiatives by having a more strategic approach to investment promotion and aligning it with local territorial
development strategies.

     4.3. SKILLS AND INNOVATION

BRIDGING THE SKILLS GAP BY MATCHING SUPPLY AND DEMAND
24.     Subnational actors are ideally positioned to match supply and demand of human capital.
Recent World Bank analysis 78 concluded that improving human capital is imperative to address the jobs
challenge in CA, considering the region’s poor record in educational and skills development indicators79.
An unskilled workforce hinders economic development and ties an economy to low-wage industries, as is
the case in the Northern Triangle and Nicaragua, making it more difficult to break the vicious circle of
inequality, youth unemployment and migration. Broad government efforts to overhaul the educational
system must be coupled with pragmatic policies to bring these skills closer to firms, through a demand-
driven approach to secondary and post-secondary education in order to improve the rates at which graduates
enter the labor market. City managers have an advantage when it comes to facilitating these linkages
between firms and universities and training institutions.

25.      There are examples of Central American cities taking one step forward in aligning education
and training providers with the skills required by a specific industry or investor. Cartago, a city of
half a million people in Costa Rica, and home to the largest campus of the Costa Rica Institute of
Technology (TEC), worked with the Costa Rican Investment Promotion Agency (CINDE) to establish the
technical curricula needed to prepare a pool of skilled workers demanded by medical device multinationals.
Since the local university was not able to provide this training at that point, CINDE and the city of Cartago
facilitated a collaboration with the University of Minnesota. Today there are 52 students enrolled in an
engineering master’s program tailored to the needs of the medical device industry, the first of its kind in
Latin America. Attracting foreign universities to establish branch campuses and expand the offer in
graduate level programs can also help strengthen and improve the programs offered by universities in the
region. Cities can also run programs designed to re-integrate returning migrants 80, providing local
economies with workers with a differentiated experience and skill set. This link between local supply and
demand of skills can be driven either by a joint initiative between central and local governments like in

   78 Better Jobs in Central America: The Role of Human Capital is a flagship 2012 report prepared by the Human Development

Department for the LAC region at the Word Bank.
   79 The quality of primary education is poor, as evidenced by low reading scores and performance levels. Nicaragua, Guatemala

and Honduras have a labor force with an average of less than 6 years of schooling, while Costa Rica and Panama have 8.4 and 9.4
respectively. These levels stand in contrast to the U.S. level of 13 years of schooling. Worryingly, the region as a whole has shown
little improvement in the last 10 years. As per the share of the labor force with some years of post-secondary schooling, Costa Rica
tops the list in the region, with 18.6%. Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua have levels that are significantly below 10%, whereas
El Salvador reaches 10.6 percent. These levels compare to the U.S. figure of 50.1%. Public expenditure on education in the region
is low, and only Panama and Costa Rica are slightly above LAC average. LAC average for the 2000-2009 period was 4.14% of
GDP, only surpassed by Costa Rica (4.98) and Panama (4.31). This is still a third of the average in OECD countries.
   80 The reduction of human capital in Central American migrant-sending countries generally takes place in the educated segments

of society, as those leaving the country tend to be better prepared than those staying behind. Emigration rates of population with
tertiary education in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua are within a staggering 25-30% band. These emigrants
generally end up in low-pay jobs in the U.S., destination for roughly 70% of total migrants from CA. Better Jobs in Central
America. The Role of Human Capital (2012) / World Bank Migration and Remittances Factbook 2011.

                                                                                                                               143
Cartago, through private businesses as depicted in Box 2, which describes the case of Aeroman a top
employer in El Salvador. Aeroman’s collaboration with a local university helped the firm build a successful
business strategy around human capital.


   BOX 24. THE CASE OF AEROMAN: LOCAL PARTNERSHIP FOR SKILLS
   IMPROVEMENT

   Commitment to quality through improved technical skills
   Established in 1983 as the maintenance and engineering division of TACA Airlines, Aeroman
   became a top provider in Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services for narrow body
   airplanes in America. Since its beginnings, the firm has shown a clear commitment to the continued
   upgrading of technical skills in order to sustain high levels of quality and achieve competitive
   turnaround times. Combined with its cost advantage and its strategic geographic position connecting
   South and North America, these factors have been pivotal in the success of the business.
   When private, public and education actors intersect
   Through collaboration with the Don Bosco University, a course for aircraft maintenance technicians
   was developed in 2005. Currently 300 students are enrolled in the program and 237 have graduated
   from it, and many of them employed at Aeroman, The curricula will soon expand to also include
   engineering courses. According to Aeroman’s chairman, a new mechanic must undergo two years of
   training before working in the production lines. Such investment per worker demonstrates the
   company’s commitment to continued upgrading of the technical capabilities of Aeroman’s
   workforce.
   Promising outlook
   Today, Aeroman is the only member of the Airbus MRO network in Latin America and services
   several commercial airlines. It has recently reached its 1,000 heavy maintenance check (performs
   around 150 annually), the vast majority of which have been to US airlines such as US Airways or Jet
   Blue. Aeroman has 12 lines for Boeing and Airbus narrow bodies and plans to add capabilities
   for Embraer in 2016. The firm is expected to add 6 new lines and create 3,500 new jobs in the next
   7 years. A new hangar will enable Aeroman to pursue widebody MRO and it will include a dedicated
   training building.


    4.4. ENTERPRISE SUPPORT

DEVELOPING A MORE STRATEGIC APPROACH TO INVESTMENT PROMOTION AND
IMPROVING LOCAL FIRMS’ ACCESS TO BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES
Leveraging Special Economic Zones

26.    Central American countries have relied heavily on Special Economic Zones to promote
export-oriented activities. The region has been early adopter of Export Processing Zones (EPZ), or Zonas
Francas along with Mexico, Colombia and the Dominican Republic. Often viewed as quick fixes to boost


                                                                                                       144
exports, Zonas Francas were public-driven at first and applied similar sets of incentives 81 to jockey for
investors through reduced production costs, trade tariffs and corporate taxes. However, limited long term
social benefits, measured by increased wages, knowledge spill-overs and improved working conditions, did
not always outweigh their costs. Over time, the tool evolved into the Special Economic Zones (SEZ), which
now account for a large share of light manufacturing jobs in El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, and
Nicaragua. Although SEZs have contributed to attracting foreign direct investment, many of the firms that
invest in them rely heavily on continued access to low wages, affordable electricity and fiscal incentives.
International evidence suggests that attracting cost-based production without capitalizing on local spillovers
limits the sustainability of the economic gains.

27.     Examples in the region show how countries can develop a more strategic approach to
investment promotion. With a 5-10 year lead time over most Central American countries, the Dominican
Republic represents a good benchmark for countries that managed to shift investment from sectors intensive
in unskilled labor to higher value-added sectors with stronger links to local suppliers. In 2003, textile and
apparel firms accounted for more than 50 percent of all companies operating out of the SEZs in the
Dominican Republic. They accounted for an even larger majority of exports and employment. By the end
of 2010, textiles & apparel accounted for only 22 percent of SEZ companies, as promotion efforts were
actively oriented toward other economic sectors such as services, tobacco, agribusinesses, pharmaceuticals
and electronics. The region is also home to very renowned success stories and emerging cases in FDI, such
as the establishment of microchips manufacturer, Intel, in Costa Rica in 1996. In Honduras, the textile
cluster underwent a remarkable evolution from low-skill, low-value productive stages to more capital-
intensive ones.

28.     With the guidance of world-class Investment Promotion Organizations (IPO) based in the
region, local authorities can tie strategic investments to both existing and new SEZs. In El Salvador,
Honduras, Guatemala and Nicaragua, SEZs constitute an important source of light manufacturing jobs,
primarily in textile and apparel industries. In Nicaragua, SEZs accounted for 80 percent of exports in 2005,
compared to 67 percent in Panama. Textile exports originating from SEZs in El Salvador, account for nearly
half of national exports, representing US$2.4 billion. This economic scenario is an opportunity for
subnational agents to leverage their precise understanding of the region’s assets and productive
specialization in encouraging technology and know-how transfer from lead firms in existing SEZs and
informing the planning of new ones.

29.      Large and mid-size cities in Central America collaborate with their respective IPOs to
guarantee that the mix of incentives promoting upstream and downstream linkages is aligned with
the transitional steps toward trade liberalization. Countries like Nicaragua and Costa Rica have globally
renowned institutions in this arena. While Nicaragua’s PRONICARAGUA is recognized by its efficiency
and celerity in responding to the requests of international investors, CINDE has particularly excelled in the
after care services aimed at consolidating and expanding the operations of established MNCs. As opposed
to the “build it and they will come” approach, CINDE dedicates half of its 40 people team to business
promotion, including a team of ‘investment intelligence’ experts to anticipate global demand in the
countries with strategic knowledge-based sectors. Encouraging sector-specific investments allows CINDE

  81Industrial zoning categories include six types: i) Free Trade Zone, ii) Export Processing Zone, iii) Enterprise Zone, iv) Single
Factories, v) Free Port, and vi) Specialized Zone. In Colombia, the Barranquilla zone was opened in 1964; in the Dominican
Republic, 1965. El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras followed in the early 1970s. After this came Nicaragua in 1976, Jamaica
in 1976, and Costa Rica in 1981.

                                                                                                                               145
to target the promotion of SEZs to specific lead firms and smaller ones producing related inputs, and to
capitalize on local comparative and competitive advantages. For established corporations, the focus of the
organization is unequivocally talent. CINDE representatives meet periodically with heads of the human
resources department to meet the skills sets they require to expand production or business activity in their
Costa Rican subsidiaries.

Improving Local Firms Access to Business Support Services

30.     City-level LED offices can improve the offer and access to business support services. As
mentioned in the previous section, successful economic development strategies at the national level
combine pro-active investment promotion with the continued provision of a comprehensive range of
business support services. In growing their businesses, firms and entrepreneurs in Central America may
seek assistance from private and institutional service providers, from up-to-date information on export
markets, to advisory services on compliance issues, quality certification, or access to finance.

31.     Business support mechanisms tend to be scattered across multiple agencies and departments
of national government. Today, the portfolio of competitiveness support programs available to firms is
not usually consolidated under one roof so businesses must navigate an often bureaucratic public structure
to do so, and the specifics needs from firms must adjust to the parameters of a given program to be
supported, not the other way around. However, there are ongoing efforts in streamlining and consolidating
national competitiveness support. Costa Rica passed a law in October 2015 for the rationalization of MSME
support portfolio through the creation of FOMPRODUCE 82. With an initial budget of $34 million,
FOMPRODUCE integrates six different bodies (DIGEPYME, INAPYME, PRONAMYPE,
FODEMIPYME, PROPYME and CONICIT 83) and brings together four ministries (MEIC, MICITT, MAG
and COMEX). Its governing board will have permanent private sector representatives, including chambers
of commerce and UCCAEP, a guild grouping business associations.

32.     The rationalization of the provision of business services at the national level should be
accompanied by the development of similar integrated windows at the local level. Doing so would not
only simplify things from the perspective of beneficiary, but it would also allow public officials to gain a
more complete understanding of the competitive challenges faced by the private sector, giving them the
opportunity to inform their intervention decisions accordingly.

      5. HOW TO DO IT? PRIORITIES FOR DEVELOPING LED POLICIES IN CENTRAL AMERICA

33.      The review of experiences in terms of developing and implementing LED policies in Central
America reveals several limitations. Local Economic Development strategies which have been developed
in the region often suffer from a lack of rigorous analysis of the local situation in terms of economic activity,
employment and economic development potential. There is a limited systematic engagement of the private
sector in the processes of definition of development strategies at the local level. Finally cities lack the


 82  Agency for Productive Development, Innovation and Value-Added.
 83  In that same order, these acronyms stand for: Directorate-General for Support to Small and Medium Enterprises, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Unit, National Program for Microenterprise Support and Social Mobility, Fund for the
Development and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Program to Support Small and Medium Enterprises, and National Council
for Scientific and Technological Research.


                                                                                                                        146
capacity to facilitate the dialogue between local actors and deliver the key services that are critical to the
definition and implementation of Local Economic Development Strategies.

34.     Based on the experience of Central American countries and lessons from the Global case
studies, the priorities to develop improved LED policies in Central America are:

   •    Understanding their local economy through benchmarking and analysis
   •    Facilitating a long-term vision for the city or region, and facilitate a stronger Public Private
        Dialogue (PPD) to prepare competitiveness agendas aimed at reaching that vision
   •    Translating strategies into action through gaining subnational capabilities and fostering intra-
        government coordination

    5.1. UNDERSTANDING THE LOCAL ECONOMY THROUGH BENCHMARKING AND ANALYSIS

35.      Any discussion on LED policy priorities must be informed by an accurate understanding of
the local or regional economic reality84. Local authorities must capture the distinct nature of their local
economies to understand potential sources of comparative and competitive advantage. Some initiatives, like
the Municipal Competitiveness Index in El Salvador and similar attempts to assess subnational investment
climate conditions are important steps toward gathering accurate benchmarking economic indicators in
local settings. In this context, firm-level surveys and investment climate indicators can tell us about the
perceived constraints to private sector development in each country and the region as a whole. Thanks to a
2010 survey 85 we know that the most binding constraint in day-to-day operations in Guatemala and El
Salvador is perceived to be crime, while electricity is a top constraint in Nicaragua, access to finance in
Costa Rica, and corruption in Panama and Honduras. We also know that when country-level results are
averaged, registered businesses rank competition from informal firms is perceived as a top binding
constraint in day-to-day operations. 86 However, these must be coupled with a refined understanding of
qualitative issues and trends affecting the city’s economic structure.

36.     The analysis must account for rapid changes in the industry mix, as exemplified by Central
American capital cities. As costs of production rise in cities, manufacturing jobs are replaced by service-
oriented activities. The emergence of the call center industry illustrates this trend, as multiplexing and
cloud-based technologies are creating the conditions for a boom in the Contact Center Outsourcing (CCO)
and Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) industries. In Guatemala City, 80,000 manufacturing jobs have
been lost in the last 15 years, but job creation in call centers for BPO is growing very fast. Quetzaltenango,
a mid-size city with limited trade infrastructure, expects to create 70,000 in the near future. This sector
employed 9,000 people in 2008 in Guatemala, but in 2014, 75 firms already employed 35,000 and this

  84 In small countries like those in Central America, the boundaries of this economic reality may go beyond the much with be

local or regional in scope, calling for a corresponding administrative setting of the LED initiative accordingly.
  85 The IFC Enterprise Survey (World Bank, 2014) included 12,855 interviews to enterprises with more than five employees in

30 LAC countries belonging to non-agricultural sectors (manufacturing, construction, services, transport, storage, and
communications, and IT). Respondents in Central America were vastly from the capital cities.
  86 Informality has traditionally been high in the LAC region, only second to Sub-saharan Africa in global terms. The real share

of employment in the informal sector is estimated at 71% in El Salvador, 81% in Guatemala and 84% in Honduras. The multiple
ramifications of informality on the economy are not confined to competition environment. The fact that almost 9 out of 10 firms in
LAC start formal and remain formal reinforces the pivotal role local authorities play in addressing entrepreneurship because
simplifying procedures required to start a business and new firm registration fosters the expansion of the formal economy.

                                                                                                                             147
figure is expected to increase to 55,000 by the end of 2016. Recent predictions (Frost & Sullivan, 2014)
situate future employment at 150,000. Similarly, the call center industry in Costa Rica created 45,000 jobs
in the last 15 years, spread among 28 contact centers and 18 major companies offering BPO services.

37.      The rest of Central American economies are catching up at an impressive speed. Panama’s
industry emerged in 2010 and, averaging a 25 percent annual growth since then, now accounts for 40 centers
and 13,000 jobs. El Salvador’s grew by 19 percent to create 17,500 jobs and Nicaragua has 25 centers in
operation as of today. The call center industry in Honduras has been the fastest-growing economic sector
in the last 3 years. It employs roughly 27,000 people, but 10,000 of them were created in 2014 alone. San
Pedro Sula, the industrial capital, is becoming a hotspot for call centers and has developed a dedicated
industrial park to attract key global players. Honduras is home to 30 contact centers and 12 BPOs from
international investors.

       5.2.   FACILITATING A LONG-TERM VISION AND A COMPETITIVENESS AGENDA THROUGH
              ACTION-ORIENTED PUBLIC-PRIVATE DIALOGUE (PPD)

38.      LED in Central America can improve the impact of past attempts to develop nation-wide
economic development agendas. Through the facilitation of bottom-up processes, LED policies can
overcome a certain degree of political gridlock that has negatively affected the implementation of national
priorities in competitiveness. In 1994, countries in the region created the Central American Alliance for
Sustainable Development aimed at improving regional cooperation in the field of economic development.
A team of international experts 87 recommended policy strategies to strengthen the global competitiveness
position of the region and prompted the emergence of national competitiveness councils, or Consejos
Nacionales de Competitividad 88. These consejos recognized the virtues of a closer interaction between the
private and the public sector supporting competitiveness, updated the analysis of economic challenges and
set national priorities to address them. However, they were unable to sustain a renewed interface with the
private sector and were seldom coupled with a corresponding allocation of resources for implementation.

39.      Effective local governance prioritizes policy actions that align with a long-term economic
vision. A city’s vision to sustained prosperity must be established through a participatory process and
informed by an assessment of the economy and its comparative advantages. CA municipalities that have
strategic roadmaps seldom have an economic development component and, when they do, these are not
supported by thorough analysis. A shared vision is essential when it comes to building consensus on the
strategies necessary to reach it, so the selection of actors in a city-wide PPD process should reflect the real
geographic scale of the city economy 89. Facilitators in Central American capital cities, by way of example,
must determine what metropolitan administrative boundaries will be better suited to tackle key economic
development challenges. It is imperative to think long term and encourage the all public and private sector
buy-in so that they are able to take ownership of the overall process.

40.     In defining strategies to support this vision, the group of public and private participants in
PPD efforts can be narrower in scope. LED actors can maximize the impact of the resulting interventions
given that they have a better knowledge of the market trends in the industry where local firms compete. In


  87Harvard Business School and INCAE facilitated a set of working sessions with public officials from 5 countries.
  88These initiatives followed the success of similar public-private institutions in pushing for productive transformation in some
Asian and European countries, the Dominican Republic and Colombia.
 89 Companion paper. Framework for Public-Private Dialogue in Cities



                                                                                                                             148
regions with an ample cluster of companies and a diverse economic structure, the role of convening
stakeholders in the local economy may reside in a permanent LED team or unit to facilitate periodical
updates of the economic vision based on economic performance indicators. Successful projects require a
business-centric philosophy that recognizes strategic analysis as the means to avoid intuitive top-down
recipes for growth. As demonstrated by the global analysis of competitive cities, when LED staff conducts
the proper analysis and understand business strategy concepts, they can perform a similar role to that of
strategy consultants, combining process facilitation and strategic analysis with participants that result in
LED action plans. Effective PPD often starts with raising strategic evidence-based questions about an issue
at hand supported by supply and demand-based analysis.

41.     When the overall development of strategies takes place in one specific economic sector or
value chain, the resulting LED actions tend to be more advanced. The path to competitiveness is not
the same for all firms in an economy. Those that belong to the same value chain or business segment will
be influenced by similar same success factors to compete, which are increasingly influenced by global
trends. LED teams can therefore facilitate a more specific discussion on the strategic challenges they face
by engaging sector stakeholders in demand-driven analysis. Traditionally, MNCs concentrated productive
processes in one location, so developing countries were left with very few options to diversify their
economy: to attract a lead firm in that sector, to develop new sectors from scratch, or to keep a low-wage
specialization in the agriculture sector. The intense globalization pattern seen during the last decades caused
the fragmentation of productive activities, opening up a whole new set opportunities for firms to participate
in global value chains 90 (GVC) by progressively capturing more value-added activities.

       5.3. TRANSLATING STRATEGIES INTO ACTION THROUGH SUBNATIONAL CAPABILITIES AND
            INTRA-GOVERNMENT COORDINATION

42.      Leadership in LED implementation comes from various combinations of stakeholders in a
city’s economy. Notwithstanding the intrinsic difficulties in defining a long-term economic vision, it is
during the implementation phase when most LED policies tend to fail. Common bottlenecks surface when
actions are poorly formulated, funding is dependent on a sole actor, or if the initiative is promoted in large
part by a single public figure. Interviews conducted across Central America revealed that several success
stories in LED have built on the influence of “personal leaders”, be it mayors, well-known businessmen or
industry experts. While their involvement may trigger action to solve specific issues, it also indicates the
lack of a systematic and action-oriented dialogue with other relevant stakeholders, jeopardizing the overall
sustainability of LED processes. Since economic challenges are dynamic and problems change over time,
the structure of PPD should be capable of supporting long term initiatives, adapt to them and, more
importantly, survive political shocks across different electoral cycles. City managers must explore
performance-based formulas binding LED structures to impact metrics.

43.   Coordination with regional stakeholders and other tiers of administration is essential.
Competitive cities use their leverage to join forces with those sharing similar interests, given that the most

  90Every economic sector, traditional or non-traditional is influenced by GVCs one way or another. Thanks to trade facilitation
reform undergone over the last decades and the proximity to large markets, CA has clearly managed to excel at providing supply
chain solutions. However, supply chain and value chain are not exactly the same concept. Value chains revolve around the concept
of value and what processes can add more of it, while a supply chain has to do with the efficient moving of inputs for the
manufacturing and distribution of a product. While trade facilitation is about making supply chains more effective and the success
of GVCs depends on the efficiency of supply chains.


                                                                                                                             149
transformational initiatives often require inter-jurisdictional cooperation with neighboring communities in
lobbying for funding. At a smaller scale, and as previously discussed, LED actors will also need to
coordinate with national instances of government to assist local businesses in navigating the portfolio of
multifaceted instruments to support competitiveness. The collaboration between subnational and national
economic development officials goes both ways. Nation-wide reforms can permeate more easily to firms
when the outreach of local and regional actors represents an active and efficient conduit to communicate
particularly with MSMEs.

44.     The allocation of LED capabilities must be preceded by a discussion on the appropriate scale
to engage in LED policies, which can be progressively expanded according to results. Expanding LED
capabilities in institutional structure, financial resources and human capital can happen gradually.
Considering that even large cities in the region do not have a LED unit, and those that do, are primarily
involved in the regulation of non-traded sectors like commerce and retail, upgrading LED policies may not
necessarily require the initial setup of new institutional structures. Prior to expanding LED staff structures
and allocating other capabilities, a discussion must take place to determine what scale is the best to engage
in LED. El Salvador, the smallest country in Central America and one of the most densely populated in the
world, has encouraged alliances among its 292 municipalities and is now pushing for regional economic
development policies with a more manageable group of 24 municipal associations, or mancomunidades.
Once the unit of administration to engage in subnational economic development has been properly defined,
LED teams can find inexpensive ways to facilitate quick wins in different policy levers while learning in
the process.

45.      This “learning by doing” approach can allow city officials to design a LED structure more
reflective of the local economy dynamics. What’s more, these field based experiences and early wins tend
to act as the proof-of-concepts to ignite the participation of a wider spectrum of local stakeholders. A
prospective LED unit will need the adequate set of skills to perform their role as facilitators of regional and
sector strategies and its performance should be measured by indicators, such as evidenced impact on local
competitiveness or the traction generated with the private sector.




                                                                                                           150
        6. REFERENCES


Bashir, S., Gindling, T. H., & Oviedo, A. M. (2012). Better Jobs in Central America: The Role of Human Capital.
        World Bank.


IMF. (2012). Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic: Trade Integration and Economic
       Performance, IMF working paper N. 12/234.

Cunha, Barbara and Jaramillo, Felipe C. (2013). Trade and Logistics in Central America: A Survey of
      Recent Analytical Work Sponsored by The World Bank


Fernández-Arias, E. (2010). Multilateral Safety Nets for Financial Crises.


Fernandez Arias, Eduardo, Manuel Agosin, and Charles Sabel. (2010). “Phantom or Phoenix? Industrial
      Policies in Latin America Today.” In The Age of Productivity: Transforming Economies from the
      Bottom Up. Development in the Americas Series. Washington, DC: IDB


Frost & Sullivan. (2014). Latin American Contact Center Systems Market 2014 Report.


Guillén, R. (2011). The effects of the global economic crisis in Latin America.Revista de Economia
       Política, 31(2), 187-202.


International Trade Centre (ITC). (2014). Panama Country Report.


Lederman, Daniel, Julián Messina, Samuel Pienknagura, and Jamele Rigolini. 2014. Latin American
      Entrepreneurs: Many Firms but Little Innovation. Washington, DC: World Bank

Migration Policy Institute (MPI). (2013). Tabulation of data from the U.S. Census Bureau.

Porter, Michael E. Economic and Social Development: The New Learning. Americas Competitiveness
        Forum, Panama City, Panama, October 4, 2013. (Presentation)

World Bank (2012). Logistics in Central America. The path to competitiveness. Washington, DC: World
      Bank

World Bank. (2013). Unlocking Central America’s Export Potential Knowledge Platform Summary
      Document. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                                                                           151
World Bank. (2013b). Shifting gears to accelerate shared prosperity in Latin America and Caribbean. Latin
       America and the Caribbean poverty and labor brief. Washington DC ; World Bank



World Bank. 2014. Mapping enterprises in Latin America and the Caribbean. Enterprise surveys Latin America
       and the Caribbean series: Note num. 1. Washington, DC: World Bank.


World Bank (2015). Competitive Cities for Jobs and Growth: What, Who and How. Washington, DC:
      World Bank

World Bank (2015b). Doing business in Central America and the Dominican Republic 2015. Washington,
      DC: World Bank




                                                                                                            152
