                 Report No: ACS15060




UKRAINE
Urbanization Review
      © 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / the World Bank
      1818 H Street NW
      Washington DC 20433
      Telephone: 202-473-1000
      Internet: www.worldbank.org




      This volume
      Disclaimer    is a product
                  : This  volume ofis the          thethe
                                          staff of of
                                       a product       International   Bank
                                                            staff of the      for Reconstruction
                                                                           International   Bank forand  Development/The
                                                                                                      Reconstruction    and
      World Bank. The findings,
      Development/The      World Bank.interpretations,
                                           The findings,and   conclusions expressed
                                                           interpretations,             in this paper
                                                                              and conclusions          do not
                                                                                                 expressed   in necessarily
                                                                                                                 this paper
          not the
      reflect
      do                     the Executive
                   views ofreflect
              necessarily            the viewsDirectors  of The World
                                                 of the Executive       Bank or
                                                                    Directors   of the
                                                                                   The governments
                                                                                        World Bank or they
                                                                                                         therepresent.
                                                                                                             governments The
      World
      they    Bank does
            represent.    not
                         The   guarantee
                              World    Bankthe
                                             doesaccuracy           the included
                                                            of the data
                                                    not guarantee         accuracyin of  thework.
                                                                                             data The
                                                                                       this            boundaries,
                                                                                                   included   in thiscolors,
                                                                                                                       work.
      denominations,    and  other  information   shown   on  any map   in  this work  do not imply  any
      The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not   judgment   on  the
      part of
      imply    The
             any    World Bank
                 judgment         concerning
                              on the            the legal
                                       part of The   Worldstatus
                                                             Bank of any territory
                                                                   concerning         or the
                                                                                 the legal   endorsement
                                                                                           status           or acceptance
                                                                                                   of any territory   or the
      of such  boundaries.
      endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

      The material
      Copyright     in this publication
                  Statement              is copyrighted.
                              : The material             Copying and/or
                                               in this publication         transmitting
                                                                    is copyrighted.       portions
                                                                                     Copying        or alltransmitting
                                                                                                 and/or    of this work
      without permission
      portions             may
               or all of this    be a
                              work    violation
                                    without     of applicable
                                              permission  maylaw.
                                                               be aThe  International
                                                                     violation        Bank for
                                                                               of applicable      Reconstruction
                                                                                               law.                 and
                                                                                                    The International
      Development/    The World   Bank  encourages  dissemination   of its work and  will normally   grant
      Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and      permission
      to reproduce
      will          portions
           normally grant     of the work
                           permission       promptly. portions of the work promptly.
                                       to reproduce
      For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
      information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
      telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

      All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
      of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422,
      e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




iii
UKRAINE
Urbanization Review




                      iv
                                    Table of Contents
LIST   OF   ANNEXES                                                          vi
LIST   OF   TABLES                                                           vi
LIST   OF   BOXES                                                            vi
LIST   OF    FIGURES                                                         vii
LIST   OF   ACRONYMS                                                          x

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                             xi

INTRODUCTION                                                                 xii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                            xv

CHAPTER 1 THE URBAN SYSTEM: DEMOGRAPHICS AND ECONOMIC TRENDS                 1
  I. Demographics                                                            3
  II. Urbanization and the Urban System                                     15
  III. Regional Economic Trends                                             34
  IV. Cities of Ukraine: Engines Of Economic Growth                         51

CHAPTER 2 CITIES AND THE INTER-GOVERNMENTAL FISCAL SYSTEM                    79
  I. The Inter-Governmental System                                           81
  II. Revenue Sources                                                        88
  III. Analysis of Expenditures                                             100
  IV. Cities and the Fiscal System                                          108

CHAPTER 3 URBAN PLANNING AND THE SPATIAL DEVELOPMENT                        113
  I. Regulatory and Institutional Framework                                 115
  II. Spatial Planning                                                      118
  III. Housing Market                                                       125
  IV. Planning as an Instrument for Managing City Growth And City Decline   130

CHAPTER 4 IMPACT OF THE CURRENT CONFLICT ON THE URBAN SYSTEM                135

ANNEXES141




v
                                        List of Annexes
ANNEX I. 	    Special economic zones
ANNEX II. 	   Location quotient
ANNEX III.	   Methodological annex using night-lights data as a proxy for economic activity
ANNEX IV. 	   Robustness of city typologies
ANNEX V. 	    List of Ukranian cities
ANNEX VI.	    Extensive growth
ANNEX VII.	   Assignment of expenditure responsibilities in the budget code
ANNEX VIII. 	 Summary of urban & spatial planning legislation
ANNEX IX. 	   Summary of planning stakeholders




                                            List of Tables
TABLE 1 	     Ukrainian diaspora by country of residence (ca. 2012)
TABLE 2 	     Between 2010 and 2012, migrants came mainly from Ukraine’s Western region
TABLE 3 	     Five largest urban centers in each region by population in 2013
TABLE 4 	     Ranking of Ukraine’s 15 largest cities by population
TABLE 5 	     Ranking of Ukraine’s largest urban agglomerations
TABLE 6 	     Ranking of the fastest growing cities in Ukraine
TABLE 7 	     Growth of sector employment in regions and relation of that sector employment against the 	
		            sector’s employment nationally using location quotients
TABLE 8 	     Cities with the highest number of firms in 2000 and 2008
TABLE 9 	     Typology of cities based on NLS observations between 1996 and 2010: selected statistics
TABLE 10 	    Ukraine’s agglomerations: merged night-light urban footprints
TABLE 11 	    Top global increment of built-up last 40 years
TABLE 12 	    Functional responsibilities
TABLE 13	     Own sources of local Government revenues
TABLE 14 	    Utilization of local revenue instruments by cities as % of UAH per capita, 2013
TABLE 15 	    Age distribution of housing stock




                                            List of Boxes
BOX 1 		      Mono-functional cities system
BOX 2		       Evolution of the Propiska system
BOX 3		       Definition of agglomeration using night lights satellite imaging
BOX 4		       Poverty in Ukraine
BOX 5 		      The rise and fall of Ukraine’s coal industry

                                                                                                            vi
BOX 6 		     Location quotient estimates of sector employment in the regions
BOX 7 		     A first typology of Ukraine’s cities
BOX 8 		     A second typology of Ukraine’s cities
BOX 9 		     Types of urban/spatial plans in Ukraine
BOX 10	      Kyiv 2025 city development strategy
BOX 11 	     Detroit (USA) master plan
BOX 12 	     Disconnect between reality and plan
BOX 13 	     National level spatial policy: Stadtumbau Ost and West (Germany)




                                        List of Figures
FIGURE 1	    Ukraine’s population is declining faster than the ECA region average
FIGURE 2	    Aging is increasingly an urban issue in Ukraine
FIGURE 3	    Population dynamics flattened as the 	      younger share of the population has decreased
FIGURE 4	    The urban population age mimics the flattening of the general population pyramids
FIGURE 5	    The decrease in younger population is less in the rural areas. These areas also show a decrease in the
		           older cohorts of the population
FIGURE 6	    A sharp decline in fertility rates is leading to an important reduction of the young cohort
FIGURE 7	    Ukraine is aging more dramatically than neighboring countries
FIGURE 8	    The birth rate has recovered since 2001, but remains very low. fertility rates follow similar trends,
		           remaining under replacement levels at least since 1990
FIGURE 9	    Ukraine’s eastern region has the highest rate of overall population decline
FIGURE 10	   The eastern region has the highest overal decline in population in urban areas
FIGURE 11	   The average age is increasing in all urban areas
FIGURE 12	   Migration is increasingly a factor in ukraine’s population decline
FIGURE 13	   Labor migration rate by regions
FIGURE 14	   Both urban and rural populations declined between 1989 and 2011; yet the country continues to urbanize
FIGURE 15	   There are strong differences among urbanization levels across the regions
FIGURE 16	   Population dynamics are heterogeneous across ukraine’s regions. in all cases, however, population declines
		           yield increased urbanization rates
FIGURE 17	   Distribution of cities across Ukraine
FIGURE 18	   Ukraine has a high percentage of small and mid-sized towns - 2013
FIGURE 19	   Most of the urban population is concentrated in eight major cities - 2013
FIGURE 20	   The western region has the greatest number of small towns. also, its urban population lives mostly in mid-
		           sized cities (100-500k)
FIGURE 21	   All categories of cities in Ukraine are losing population
FIGURE 22	   Ukrainian cities with growing or declining population 2001-2013
FIGURE 23	   Real GDP decreased sharply after Ukraine’s departure from the Soviet Union (1991-1998) and
		           experienced a slow recovery lasting until the recent conflict (1999-2012)
FIGURE 24	   GDP per capita grew steadily from 1998 until the global financial crisis
vii
FIGURE 25	      EBRD transition INDEX (2012)
FIGURE 26	      GVA shares: the service and finance sectors now lead Ukraine’s economy, but the industrial sector still 	
		              occupies a prominent place
FIGURE 27	      The change in the share of employment by sector between 2001 and 2008 in percentage points against
		              sectoral productivity in 2001. the economy’s average productivity rate is provided for comparison
FIGURE 28	      GDP per person employed in countries of the former Soviet Union 2001
FIGURE 29	      Trend of GDP per person employed in Ukraine
FIGURE 30	      Remittances to Ukraine by expatriates, 2001-2013
FIGURE 31	      GVA shares: the Eastern and Southern regions remain more industrial in nature, while the central region is
		              predominent in trade, services and the financial sector
FIGURE 32	      Sectoral employment in the Western region by location quotient
FIGURE 33	      Sectoral employment in the Central region by location quotient
FIGURE 34	      Sectoral employment in the Eastern region by location quotient
FIGURE 35	      Sectoral employment in the Southern region by location quotient
FIGURE 36	      Ukraine’s urban GVA (upper graph) is much greater than its rural GVA (lower)
FIGURE 37	      Urban-rural GVA ratios are much greater than urban-rural population ratios, indicating much higher
		              productivity in the urban sector
FIGURE 38	      The performance of firms based on firm, city, and industry characteristics
FIGURE 39	      There is a strong positive correlation between urban GDP and night lights
FIGURE 40	      NIght lights and urban footprints in Ukraine 1996 and 2010
FIGURE 41	      Compound growth/decline in NLS in Ukraine between 1996 and 2010
FIGURE 42	      Urban GVA production at the oblast level
FIGURE 43	      Urbanization shows steady growth mainly in the Central and Western regions
FIGURE 44	      Real GVA growth per worker shows strongest increase in the Western region
FIGURE 45	      Distribution of found, appear, disappear, and missed cities by population in 2013
FIGURE 46	      Distribution of missed cities by population in 2013
FIGURE 47	      Distribution of found, appear, disappear, and missed cities by geographic location
FIGURE 48	      Distribution of found, appear, disappear, and missed cities
FIGURE 49	      Changes in NLS urban footprint vs. changes in NLS intensity in the urban core
FIGURE 50	      The distribution of city sizes varies across types in the second typology; type 1 cities are overall larger
FIGURE 51	      The distribution of cities by economic growth varies across types in the second typology; type 1 cities
		              have more cities with positive growth
FIGURE 52	      The distribution of cities by economic growth varies across types in the second typology; type 1 cities
		              have more cities with positive growth
FIGURE 53	      Intensity of night lights has a strong relationship to population dynamics
FIGURE 54	 The distribution of types of cities varies by region; the western region has the majority of thriving (type 1)
		cities
FIGURE 55	      Kyiv’s agglomeration 1996-2010
FIGURE 56	      Distribution of agglomerations and individual cities by city type; agglomerations are disproportionately
		              thriving (type 1)
FIGURE 57	      Ukraine is 4th in absolute number of new built-up areas over the last 15 years
FIGURE 58	      Prosperity is not pushing the massive addition of built-up areas in Ukraine
                                                                                                                              viii
FIGURE 59	   Sub-national governments account for almost half of public expenditures
FIGURE 60	   Sub-national expenditures are dominated by the three social sectors
FIGURE 61	   Composition of sub-national revenues, 2005-2012
FIGURE 62	   Decentralization of social services is associated with transfer dependence
FIGURE 63	   Type of city revenues and % of total provided by different tiers of government, 2013
FIGURE 64	   Composition of city revenues by night light type as % of total, 2013
FIGURE 65	   Composition of city revenues by population size as % of total, 2013
FIGURE 66	   Composition of city revenues as % of total relative to population decline, 2013
FIGURE 67	   Utilization of local revenue instruments by cities, uah per capita, 2013
FIGURE 68	   Utilization of local revenue instruments by city night light typology, UAH per capita, 2013
FIGURE 69	   Utilization of local revenue instruments by city population size, in UAH per capita, 2013
FIGURE 70	   Per capita revenue from own taxes and the night light typology of sub-oblast cities, in UAH, 2013
FIGURE 71	   Per capita revenue from own taxes and population decline of sub-oblast cities, in UAH 2013
FIGURE 72	   Composition of inter-governmental transfers to cities by type, 2013
FIGURE 73	   Composition of inter-governmental transfers to cities by population trend, 2013
FIGURE 74	   Composition of inter-governmental transfers to cities by population size, 2013
FIGURE 75	   Functional composition of city expenditures by sub-type, 2013
FIGURE 76	   Per capita expenditures on social sectors by night light category in sub-oblast cities, in UAH, 2013
FIGURE 77	   Average per capita expenditures by function and city population size, 2013
FIGURE 78	   Per capita expenditures by function and population trend, 2013
FIGURE 79	   Per capita expenditures on social sectors by population decline in sub-oblast cities, in UAH, 2013
FIGURE 80	   Economic composition of city expenditures by city typology, 2013
FIGURE 81	   Economic composition of city expenditures by city population size, 2013
FIGURE 82	   Economies of scale by economic item, 2013
FIGURE 83	   Economic composition of city expenditures by population trend, 2013
FIGURE 84	   Composition of capital expenditures by function and city typology, 2013
FIGURE 85	   Per capita capital expenditures by function and population size, 2013
FIGURE 86	   Per capita capital expenditures by function and population trend, 2013
FIGURE 87	   Hierarchy of spatial plans produced by dipromisto
FIGURE 88	   Dwelling stock by Tenure status 2000-2009
FIGURE 89	   Dwelling stock by country
FIGURE 90	   Level of mortgage penetration
FIGURE 91	   House price to income ratio
FIGURE 92	   Conflict and displacement in Eastern Ukraine (as of February 2015)




ix
                             List of Acronyms

CDS	   	   City Development Strategy
CIS	   	   Commonwealth of Independent States
CIT		      Corporate Income Tax
DN		       Digital Number
EBRD		     European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ECA		      Europe and Central Asia Region
EU		       European Union
FAOSTAT	   Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Statistics Division
FDI		      Foreign Direct Investment
FSU	   	   Former Soviet Union
GAWC		     Globalization and World Cities (Research Network)
GDP		      Gross Domestic Product
GHSL		     Global Human Settlement Layer
GIS 		     Geographic Information System
GVA		      Gross Value Added
ICT		      Information and Communications Technology
ILO 		     International Labor Organization
IMF		      International Monetary Fund
KM	    	   Kilometer
MGI		      McKinsey Global Institute
NLs		      Night lights
OECD		     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PIT		      Personal Income Tax
PPP		      Purchasing Power Parity
RPA 		     Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment
SAR		      Special Administrative Region
SME		      Small and Medium Enterprises
SNG		      Sub-national Public Expenditures
UAH		      Ukrainian Hryvnya
UN		       United Nations
UUR		      Ukrainian Urbanization Review
USD		      United States Dollar
USSR	 	    Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
WDR	 	     World Development Report (World Bank)
WWII	 	    World War II



                                                                                         x
                                     Acknowledgements
The Ukraine Urbanization Review was prepared under the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Urban Development,
which funds the World Bank’s urbanization reviews for all countries of the globe.

It was initiated before the onset of the current conflict in Eastern Ukraine and prior to the referenda held in the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on 16 March 2014. The report uses historical data sets ranging between
1989 and 2013, as well as historical maps; further, the report does not intend to make any judgment as to the legal or
other status of any disputed territories or prejudice the final determination of the parties’ claims.

The study was developed under the guidance of Qimiao Fan and Sumila Gulyani. It benefitted from guidance and direction
provided by Peter Ellis, Christine Kessides, and Judy Baker.

The team that developed Chapter 1 was led by Paula Restrepo Cadavid and included Luis Eduardo Quintero, Benjamin
Stewart (GIS analysis), Katie McWilliams (GIS analysis and maps), and Sofia Zhukova. Chapter 2 was prepared by Andrey
Timofeev and Iryna Shcherbyna, and inputs from Sebastian Eckardt. Chapter 3 was prepared by Brent Ryan, Yarissa
Lyngdoh Sommer, Olga Mrinska, Kate Owens, and Mariana Kuchlevska. Copyediting was provided by Will Ferroggiaro
and graphic design additions by George Maier. The overall work on the Ukraine Urbanization Review was led by Kremena
Ionkova and Tamara Sulukhia.

The team has benefitted tremendously from guidance and comments provided by Mark Roberts, Denyz Nizalov, Olga
Mrinska, and Klavdiya Maksymenko.




xi
                                                         Introduction

Objectives, Audience and Limitations
The present report is a diagnostic Economic and Sector Work (ESW) on the urban landscape in Ukraine. Its objective
is to link population dynamics with economic dynamics, and to present emerging spatial characteristics and trends.
Ukraine has experienced a dramatic population decline over the past two decades, which impacts the urban system. This
ESW seeks to elicit a policy dialogue on opportunities to enhance efficiency through dedicated urban planning and fiscal
instruments. The intended primary audience is the Government of Ukraine, including city mayors and city managers;
international partners; and other stakeholders engaged in the area of urban development.
The Ukraine Urbanization Review (UUR) was initiated before the onset of the current conflict in Eastern Ukraine and
prior to the referenda held in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on 16 March 2014. The
report uses historical data sets ranging between 1989 and 2013 as well as historical maps. Consequently, events related
to the current conflict are not a part of the present analysis, although they are recognized in the concluding chapter of
this report. This stems from the lack of recent, reliable data from the conflict areas as well as the continuously evolving
and changing characteristics of the conflict. Despite this limitation, the UUR remains relevant and opportune in its
findings on trends, challenges, and opportunities for the urban system in Ukraine.


Report Organization
The UUR is organized into three main Chapters and a concluding Chapter.
Chapter 1
outlines recent demographic changes, presents the urban system and its economic characteristics, and develops city
typologies based on their economic, spatial and demographic patterns.
Chapter 2
offers an analysis of sub-national finance arrangements and examines tiers of government and the city typologies
developed in Chapter 1 for discrepancies that could be explored to enhance efficiency in spending.
Chapter 3
discusses current urban and spatial planning practices and outlines shortcomings in view of changing demographics.
The concluding Chapter touches on the impact of the current conflict on the urban space and system.

For clarity, the section immediately below describes the territorial administrative division of Ukraine as it is used
throughout this report.


Territorial-Administrative System of Ukraine
Ukraine has inherited its territorial-administrative system from the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and it has not
changed significantly since the 1950-60s when it was formed. Each of the 15 Soviet republics, depending on their
territory and population, was divided into several sub-regional tiers of administration1. The larger republics— including
the Russian Federation and Ukraine—had three territorial-administrative tiers.

According to Ukraine’s constitution, the territorial–administrative system is as set forth below,




   1   Eurasian Cities: New Realities along the Silk Road, World Bank (2012).
                                                                                                                        xii
                                                       Introduction


                                          Central Government

                                               Autonomous Republic of                   Cities with special status:
            24 oblasts
                                                Crimea (until 2013)                   Kyiv & Sevastopol (until 2013)


                       490 raions                                     182 cities of oblast significance
                                                                             (including 111 municipal districts)


                                           276 cities of raion significance
                   and 28,388 villages and settlements formed in 10,279 village and settlement councils



                 24 oblasts, 1 Autonomous Republic of Crimea and 2 cities of state
  TIER 1         significance – Kyiv and Sevastopol (until 2013)
24 oblasts have elected councils, however they do not have own executive committees and all executive functions are
delegated to oblast state administrations – representative body of the central government. Most of Ukraine’s oblasts are
named after their respective administrative centers. Cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol had (until 2013) special status and are
regulated by separate laws. Cities have councils with executive committee, which at the same time performs functions of
the regional representative of central government (city state administration). Kyiv as well as being a separate territorial-
administrative unit serves as the administrative center for Kyiv oblast.


                 490 raions and 182 cities of oblast significance,
  TIER 2         which have equal status within oblast
Both raions and cities have their elected councils. However only cities of oblast significance have their own executive
committees, which are responsible for implementation of municipal policies in the framework of their own powers. Raion
councils do not have executive committees and delegate all their executive functions to raion state administrations, similar
to oblast councils. In addition to 490 raions there are 111 municipal raions (districts) in larger cities of state and oblast
significance. At the moment only 55 municipal raions have their own councils but all of them have raion state administrations.
For example in Kyiv in 2010 ten raion councils were abolished by the decision of city council and approval of the parliament,
and raion state administrations were left to manage raions’ development. Also some cities might have separate settlements
and villages within their geographical boundaries, which have a separate administrative structures (councils). The oblast
significance status is usually granted to a city, which is an economic, administrative and cultural center. Each oblast has at
least one city of oblast significance as its administrative center.


                 cities of raion significance, urban and rural settlements,
  TIER 3         and villages (united into communities).
Urban populated places can be either cities or urban settlements, while rural populated places can be either villages or rural
settlements. There are no state administrations below raion level and all basic tier territories are governed by their elected
councils and executive committees.




xiii
                                                                       Introduction
The total of 458 cities of state, oblast and raion significance is considered for the
analysis presented in this Urbanization Review
These are 2 cities of state significance, 182 cities of oblast significance (both types administered by their own councils
and executive committees) and 276 cities of raion significance that have their own councils and executive committees
however are more dependent on oblast state administrations. In addition, there are two cities, Chernobyl and Pripyat
that were abandoned after accident at Chernobyl nuclear power station in 1986 due to unsafe levels of radiation.
Although they officially have the administrative status of a city, they are not considered in the current analysis as they
do not have any population or economic activities and in practice are administered directly by the central government.

Due to the scale of the territory and population Ukraine is sometimes divided into macroregions and mesoregions –
groups of oblasts – that are used for the planning, economic, social, political and other purposes. For example, in USSR
era Ukraine officially had three economic macroregions, which were used for spatial planning of industrial development,
infrastructure, agriculture and system of settlements. This system was effective for large-scale planning however not
suitable for Ukraine when it became an independent state, as the scale of mobilization of resources and population
has downshifted. Ukrainian researchers have been proposing different systems of socio-economic macroregions and
mesoregions since the beginning of XX century, which would correspond to the spatial structure of Ukraine and would
better reflect the potential of each territory.

In order to combine the different oblasts of the country and in order to facilitate the analysis of economic and demographic
trends across the Ukraine territory macroregions have been identified in Ukraine. The model of regionalization used for
this Review has been developed by Kiel Institute of Sociology. In this model Ukraine is divided into four macroregions:
West, East, South and Central, as shown in the figure below. These macroregions do not have any legal or administrative
significance in Ukraine’s territorial-administrative system.

Macroregions of Ukraine



                           Luts’k
                                                                                  Chernihiv
                                                                                                        Sumy
                                            Rivne

                                                            Zhytomyr
                 Lvyv                                                    Kyiv
                                                                                                        Poltava
                                                                                                                                   Kharkiv
                             Ternopil      Khmelnytskyi                                                                                                 Luhans’k

                                                          Vinnytsya       Cherkasy
                 Ivano-Frankivs’k
      Uzhhorod
                                                                                                                                             Donets’k
                                                                                        Kirovorad                 Dnepropetrovsk
                              Chernivtsi


                                                                                                                           Zaporizhzhya
                                                                                     Mykolayiv

                   East
                                                                                                    Kherson

                   West
                                                                          Odesa

                   Center
                                                                                                          Simferopol

                   South

                                                                                                              Sevastopol

Source: Kiev Institute Of Sociology (2013)
                                                                                                                                                                   xiv
                             Executive Summary

The UKRAINE URBANIZATION REVIEW is
a DIAGNOSTIC REPORT on the URBAN
LANDSCAPE, linking population dynamics with
economic dynamics and presenting emerging
spatial characteristics and trends. It was initiated before
the onset of the current conflict in Eastern Ukraine and uses historical data sets ranging from 1989
to 2013. Consequently, events related to the current conflict are not part of the present analysis,
although they are addressed in the concluding chapter. The Ukraine Urbanization Review is limited to
data analytics rather than discussion of policy options and recommendations. Still, it outlines areas
and implication for further policy work as well as areas that require further analysis.



The CENTRAL FINDING of this report is that,
over the past two decades (prior to the conflict),
demographic profiles and economic activities in
Ukraine have been changing in a manner that has
not been uniform across the territory. Meanwhile,
urban public policy remained stagnant. Inter-governmental
fiscal relationships as well as urban and spatial planning, two key public policy tools, continue the
legacy of the past and have yet to be fully utilized in supporting economic growth and managing
decline across the urban space.

The key findings of the report are further summarized below.




xv
                                                       Executive Summary

   Compound Growth Rate, 1996-2010




Shifting Economic Geography: from East to West
                                                                                                                                      2




Over the past two decades, Ukraine’s population has been declining and aging, but not uniformly among regions. The
sharp decline in population (13 percent nationally over two decades) is linked to an overall aging trend, a significant
decline in fertility (below replacement levels since 1990), and, in part, out-migration. While population is declining across
the territory, the demographic transition has not been uniform across the regions. There is significant variation – the
Eastern Region has seen a sharper decline over the past two decades, while in the West the population decline has been
lower and a few cities, including Kyiv, continue to grow. At the same time, although the urban population is increasingly
aging across all regions, the Eastern Region is losing its youngest population at a faster rate..

Similarly, economic activity has been shifting within and across regions. This is confirmed by analyzing trends in regional
Gross Value Added (GVA), firm-level and employment locational data, and night-lights data (NLs – used to analyze the
dynamics of economic growth). Although the Eastern Region continues to play an important role in the economy, the
Western and Central regions have been much more dynamic. This is partly explained by a combination of lower initial
levels of economic activity in the West – compared to the East – and a faster transformation of the West from agriculture
to more productive sectors. The Eastern Region is also less productive than its urbanization level would suggest. The shift
can be observed clearly in the figure below, which compares night-lights data emissions between 1996 and 2010. The
red- and orange-colored areas are those that have experienced the highest growth in night-lights (proxy for economic
activity), while the blue areas are those with the lowest growth levels.


   2In providing a regional overview of the country, this document uses the description of four geographic regions developed by the Kiev
   International Institute of Sociology: East, Center, South and West.
                                                                                                                                           xvi
                                                 Executive Summary

In terms of structural transformation, Ukraine’s economy has moved slowly from an industrial enterprise-centered
economy to a services-centered economy, with a finance sector at the forefront of this change. Services have grown
significantly in a number of areas, including retail, property, and information and communications technology. Here too,
progress has not occurred uniformly across the regions. Industry remains very important in the Southern and Eastern
regions, while the Western Region has seen a slow increase in the importance of services as the agriculture sector’s
dominance wanes. Finance’s share of national GVA has nearly doubled, but its share of the labor market is still minor and
cannot be expected to replace jobs in traditional sectors.

In the strict sense of the term, Ukraine continues to urbanize despite an overall decline in its urban population (as rural
population has declined even faster). The Eastern and Southern regions, which at the time of the fall of the Soviet Union
were already highly urbanized, have shown slower urbanization rates in the last two decades, while the historically rural
Western Region and to a lesser extent the Central Region experienced higher urbanization rates. The rural population
has migrated to urban areas at greater rates in the Western and Central regions, resulting in greater relative growth of
urban production in the West.

More than 80 percent of the cities have experienced population decline, but shrinking cities are disproportionally
concentrated in the East and growing ones are disproportionally concentrated in the West. An analysis of the evolution
of cities reveals that the Eastern Region has the highest number of cities that in 1996 met the threshold to be classified
as cities (in terms of the amount of night-light emitted), but had “disappeared” (i.e. were no longer classified as such) by
2010. By contrast, the Western Region has the highest number of “appeared” cities, i.e., cities that could not be classified
as cities by night-lights standards in 1996, but passed the night-light threshold in 2010. A similar “disappeared-appeared”
correlation with these regions is found when comparing population trends at the city-level between 1989 and 2013.

A large number of agglomerations are concentrated in the East; however, the agglomerations in the West and the Kiev
agglomeration are more dynamic. Only one city in the Western Region is ranked among the fifteen largest individual
cities. However, five agglomerations among the fifteen largest are located in this region, as well as four of the fastest-
growing cities. This suggests that, despite having the lowest urbanization levels, the cities in this region are taking
advantage of the economies generated by their agglomeration into large-scale urban regions. By contrast, the Eastern
Region has five cities among the largest fifteen individual cities, but has none of the fastest-growing cities. Finally, the
agglomeration patterns are much more concentrated in the Central Region, led by Kyiv’s agglomeration. The figure below
plots the location of Ukraine’s cities and agglomerations (agglomerations are labeled with the name of the main city
in them) with colors assigned according to their population growth rate. Again, this graph shows a strongly declining
Eastern Region, despite the fact it contains a large number of agglomerations. The West, by contrast, shows a higher
concentration of growing cities as well as cities that are at least declining less than the urban population and national
population. The significance of Kyiv’s agglomeration and its pattern of growth are noticeable.




Moving to Opportunity: Push and Pull factors
Observed economic geography shifts might have been even stronger if internal mobility was less constrained. Migration
studies reveal that few people in Ukraine are moving to opportunities. Migration to and between urban areas is typically
an indication that people are looking for better labor opportunities, and is a sign of an efficient re-organization of human
resources within a country (pull factors). In Ukraine, however, studies indicate that few people are moving to seek new
economic opportunities. Instead, their movement seems to be catalyzed by low levels of social spending in their home
regions (push factors). Key barriers to internal migration include very high housing ownership rates and an underdeveloped
rental market, the lack of access to credit and underdevelopment of the housing and mortgage market, the costs of
moving to economically vibrant regions of the country, and high transaction costs. Nevertheless, agglomerations have
been forming slowly.



xvii
                                                  Executive Summary

Percent Change in Population, 2001-2013




       Percent Change
              by city
     Declining more than national
     average (less than -6.3%)
     Declining less than national
     average (-6.3 to -5.7%)
     Declining less than urban
     average (-5.7 to 0%)
     Growing Cities


Source: Ukraine Statistics Department



Agglomerations: Engines of Economic Growth
Ukrainian cities and agglomerations in particular, are important engines of economic growth. Not only is urban sector
production much greater than rural sector production, in absolute terms, it is also much more productive in per capita
terms. Agglomerations in Ukraine seem to be concentrating the little urban (population) growth currently witnessed in
the country, but they are also engines of economic growth. Cities in all regions, especially smaller ones, have been losing
population, mostly to the largest cities, and usually to those that have formed large urban centers, or agglomerations.
Agglomerations, according to night-lights measurements, are more productive in both per capita and per km2 terms.
Firm-level data also shows that larger cities had a higher concentration of both economic activity and productivity.
The growth of agglomerations is indicative of a movement towards a more efficient urban system. Led by the Kyiv
agglomeration, these city clusters hold the large majority of the cities that are actually growing in population (eleven out
of fifteen fastest growing cities in the country belong to an agglomeration). This growth might be explained by the fact
that these larger groups of cities can through their agglomeration increase productivity by sharing costs, increase access
to and the size of their markets, and enhance interactions between citizens and firms. The agglomerations of Ukraine
are therefore an important source of economic growth in the country.

Overall for Ukraine, steady progress has been observed in the main economic (GDP and GDP per capita) and poverty
indicators over the last decade. However, continued progress in these areas is highly uncertain due to (i) the observed
negative population trends; (ii) the current conflict; and (iii) the slow progress that Ukraine has made in terms of
institutional adaptation and reforms. It is not uncommon that a declining population initially has a positive impact on
                                                                                                                     xviii
                                                  Executive Summary

economic indicators, but its effect on economic performance over the long run is uncertain. The higher GDP per capita
that is observed following population decline is generally linked to the fact that capital is durable. Such economies may
experience an increase in their capital per worker ratio, which may render each inhabitant marginally more productive.
Additionally, decreasing population causes an initial shortage of labor, increasing relative demand for it, and potentially
resulting in a reduced unemployment rate as well as higher wages. The negative effects of population decline appear
later, and are generally visible in the decline in demand for consumption. The effects over time of diminished demand as
well as expectations of further population decline reduce incentives for investment and affect GDP growth negatively3.
Additionally, fixed costs in the provision of services also become more burdensome as they are shared among fewer
people. Overall, given the demographic trends, the observed increase in GDP per capita should be viewed with cautious
optimism; if appropriate measures are not adopted, the increase may not be sustained in the mid-term or long term.

Ukraine’s firms and institutions have been adapting slowly to a market economy system. Compared to other countries
in the region, Ukraine lags behind in its transition from a centrally-planned economy to a market economy, as well as
on its institutional and business environment reforms (for instance, in surveys on the ease of doing business, Ukraine
ranks 96th worldwide and 22nd in the ECA region4). The EBRD transition index finds Ukraine doing poorly in several areas,
including small-scale privatization efforts, enterprise restructuring, price liberalization, and trade and foreign exchange
policy. Unless changes are made in these spheres, continued progress will be threatened.




Emerging City Typology: Growing and Shrinking Cities
An analysis of the urban system reveals the emergence and consolidation of three city types with contrasting economic,
spatial, and demographic patterns. The typologies were constructed based on whether cities have growing or declining
economic activity, growing or declining population, and expanding or shrinking urban footprints5.

Cities growing in economic activity and expanding in footprint are also performing better in other indicators. These cities
have on average significantly lower declines in population, higher concentrations of economic activity and higher rates
of growth, and higher productivity. 22 percent of Ukrainian cities and the majority of the largest cities in the country
fall within this category (Type 1). These cities are also overwhelmingly concentrated in the Western and Central regions.
However, it is important to highlight that an important number of Type 1 cities continue to grow economically despite
declining in population. This means that in these areas population decline is not necessarily coming at the expense of
growth. While this might be a reflection of a temporal increase in productivity due to an increase in the capital per worker
ratio – as observed at the national level – it might also be linked to a decline in congestion costs associated with the city
moving toward a new population equilibrium.

On the contrary, cities that are declining in economic activity have experienced a sharper population decline. The majority
of cities in Ukraine (68 percent) fall under this category. Compared to their thriving peers, these cities are smaller in
size (averaging 50,000 inhabitants), are concentrated in the Eastern and Southern regions and to a lesser extent in
the Central Region, and have much lower levels of productivity. Two distinct types can be found here: those that are
declining in economic activity and shrinking in urban footprint (Type 2) and those that despite economic decline present
an expanding urban footprint (Type 3). Type 2 and Type 3 cities are and will continue to experience important urban
development challenges including financing and operating their infrastructure as economies of scale decrease with falling
population density. These challenges are greater for declining and sprawling cities (Type 3).




xix
                                                          Executive Summary

Urban Public Policy Tools: Intergovernmental
Fiscal Policy
Intergovernmental fiscal relations have lagged behind as a key instrument of urban public policy. Until 2014, the majority
of fiscal revenues were not raised by city governments, but came from retained shares of national taxes and transfers.
The allocation of these transfers was largely based on the existing network of service facilities and staffing rather
than on the demand for services. The system of inter-governmental transfers has led to wide disparities across city
types in per capita levels of expenditures per function. The highest per capita expenditures were observed in cities with
declining cores and peripheries, while the lowest were observed in growing cities with expanding footprints. Such financial
disincentives, combined with legal constraints on local government’s discretion in downsizing the network of facilities
and staff, impede the fiscal adjustments necessitated by Ukraine’s demographic and economic changes.

In December 2014, the Budget Code was significantly changed; it is expected to help improve the alignment of resources
to actual population as part of the ongoing decentralization reform in Ukraine. As a result, the new equalization system
will factor in per capita revenue levels and thus significantly decrease the disincentive that focuses on infrastructure
need. Such re-design of the transfer mechanism will likely realign resources among local governments, channeling more
resources to large and growing cities. Derivation-based sharing of revenues, although partially mitigated with a new basic
grant, will likely exacerbate the impact on shrinking cities. It will, however, improve the efficiency of spending. These
changes are expected to improve fiscal autonomy and to better align public services with the needs of local communities.




Urban Public Policy Tools: Urban Planning
Planning has also lagged behind as a key instrument of urban public policy. Urban planning in Ukraine bears the legacy of
a centralized planning system. It is not sufficiently flexible to respond to market conditions and to be an effective tool in
developing the urban space. Centralized development of master plans and zoning plans is inefficient, costly, and distant
from realities on the ground. It is also not sufficiently transparent or welcoming to public input and debate. In addition,
the planning framework is not equipped to adequately support strategies that reflect the reality of population loss and
economic decline. Existing urban plans are aligned with national growth policies, and so propose expansions of housing
and economic activity across all cities despite different local contexts.

Recent steps outlined in the Government’s Action Plan on Decentralization that orchestrate towards a planning reform,
if implemented in full, have the potential to place planning at the local level, which will permit cities to correlate their
own priorities with their economic and social needs. It will promote a more transparent system resulting in plans more
closely attuned to the actual conditions of growing and shrinking cities. Such changes will require increased funding and
intense capacity-building at the local level. In addition, there is an increased need to raise awareness about the scale and
consequences of urban decline so that local governments start to reflect their population’s realities in their urban plans.




   3 Markus Brückner and Hannes Schwandt, Income and Population Growth: Discussion Paper No. 7422, Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor,

   May 2013, available at http://ftp.iza.org/dp7422.pdf.
   4 World Bank Group, Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency, available at http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/
   ukraine/. Only Kiev is considered.
       5
      A fourth city type (Type 4) with growing light intensity in the core but shrinking urban footprint was found. However, only two cities –
   Donetsk and Zaporizhia – comprised this classification.
                                                                                                                                                 xx
                                                  Executive Summary


What Does It All Mean for the Future? Implications
for Further Analysis and Policy Work, and the Role
of the Conflict
The overall decline and aging of the Ukrainian population poses important economic and urban development challenges
with implications in terms of fiscal policy and demand for public services. Overall labor participation might decline, as
older workers leave the labor force and become a larger share of the population. This aging may lead to a reduction of
tax revenues due to a diminishing workforce and lower private savings of workers, while it is also expected to lead to an
increase in demand for public expenditures related to healthcare, long-term care, and pensions. However, as argued in
the recent World Bank Study “The Golden Age of Aging,”6 an aging and declining population does not necessarily lead to
economic catastrophe. For instance, a reduction of the labor force can make more capital available to existing workers
and lead to increased productivity. To lessen the potential negative consequences of an aging population, the report
recommends increasing the retirement age to better reflect gains in life expectancy; focusing on policies that increase
fertility to sustainable levels; reforming health and long-term care systems to allow for healthier aging; and embracing
migration as a part of the solution. Local governments have a key role to play in this.

As cities shrink, Ukraine needs to put in place the right national policies to better manage the population decline of most
of its cities while managing population growth in the large agglomerations. The Central Government should create the
right mechanisms and incentives (e.g., financial transfers) so that cities focus on declining efficiently and shifting their
focus from existing infrastructure to future demand such as agglomerating schools when needed. Given the extent of
urban decline, the country should explore the need for establishing national-level programs, such as technical assistance
and funds for downsizing, that provide resources to better manage decline. There is also a need to increase awareness of
the scale and type of urban decline as many cities continue to follow unrealistic population growth projections.

At the same time, local authorities will need to re-assess how infrastructure is planned and maintained and the way
services are financed and delivered. Neighborhoods may need to be consolidated as cities lose density. Public service
plans, designed for larger populations, may have to be re-considered to address lower demand. In addition, an aging
urban population has consequences for the demand for and type of housing (e.g., long-term care facilities), the demand
for public transportation (as elderly tend to commute less and have different design needs), and other basic services. The
combination of an overall aging urban population and declining fertility rates will also likely shift demand from education
to health services. Urban areas will, therefore, need to adapt their social and material infrastructure to better serve the
changing needs and demands of their populations.

Ukraine should also recognize the role of urban areas in economic growth and make sure that they use the right tools to
reach their full potential. To achieve increased productivity in urban centers, the right mix of good governance, a beneficial
business climate, and an efficient provision of public goods, usually in the form of public services and infrastructure, is
necessary so that agglomeration economies are fostered and congestion costs reduced. In urban areas experiencing
population growth, cities should focus on adapting infrastructure and services to ensure that new-comers are well-
absorbed and integrated into the city and manage peri-urban growth to avoid sprawl, etc. In addition, the realignment
of city boundaries or introduction of metropolitan governance mechanisms might be needed to achieve an effective
coordination of agglomerations which span across administrative units. This might require the involvement of the Central
Government and is particularly important in the case of public transport. The country also needs to put in place the
right policies in cities that continue to grow economically, but are experiencing population decline. In these cases, city
administrators should aim at managing population decline in an efficient and harmonious way making the best out of it,
for example, turning brownfields into public space and optimizing public transportation.




xxi
                                                           Executive Summary

Ukraine should reduce barriers to move internally. The low mobility of Ukraine’s internal population is an obstacle preventing
the country from reaping the rewards of its urban potential. Improved mobility might further spur the growth of urban
centers with emerging employment opportunities. However, increased mobility most likely will also deepen the decline
of most Ukrainian cities, which will then require policies to protect the less mobile and more vulnerable population that
is left behind. Increasing population mobility will require eliminating or reducing some of the obstacles to move including
making the housing market more fluid and permeable (e.g., by increasing rental options and improving access to housing
finance) and lowering the transaction costs of moving. In addition, as outlined in the World Development Report 20097,
governments should be neutral in regards to the migration of unskilled labor: encouraging migration for economic reasons,
discouraging migration in search of public services, and strongly supporting internal migration of skilled labor. The latter
can be done through investment in services in lagging areas to build portable human capital and to increase the flow of
labor market information, among other initiatives, so migrants arrive better informed of employment opportunities.

In terms of fiscal policy, Ukraine’s policy makers might re-think the structure of functional sub-national expenditure
in view of changing demographics. So far, expenditures for education have been steadily increasing despite the rapidly
aging population, which itself has placed increasing demands on the health system. By earmarking new subventions
separately for education and health, the new system can take advantage of under-utilized social infrastructure and focus
on increasing capacity in places with growing demand. More generally, the focus of reforms in the short-term might be
on increasing the yield of user fees and property taxes as a way to make cities assume their responsibility to collect own
revenue. In the medium-term, some of these taxes could be re-assigned from national to the sub-national level as a way
to increase horizontal accountability of local officials to their residents as well as fiscal responsibility. Addressing fiscal
fragmentation and amalgamating the bottom tier should remain a priority for government as a way to improve fiscal
efficiency in service provision.

Finally, urban planning and spatial development should take note of the continuing demographic changes and shifts
in the country. Current mobility remains low and the high homeownership rate has prevented the widespread housing
abandonment that characterizes typical shrinking cities in Europe and United States. Once mobility increases and
people start migrating to opportunity, declining cities are likely to decline even faster, while the growing centers and
agglomerations may experience peri-urban growth and sprawled development. In both cases, authorities will need to
reassess how infrastructure is planned and maintained to ensure that shrinking cities continue to provide acceptable
levels of service to their populations at reasonable cost, while growing urban centers are supported to foster further
growth.




   6   World Bank Group, The Golden Age of Aging (2014).
   7   World Bank (2009), Reshaping Economic Geography – World Development Report.
                                                                                                                           xxii

                                                                  13
xxiii
CHAPTER 1
The Urban System:
Demographics and
Economic Trends

                    1
                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends1


Key Highlights and Implications for Further Policy
and Analytical Work
Over the past two decades, Ukraine has experienced population decline and aging trends, which have had important
consequences at the city level. Over this time, national population has declined by 13 percent; urban population has declined
by around 9 percent. In the strict sense of the term, the country continues to urbanize as its rural population is declining
at faster rates than its urban population. However, more than 80 percent of its cities are losing population. There are
important geographic differences in this demographic transition with the Eastern region observing a sharper population
decline when compared to the Western and Central regions. In a similar way, shrinking cities are disproportionally
concentrated in the East while growing ones are disproportionally concentrated in the West. The observed demographic
shifts across the territory might have been stronger if mobility had been less constrained, as internal migration has been
low. In fact, recent migration studies reveal that in Ukraine few people are moving to economic and social opportunity.

Economic activity has been shifting within and across regions, but Ukraine’s firms and institutions have been slow in
adapting to a market economy. This is confirmed by analyzing trends in regional Gross Value Added (GVA), firm-level and
employment location data, and night-light (NLs) data (used as a proxy for economic activity). Although the Eastern region
continues to play an important role in the economy, the Western and the Central regions have been much more dynamic.
This is partly explained by a combination of lower initial levels of economic activity in the West – compared to the
East – and a faster transformation of the West from agriculture to more productive sectors. The Eastern region is also
less productive than its urbanization level would suggest. There has also been a shift in the structure of the Ukrainian
economy with the service sector growing significantly in importance in the Western and Central regions. The structural
shift has been accompanied by steady progress in the main economic indicators of the country (GDP, GDP per capita,
and poverty). However, continued progress in these areas is highly uncertain due to (i) the observed negative population
trends, (ii) the current conflict, and (iii) the slow progress that the country has made in terms of institutional adaptation
and reforms towards a market-oriented system.

Ukrainian cities and agglomerations, in particular, are important engines of economic growth. The urban sector is more
productive than the rural both in absolute and per capita terms. Agglomerations – cities whose NLs footprint merge
– account for the little urban population growth currently witnessed in the country, and are more productive in both
per capita and per km2 terms than their smaller peers. Firm-level data also show that larger cities have a higher
concentration of both economic activity and productivity. This growth might be explained by the fact that these larger
groups of cities can through their agglomeration increase productivity by sharing costs, increasing access to and the size
of their markets, and enhancing interactions between citizens and firms.

Over the past decade, three City Types with contrasting economic, spatial and demographic patterns have emerged
and consolidated in Ukraine. The first type corresponds to cities that are growing in economic activity and expanding in
footprint (Type 1). Type 1 cities – which comprise 22 percent of the urban system – are also performing better in other
indicators; they have, on average, significantly lower declines in population, higher concentrations of economic activity
and rate of growth, and higher productivity. However, an important number of Type 1 cities continue to grow economically
despite declining in population. This means that in these areas – at least in the short term – population decline is not
coming at the expense of growth. The second and third types of cities correspond to cities that are declining in economic
activity, but either shrinking (Type 2) or expanding (Type 3) in footprint. They have much lower productivity levels, have
experienced a sharper population decline, are smaller in size (average 50,000 inhabitants), and are overwhelmingly
concentrated in the Eastern and Southern regions. These cities are experiencing and will continue to experience important
urban development challenges, including financing and operating their infrastructures as economies of scale decrease
with falling population density.

    1   Figures that do not include a source in this Chapter were developed by World Bank staff working on the report.


2
                      CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Going forward, Ukraine needs to put in place the right policies to better manage urban population decline while managing
growth in the number of large agglomerations. On the one hand, the overall decline and aging of the Ukrainian population
poses important economic and urban development challenges with implications in terms of fiscal policy, infrastructure
financing, and demand for public services. In shrinking cities, neighborhoods may need to be consolidated and public
service plans designed for larger populations may have to be re-considered to address lower demand. The combination
of an overall aging urban population and declining fertility rates will also likely shift demand from education to health
services. The Central government should in turn create the right incentive frameworks so that cities focus on declining
efficiently. Given the scale of urban population decline, the country should explore the need for establishing national-level
programs, such as technical assistance and funds for downsizing. On the other hand, the country should recognize the
role of urban areas in economic growth and make sure that growing urban centers have the right tools to reach their
full potential. To increase productivity in urban centers, the right mix of governance, a beneficial business climate, and
efficient provision of public services and infrastructure is necessary so that agglomeration economies are fostered and
congestion costs are reduced. In the case of agglomerations that span across administrative units, the country might
need to assess the benefits of realigning city boundaries or the introduction of metropolitan governance mechanisms.

In addition, to reach its full economic potential the country needs to reduce barriers so that people can move to
opportunity. However, increased mobility will likely deepen the decline of most Ukrainian cities, which will then require
policies to protect the less mobile and more vulnerable population that is left behind. Increasing population mobility will
require eliminating or smoothening some of the obstacles to move, including making the housing market more fluid and
permeable (e.g., increase rental options and improve access to housing finance) and lowering the transaction costs of
moving.




I. Demographics2
A declining and aging population presents challenges
going forward
Over the past two decades Ukraine has experienced a dramatic population decline. In 1993, Ukraine had 52.2 million
inhabitants while in 2013, it was estimated to have 45.5 million inhabitants. Over this period the country lost 13 percent
of its population. While similar levels of population decline can be found in other countries in the region, such as Bulgaria
(-14 percent) and Romania (-13 percent), the degree of decline in Ukraine’s population growth rate is below the ECA
regional average (Figure 1). The sharp decline in population growth rate observed in the decade after the fall of the Soviet
Union – 1990 to 2000 – was partly the result of out-migration but was also very much linked to an overall aging trend
of the population and a significant decline in fertility. However, the sharp decline in the growth rate appeared to be
rebounding toward population stabilization prior to the current conflict.




   2 In order to provide a regional overview of the country, this document uses the definition of four geographic regions developed by the Kiev
   International Institute of Sociology: East, Center, South, and West.
                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

   Figure 1 – Ukraine’s population is declining faster than the ECA region average

                               4

                                                                                                                                                                          Azerbaijan

                               3
Annual Population Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                                          Kyrgyz Republic

                               2
                                                                                                                                                                          Turkey


                                1
                                                                                                                                                                          Europe & Central Asia
                                                                                                                                                                          (developing only)


                               0                                                                                                                                          Romania




                                                                                                                                2000
                                    1961

                                           1964

                                                  1967

                                                         1970

                                                                1973

                                                                       1976

                                                                              1979

                                                                                     1982

                                                                                            1985

                                                                                                   1988

                                                                                                           1991

                                                                                                                  1994

                                                                                                                         1997



                                                                                                                                       2003

                                                                                                                                              2006

                                                                                                                                                     2009

                                                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                                                          Russian Federation
                               -1


                                                                                                                                                                          Ukraine
                               -2

   Source: World Development Indicators

   The overall decline in the population, much like in the region, is driven by a strong decline in fertility rates and a fast
   aging population, but it is also exacerbated by still high old-age mortality rates. The average age in Ukraine has increased
   from 33 to 39 over the last 20 years, led largely by a dramatic increase in the average age in urban areas. Measured by
   average remaining life expectancy, Central and Eastern Europe is by far the oldest region in the world, even significantly
   older than Western Europe. As in Ukraine, this is caused by low fertility rates and high old-age mortality rates. As an
   example, in France a 71-year-old man in 2009 had the same risk of dying as a 60-year-old man in 1959, while in Ukraine
   a 54-year-old man in 2009 had the same risk of dying as a 60-year-old in 1959.


   Figure 2 – Aging is increasingly an urban issue in Ukraine


                               40


                                                                                                                                                                                       Total Avg age

                               38
Average age




                                                                                                                                                                                       Urban Avg age


                               36
                                                                                                                                                                                       Rural Avg age



                               34

                                           1990                           1995                            2000                         2005                        2010




   Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

    4
                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends
Ukraine’s population dynamics are very different across the age distribution, with declining fertility rates creating a
diamond-shaped population pyramid (Figure 3). Both Figure 3 and Figure 4 below suggest that the overall negative
population growth is better demonstrated with data disaggregated by age. The decline in the 0-10 years cohorts is much
sharper (-41 percent) than the one observed in the 11-39 years cohorts (-6 percent) between the years of 1989 and 2011.
In addition, the decline of these younger cohorts is higher, in percentage terms, in urban areas (-42 percent) than in
rural areas (-38 percent), which is probably due to lower urban fertility rates. This also supports our previous point of an
increasingly accelerating average age in urban areas.


Figure 3 – Population dynamics flattened as the younger share of the population has decreased
                          Population Pyramid 1989                                                          Population Pyramid 2011
                                   Men       Women                                                                  Men       Women

   100                                                                                   100
95-99                                                                                 95-99
90-94                                                                                 90-94
85-89                                                                                 85-89
80-84                                                                                 80-84
75-79                                                                                 75-79
70-74                                                                                 70-74
65-69                                                                                 65-69
60-64                                                                                 60-64
55-59                                                                                 55-59
50-54                                                                                 50-54
45-49                                                                                 45-49
40-44                                                                                 40-44
35-39                                                                                 35-39
30-34                                                                                 30-34
25-29                                                                                 25-29
20-14                                                                                 20-14
 15-19                                                                                 15-19
 10-14                                                                                 10-14
   5-9                                                                                   5-9
   0-4                                                                                   0-4
     3 000       2 000     1 000         0           1 000   2 000       3 000             3 000   2 000    1 000         0           1 000   2 000       3 000
                                                                     Thousands                                                                        Thousands
Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

The fastest growing segment of the population – by age cohort – is the 60+ cohort living in urban areas (Figures 4 and 5).
Between 1989 and 2011, this age cohort grew 21 percent in urban areas. By contrast, a 19 percent decrease of this cohort
in the rural areas offset the effect of this urban growth, such that national growth was 3 percent. The dynamics within
this older age cohort are different between genders, with the 60+ overall population increasing 11 percent among men,
while increasing less than 1 percent for women between 1989 and 2011. Some analysts suggest that the large number
of men that died during the Second World War3 could explain the low numbers observed in 1989 in this cohort and the
subsequent large percentage increase in 2011. Large increases can be observed in the urban population of men in the
60+ age cohort, which grew 26 percent, and of women of the same age group, which grew 18 percent. In contrast, in the
rural sector, population in this age cohort decreased for both men and women, but more than twice as fast for women
than men (23 percent for women and 10 percent for men). These trends are a result of the combination of internal and
external migration dynamics, where more men can be found migrating internally from rural to urban areas, and relatively
more women migrating outwards.




     3   It is estimated that around 7 million people died in this period (Andrew Gregorovich, World War II in Ukraine: Total Losses by Country).


                                                                                                                                                             5

                                                                                 17
                             CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Figure 4 – The urban population age mimics the flattening of the general population pyramids
                     Urban Population Pyramid 1989                                                     Urban Population Pyramid 2011
                                     Men       Women                                                                 Men       Women

   100                                                                               100
95-99                                                                             95-99
90-94                                                                             90-94
85-89                                                                             85-89
80-84                                                                             80-84
75-79                                                                             75-79
70-74                                                                             70-74
65-69                                                                             65-69
60-64                                                                             60-64
55-59                                                                             55-59
50-54                                                                             50-54
45-49                                                                             45-49
40-44                                                                             40-44
35-39                                                                             35-39
30-34                                                                             30-34
25-29                                                                             25-29
20-14                                                                             20-14
 15-19                                                                             15-19
 10-14                                                                             10-14
   5-9                                                                               5-9
   0-4                                                                               0-4
     2 000   1 500   1 000     500         0      500    1 000   1 500    2 000        2 000   1 500   1 000   500         0       500    1 000   1 500    2 000
                                                                      Thousands                                                                        Thousands
Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

Figure 5 – The decrease in younger population is less in the rural areas. These areas also show a
decrease in the older cohorts of the population
                     Rural Population Pyramid 1989                                                     Rural Population Pyramid 2011
                                     Men       Women                                                             Men           Women

   100                                                                               100
95-99                                                                             95-99
90-94                                                                             90-94
85-89                                                                             85-89
80-84                                                                             80-84
75-79                                                                             75-79
70-74                                                                             70-74
65-69                                                                             65-69
60-64                                                                             60-64
55-59                                                                             55-59
50-54                                                                             50-54
45-49                                                                             45-49
40-44                                                                             40-44
35-39                                                                             35-39
30-34                                                                             30-34
25-29                                                                             25-29
20-14                                                                             20-14
 15-19                                                                             15-19
 10-14                                                                             10-14
   5-9                                                                               5-9
   0-4                                                                               0-4
    10 000 8 000 6 000 4 000 2 000         0    2 000 4 000 6 000 8 000 10 000        10 000 8 000 6 000 4 000 2 000       0    2 000 4 000 6 000 8 000 10 000
Source: Ukraine Statistics Department                                Thousands                                                                       Thousands


Despite its similarities to populations of other countries of the Former Soviet Union (FSU), Ukraine’s population is aging
more dramatically. As shown in Figure 7, for both 1991 and 2008, Ukraine had the lowest percentage of population aged
0-14 than any other country of the FSU. At the same time, Ukraine’s share of population that is age 65 and older is the
region’s largest and is increasing. These trends are accompanied by a slightly recovering but still very low birth rate since
2001 (Figure 8). More importantly, fertility rates remain very low and under replacement levels at least since 1990.

6
                                                           CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Figure 6 – A sharp decline in fertility rates is leading to an important reduction of the young cohort

                                                                Population changes by age cohort in Ukraine (1989-2011)
30%

20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                             national
 10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                             rural
        0%

                                                                                                                                                                                                             urban
-10%

-20%

-30%

-40%

-50%
                                           all ages                0-10                  11-24                  25-39                                     40-60                 60 plus




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department


Figure 7 – Ukraine is aging more dramatically than neighboring countries

                                                              Population ages 0-14                                                                                           Population ages 65 and older
                                     50                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                 1991    2008                                                                                                        1991     2008
                                     45                                                                                                                   16
Percentage of total population




                                                                                                                         Percentage of total population




                                     40                                                                                                                   14
                                     35
                                                                                                                                                          12
                                     30
                                                                                                                                                          10
                                     25
                                                                                                                                                          8
                                     20
                                                                                                                                                          6
                                     15
                                     10                                                                                                                   4

                                      5                                                                                                                   2
                                     0                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                    .
                                            tan istan istan public baijan hstan menia ldova eorgia elarus n Fed kraine                                           tan istan istan public baijan hstan menia ldova eorgia elarus n Fed kraine
                                        ikis    k     n                              Mo                                                                      ikis    k     n                              Mo
                                     Taj Uzbe rkme yz Re Azer Kazak            Ar          G      B
                                                                                                       ussia     U                                        Taj Uzbe rkme yz Re Azer Kazak            Ar          G      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ussia     U
                                                  Tu Kyrg                                             R                                                                Tu Kyrg                                             R


Source: Eurasian Cities 2012


Ukraine’s population dynamics vary across its regions, with the Eastern region losing its youngest population at a faster
rate than others. This region presents negative growth at all cohort levels, except for the 60+ age cohort (See Figure 9
below). By contrast, all of the other regions present positive growth of the 40-60 years cohort. The population in the
Western region is declining at a slower pace; this is due both to its – on average – higher fertility rates (12.76 births per
1,000 inhabitants in Western versus 9.7 births per 1,000 inhabitants in the Eastern region) and lower mortality rates
(13.62 per 1,000 inhabitants in the Western versus 15.56 per 1,000 inhabitants in the Eastern region) than Eastern,
central and southern regions. Additionally, higher mortality rates in the Eastern region may be explained by a significant
share of employment in the region in the mining sector, a sector that generally presents higher rates of employee
mortality and disability4.


                                 4 The Jamestown Foundation states that Ukraine has the world’s second-highest mining fatality rate, behind only China (Eurasia Daily Monitor
                                 Volume: 6 Issue: 167). This is a common trend worldwide. For example, mining has the second highest fatality rate among all sectors in the US
                                 (US Bureau of Labor Statistics; national census of fatal occupational injuries in 2006).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                            CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Figure 8 – The birth rate has recovered since 2001, but remains very low. Fertility rates follow
similar trends, remaining under replacement levels at least since 1990

                         Births per 1000 inhabitants                                                                   Fertility Rates
13                                                                              2.2
                                                                                2.1
                                                                                2.0
11                                                                              1.9
                                                                                1.8
                                                                                1.7
9                                                                               1.6
                                                                                1.5
                                                                                1.4
7
                                                                                1.3
                                                                                1.2
                                                                                1.1
5
       1995                          2001                        2012           1.0




                                                                                      1990


                                                                                             1992


                                                                                                     1994


                                                                                                             1996


                                                                                                                    1998


                                                                                                                              2000


                                                                                                                                       2002


                                                                                                                                              2004


                                                                                                                                                        2006


                                                                                                                                                                 2008


                                                                                                                                                                         2010


                                                                                                                                                                                 2012
              Western                Eastern               Central

              Southern               Ukraine                                                   Fertility Rates                       Replacement rate


Source: Ukraine Statistics Department (left) and World Bank WDI (right)




Figure 9 – Ukraine’s eastern region has the highest rate of overall population decline

                                  Population changes by age cohort and by regions (1989-2011)
20%


 10%


 0%                                                                                                                                                            Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                               Eastern Region
-10%                                                                                                                                                           Central Region
                                                                                                                                                               Southern Region
-20%
                                                                                                                                                               Western Region

-30%


-40%


-50%
              all ages              0-10               11-24            25-39                40-60                  60 plus




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

Urban areas are aging rapidly across all Ukraine’s regions. While increases in aging in the urban population’s first three
age cohorts—0 to 10, 11 to 24, and 25 to 39—look very similar to those observed for all Ukraine, the 60+ urban cohort
is growing at a much faster pace than other cohorts in urban areas (Figure 10). Among this cohort, the fastest growing
population is in the Western Region, which is also observing a significant increase in its 40 to 60 age cohort. The fast-
aging urban population, across all regions, is reflected in an increase in Ukraine’s average age as shown below in Figure 11.




8
                               CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends




 Figure 10 – The Eastern region has the highest overal decline in population in urban areas

                                Urban population changes by age cohort and by regions (1989-2011)

    40%

    30%

    20%

     10%                                                                                                                         Ukraine

       0%                                                                                                                        Eastern Region
                                                                                                                                 Central Region
  -10%
                                                                                                                                 Southern Region
 -20%                                                                                                                            Western Region

 -30%

 -40%

 -50%
                    all ages          0-10             11-24        25-39           40-60             60 plus
 -60%

 Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




  Figure 11 – The average age is increasing in all urban areas

                                             Western                                                            Eastern
              45


              40


              35
Average age




              30

                                             Central                                                            Southern
              45


              40


              35


              30
                   1990        1995           2000         2005     2010          1990         1995              2000        2005            2010


                                       Total Avg age                         Urban Avg age                                 Rural Avg age


 Source: Ukraine Statistics Department


                                                                                                                                                    9
                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Although both a decline in fertility and aging play a central role in the overall population decline, out-migration is also
playing an important role. An analysis of implied migration5 data across regions suggests that a large part of the
population decline is the result of net out-migration reveals the potential role that outmigration can be playing on the
overall population6 decline. In addition, the Western region presents an interesting shift in behavior when comparing
annual data from 1995 to 2001 and from 2001 to 2010. As the analysis of implied migration is imperfect, secondary
sources of information are used to further review migration patterns.


Recent studies confirm that negative net migration has contributed to further population decline, becoming one of the
biggest challenges in the country. The International Labor Organization (ILO) estimated that between January 2010
and June 2012, 1.2 million people (or 3.4 percent of the population) were working or searching for employment abroad7.
Additionally, according to the Ukrainian statistics bureau, in 2013 alone, 621,842 people left the country8.


Labor migration from Ukraine is mostly of cyclical and seasonal character. According to the Modular Sample Survey on
Labor Migration in Ukraine 2013, the average duration of stay abroad for migrants on their most recent labor trip taken
was 5 months. Persons migrating to neighboring countries (Russia, Belarus, Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary)
generally undertake periodic short trips with a permanent return to Ukraine. However, those travelling to the South
European countries and Germany usually remain working there for longer periods of time.


Evidence suggests that most of the recent migration from Ukraine – prior to the current conflict – was to the countries
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries and the European Union (EU). For the 2010-2012 period,
the largest recipient countries were the Russian Federation (43.2 percent of Ukraine migrants), Poland (14.3 percent),
Italy (13.2 percent), and the Czech Republic (12.9 percent). Spain, Germany, Hungary, Portugal, and Belarus also received
significant influxes of migrants from Ukraine. Historically, there have been three distinct waves of migration from Ukraine:
in 1890-1914, before and after WWII, and after Ukraine became independent. The Ukrainian diaspora abroad can be
measured under different criteria of, one being the country of birth and country of nationality. Table 1 below presents the
distribution of the Ukrainian diaspora according to both criteria by the Migration Policy Center. According to the official
statistical institute of Ukraine, the following countries have the biggest stock of Ukrainians: the Russian Federation (1.93
million), Canada (1.2 million), the USA (893 thousand), Brazil (500 thousand), Kazakhstan (333 thousand), Moldova (477
thousand) and Argentina (250 thousand).


The vast majority of migrants in the wave of migration after Ukraine’s independence but prior to the conflict came from
oblasts located in the Western region (Figure 12 and Figure 13). According to the ILO’s 2012 Modular Sample Survey
on Migrations in Ukraine, in fact, 72 percent of migrants in the period of 2010-2012 were estimated to come from this
area. It is important to note that official statistics may underestimate the real flow of migrants, many of whom may
be illegal and undocumented. Specifically, the oblast with the highest migration rate was Zakarpattia, whose population
is relatively young and diverse, with large shares of Hungarians (12 percent), Romanians (2.6 percent), Russians (2.5
percent), and Slovaks (0.5 percent). This is also the oblast with the highest percentage of Gypsy population (1.1 percent),
whose mobility might add to the migration balance. The others regions contributed to a lesser extent to Ukraine’s out-
migration. Some patterns regarding migration destinations can be observed in the ILO sample; as expected, most of the
Eastern region’s migrants headed to Russia, while the Western region’s migrants had a greater variety of destinations.
Apart from Russia, Germany was a popular destination for migrants from the South, while nearby Poland attracted a
significant number of migrants from the Western region.




     5   Implied migration is estimated as the residual after births and deaths are considered in population comparisons.
     6   International Organization for Migration, Migration in Ukraine: Facts and Figures, 2011.
     7   ILO, Modular Sample Survey on labor Migration in Ukraine (2013).
     8   Ukrstat.org – “публикація документів Державної Служби Статистики України”
10
                     CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Table 1 – Ukrainian diaspora by country of residence (ca. 2012)

   Country of          Definition          Reference           Number               Number              %                   %
   residence                                 date            (Russia –A)          (Russia – B)      (Russia-A)          (Russia B)

   EU of which                                                             1,052,184                    19.7               53.3

      Poland               (A)                2012                         227,446                       4.3                12.2

       Italy               (A)                2012                         201,830                       3.8               10.8

     Germany               (B)                2012                         153,393                       2.9                8.2

   CSI Countries
                                                               3,581,104               114,519          67.1                6.1
    and Georgia

     of which
                           (A)                2002             3,581,104                  x             66.7                 x
      Russia

      Russia               (B)                2010             3,559,975               59,339             x                 5.0

      Belarus              (B)                2009                           16,874                      0.3                0.9

     Moldova               (B)                2010                                                       0.1                0.2

      Other
   countries of                                                              702,551                    13.2               37.6
      which

        US                 (A)                2011                         352,793                       6.6               18.8

       Israel              (A)                2005                         258,793                       4.9                13.8

      Canada               (A)                2006                           59,460                      1.1                3.2

     TOTAL                                                    5,335,840               1,869,255         100                100

Definition: Depending on the country of destination, Ukrainian migrants are classified by country of birth (A) or country of nationality
(B). As Russia reports numbers using both definitions, total estimations are used for Russia (A) and for (B).
Source: : Migration Policy Center, Mpc - Migration Profile: Ukraine (2013)




                                                                                                                                     11
                                                 CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

   Figure 12 – Migration is increasingly a factor in Ukraine’s population decline
                                                                                                                   1995-2001
                      600

                      400
Thousands per year




                      200
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Population change
                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Births
                      -200
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Deaths
                     -400                                                                                                                                                                           Implied migration

                     -600

                     -800
                                           Ukraine                          central                             western                        southern                   easthern
                     -1000

                                                                                                                    2001-2011
                      600

                      400
Thousands per year




                      200

                        0                                                                                                                                                                           Population change
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Births
                      -200
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Deaths
                     -400                                                                                                                                                                           Implied migration

                     -600

                     -800
                                           Ukraine                          central                             western                        southern                   easthern
                     -1000

   Source: Authors’ analysis of data from Ukraine Statistics Department


    Figure 13 – Labour migration rate by regions

                                                                 BELARUS

                                                                                                                                       RUSSIAN FEDERATION                            Participation Rate
                                                                                                   Chernihiv                                                                         Population, Aged 15-70
                     POLAND              Volyn
                                                         Rivne                                                            Sumy
                                                                      Zhytomyr                                                                                                         Very High
                                                                                       Kyiv City
                                                                                                                                                                                       High
                              Lviv                                                       Kyiv                                                                                          Average
                                                                                                                     Poltava                Kharkiv
                                                       Khmelnytskyi
                                                                                                                                                                Luhansk                Low
                                            Ternopil                                            Cherkasy
                                     Ivano-                                                                                                                                            Very Low
                                   Frankyvsk                          Vinnytsya
                        Zakarpat                                                                     Kirovohrad            Dnipropetrovsk
                                              Chernivtsi
                                                                                                                                                      Donetsk


                                                                                                     Mykolaiv                       Zaporizhzhia
                                                                 MOLDOVA              Odessa
                               ROMANIA                                                                              Kherson




                                                                                                                           Crimea


                                                                                                           Sevastopol



   Source: Authors’ analysis; ILO, Modular Sample Survey on Labor Migration in Ukraine (2012)

   12
                     CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Table 2 – Between 2010 and 2012, migrants came mainly from Ukraine’s western region

                                            Total (thousands)             Percentage by destination              Percentage by origin
                   Total   Total
                  (000)     (%)
                                   Central South      East      West    Central   South   East   West    Central South       East    West

 Russian Fed.      511     43.2     76,1       50,6   102,2     282,1    14.9      9.9    20.0   55.2     64.5       49.9    88.1       33.2


    Poland        168,4    14.3     6,6        3,9     0,0      158,0     3.9      2.3    0.0    93.8     5.6         3.8     0.0       18.6


     Italy         156     13.2     9,0        10,9    2,7      133,4     5.8      7.0    1.7    85.5     7.7        10.8     2.3       15.7


 Czech Republic    153     12.9     10,3       0,0     0,0      142,7     6.7      0.0    0.0    93.3     8.7         0.0     0.0       16.8


     Spain        52,6      4.5      1,3       10,0    0,0      41,3      2.5     19.0    0.0    78.5      1.1        9.9     0.0       4.9


   Germany         27,8     2.4     2,0        11,8    4,5       9,5      7.2     42.4    16.2   34.2      1.7       11.6     3.9       1.1


   Hungary         23       1.9     0,0        0,0     0,0      23,0      0.0      0.0    0.0    100.0    0.0         0.0     0.0       2.7


   Portugal        21,7     1.8      9,1       0,0     0,0      12,6     41.9      0.0    0.0    58.1     7.7         0.0     0.0       1.5


    Belarus        21,5     1.8      2,4       0,0     0,0      19,1     11.2      0.0    0.0    88.8     2.0         0.0     0.0       2.2


    Other
                  46,6      3.9      1,3       14,1    6,7      29,1      2.8     30.3    14.4   62.5      1.1       13.9     5.8       3.4
   Countries

    TOTAL         1181,6   100      118,1     101,3   116,1     850,8    10.0      8.6    9.8    72.0    100.0       100.0   100.0   100.0



Source: ILO, Modular Sample Survey on Labor Migration in Ukraine (2012)


The Czech Republic and Hungary were the main recipients of migrants from Zakarpattia. This is primarily due to geographical
proximity. Further, the Western region’s ethnic specificity is a contributing factor – most Ukrainian Hungarians live there
– and Zakarpattia was historically part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Other western oblasts generated a large number
of migrants to Southern European countries such as Portugal, where in relative terms Ukrainians are the second biggest
immigrant group after Brazilians – with about 44 thousand migrants officially registered.


The profile of Ukraine’s migrants is diverse, but they are disproportionally young and approximately two-thirds of
emigrants are male. However, certain distinctions can be observed among the emigrant populations of the destination
countries. Some Southern European countries receive a larger share of women because of the demand for service-
oriented jobs in those countries, whereas the Russian Federation receives a higher share of migrant men because of the
demand for manual or mechanical jobs. Moreover, 45 percent of migrants are between 15 to 35 years of age, while this
age cohort comprised 29% of Ukraine’s total population, demonstrating an over-representation of young people among
Ukraine’s migrants. In addition, migrants’ origins were almost equally divided between rural (55 percent) and urban areas
(45 percent).




                                                                                                                                              13
                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Regarding the educational level of migrants, an ILO study9 concluded that for most European countries Ukrainian migrants
are more educated than the local labor. Nevertheless, most of Ukraine’s temporary migrants are from segments of the
Ukrainian population with lesser educational achievement (e.g., construction workers going to Russia as well as service
workers going to Southern Europe). By contrast, younger, highly-educated migrants are usually leaving permanently in
order to find better opportunities professionally and financially.


Figure 13 shows that higher labor migration rates were in the Western region in Ukraine between 2010 and 2012. An
analysis of the migration patterns since the conflict’s onset is provided in the Conclusion Section. An analysis of internal
labor migration patterns prior to the conflict has been included in Section 2 following the urbanization analysis.




Key messages and implications for further policy
and analytical work
Over the past two decades Ukraine’s population has been declining and aging. Over this period the country lost 13
percent of its population. The sharp decline in population was partly the result of out-migration but is also very much
linked to an overall aging trend of the population in the country and a significant decline in fertility. Fertility rates remain
very low and have been below replacement levels since 1990. Population dynamics differ across age cohorts, urban and
rural, and regions. The decline in the youngest cohorts, from 0 to 10 years, is much sharper – at 41 percent – than the
one observed in the 11 to 39 years old cohort. The youngest cohort is also declining more in urban areas than in rural
areas. On the contrary, the fastest growing segment of the population is the 60+ cohort living in urban areas, which
grew by 21 percent over the past two decades. Variation in population dynamics is also visible across regions, with the
Eastern region losing its youngest population at a faster rate than others. In terms of out-migration, the vast majority
of migrants – prior to the conflict – came from Oblasts located in the Western region; were disproportionately young
and to a large extent male. As will be discussed in subsequent sections, the overall population decline is leading to an
important decline of the population in the majority of urban centers in Ukraine, and even more dramatically since the
conflict started in 2014.

The overall decline and aging of the Ukrainian population poses important economic and urban development challenges
with implications in terms of fiscal policy and demand for public services. Overall labor participation might decline, as
older workers leave the labor force and become a larger share of the population. This aging may lead to a reduction of
tax revenues due to a diminishing workforce and lower private savings of workers, while it is also expected to lead to an
increase in demand for public expenditures related to healthcare, long-term care, and pensions. However, as argued in
the recent World Bank Study “The Golden Age of Aging”10, an aging and declining population does not necessarily lead
to economic catastrophe as the demographics observed in the region may prove temporary in nature. For instance, a
reduction of the labor force can make more capital available to existing workers and lead to increased productivity. To
lessen the potential consequences of an aging population, the report recommends increasing the retirement age to better
reflect gains in life expectancy; focusing in policies that increase fertility to sustainable levels; reforming health and long-
term care systems to allow for healthier aging; and embracing migration as a part of the solution. Local governments
have a key role to play in this.




     9    Ganna Vakhitova and Tom Coupe, The Relations between Education and Migration in Ukraine, International Labor Organization, 2014.
     10   World Bank Group: The Golden Age of Aging, 2014.
14
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Going forward, as cities shrink, local authorities will need to re-assess how infrastructure is planned and maintained, and
the way services are financed and delivered. Neighborhoods may need to be consolidated as cities lose density. Public
service plans, designed for a larger population, may have to be re-considered to address lower demand. In addition, an
aging urban population has consequences for the demand for and type of housing (e.g., long-term care facilities), the
demand for public transportation (as elderly tend to commute less and have different design needs), and other basic
services. The combination of an overall aging urban population and declining fertility rates will also likely shift demand
from education to health services. Urban areas will, therefore, need to adapt their social and material infrastructure to
better serve the changing needs and demands of their population.




II. Urbanization and the Urban System11
Ukraine’s cities during the soviet period
Large-scale urbanization in Soviet Ukraine commenced only after 1945 and resulted from an increase in the demand for labor
by the country’s industries and a massive housing production initiative. In 1945 only 34 percent of the population of Ukraine
lived in urban areas and Ukraine was still predominantly rural. Rapid urbanization only came later and was caused by
an increase in the demand for labor in the industrial centers in the cities of Soviet Ukraine and a large campaign for the
construction of residential housing units driven by the housing reform of Nikita Khrushchev in the late 1950s. The growth
of the urban population throughout the USSR was mainly due to a large-scale migration of rural population to the cities.
In Ukraine, urbanization and industrialization went hand-in-hand; as the USSR restored infrastructure and factories
demolished in the war and built new one and workers started arriving from the central parts of Russia and from further
away in the USSR.


At the time, the majority of Ukraine’s population lived in multi-family apartments, hostels, or barracks, and the drive
for single-family dwellings with all basic amenities became an important national policy in the 1950s-1960s. Urban
development policies were strongly linked to the decision to expand housing construction. The industrialization and
standardization of housing construction made it possible to rapidly increase the supply of housing and played an elemental
role in the growth of Ukrainian cities. The idea of simple and utilitarian blocks of flats came to the USSR from Germany
and the US, where pre-fabricated construction took off in the 1930s and expanded significantly immediately after WWII
(e.g., Concept of Plattenbau in Germany). New buildings were produced in factories using panel construction that could
then be assembled on site. It was estimated that more buildings were built in Ukraine from 1956 to 1964 than in the
previous 38 years of Soviet rule12.


Urban development at the time was viewed through the perspective of achieving higher socio-economic equity across
Ukraine’s cities. The 22nd Communist Congress held in 1961 outlined a roadmap, which aimed to eliminate disparities in
social infrastructure between cities and villages. However, officials were also instructed to avoid an excessive concentration
of population in big cities, to promote the development of small cities and towns, and to transform farm villages into
bigger town-like settlements. The optimal size for a city in terms of population was considered to be between 20,000
and 300,000 inhabitants13. The national policy was also influenced by meager per capita size of the housing stock, which
was around 4-5 m2 in cities like Moscow or Kyiv.


   11  In providing a regional overview of the country, this document uses the description of four geographic regions developed by the Kiev
   International Institute of Sociology: East, Center, South, and West.
   12 Yaroslav Hyrych, “Urbanization According to Plan,” The Ukrainian Week, 26 September 2012, available at http://ukrainianweek.com/

   History/60924 .
   13   Urban Development Institute under the Academy for Construction and Architecture of Ukrainian SSR (1950).
                                                                                                                                              15
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

The emergence and later obsolescence of Ukraine’s cities was facilitated by the Soviet command-administrative system.
Between 1956 and 1965 the number of cities increased substantially due in part to legal changes that allowed Oblast
councils to grant city status to settlements – a power previously limited to Ukraine’s central government (or Verkhovna
Rada). While in 1946 Ukraine urban system was composed of 258 cities, by 1959 the number had grown to 331 and by
1970 to 385. Uzhhorod, for example, was a town that had only 17,000 inhabitants at the war’s end, but experienced a
population increase when it was granted oblast center status (in 1946) and a university opened there. By 1989, it counted
more than 100,000 inhabitants. By contrast, settlements that lost their “city” status eventually declined.


Cities in the post-war era were developed around a core industry and guided by industrialization policies. The majority of these cities
emerged in priority industrial areas identified and established by the central Government such as Donetsk, Luhansk,
and Dnipropetrovsk oblasts and along the Black Sea coast. These policies produced flourishing, mono-functional cities14,
where the majority of the population was employed by one or few inter-connected industries and the city’s economy was
fully dependent on them. A more detailed review of the mono-functional cities system is described in Box 1 below.



     BOX 1 – MONO-FUNCTIONAL CITIES SYSTEM


     The term mono-functional city or mono-town refers to a city whose economic performance and employment is
     highly dependent on one or few industries. In Ukraine, this term is defined in law as cities where the employment
     of economically active population works in enterprises mainly focused on one or two main economic sectors that
     also support a substantial part of the city’s budget and social infrastructure.

     At present, there are 111 mono-functional cities in Ukraine: 32 are focused on coal extraction, 27 on the
     processing industry, 18 are agricultural centers, nine are focused on transport and nine on power engineering,
     seven focused on production of ore and non-metallic resources, six on chemicals and the oil refining industry, two
     on therapeutics, and one on art.

     The Donetsk oblast counts with the highest number of mono-functional cities with 27 of them. This is partly
     explained by the decision to have eastern Soviet Ukraine specialize as a region in coal-mining, metallurgy, heavy
     machinery, chemicals, etc., based on the abundance of natural resources found in the Eastern Region. A mono-
     functional city approach was extensively used in the period of the centrally-planned economy as the instrument
     for implementing industrialization and the territory management policy, which was heavily oriented towards large-
     scale industry and its accompanying infrastructure. During the 1950s-1970s, the narrow industrial specialization
     of individual cities combined with large-scale infrastructure and intensive transport flows were features of the
     paradigm of ‘territorial industrial complexes’ implemented throughout the USSR.

     Due to the heritage of this narrow economic specialization, mono-functional cities are highly vulnerable to the
     economic changes that have occurred in the country since the post-Soviet era. For example in the Donetsk and
     Lugansk oblasts, the economic performance of these cities is highly dependent on the status of the region’s
     mineral reserves, the degree of their industrial development, and the competitiveness of enriched raw materials
     extracted by local enterprises. It is also dependent on the ability of new private owners to manage local enterprises
     in a way that enhances their competitiveness. Many of these cities, which are dependent on the coal mining
     industry, struggled to find new economic growth following the massive industry restructuring and closure of
     enterprises due to their low level of competitiveness in the post-Soviet era.

Source: L.M. Kuzmenko, M.O. Soldak, Mono-functional cities: Problems, support provision and development, 2010.


     14 Law on the Approval of the National Programme of Development of Small Cities # 1580-IV approved on 04.03.2004 (in Ukrainian) - http://
     zakon2.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/1580-15
16
                      CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Ukraine’s major urban agglomerations emerged between 1957 and 1979. The city of Kyiv hit the one million-inhabitant
mark in 1957, followed by Kharkiv in 1962 and Odessa in 1974. By 1976, Kyiv had already two million inhabitants, and
by 1979, Dnipropetrovsk and Donetsk counted more than a million residents. Urbanization was rapid; while in 1959,
Soviet Ukraine had only 25 cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants, by 1979 it had 46 such cities15. At the same
time, internal migration was very restricted by regulations such as the “propiska” system, (name of the registration
system during soviet times, a brief review is included in Box 2) which made it very difficult for residents of the former
Soviet Union to move within the country. Internal migration policies were relaxed only after the country entered the
post-Soviet transition. Between 1935 and 1974 there was a de facto ban on mobility of rural inhabitants. Only in 1974
were residents of collective farms that had the name of kolkhoz able to obtain passports. Prior to that date, they had
no national documents and could not leave their place of residence without fear of criminal prosecution.



 BOX 2 – EVOLUTION OF THE PROPISKA SYSTEM


 One of the main restrictions for internal mobility in Ukraine was the propiska system, (the registration system in
 the Soviet countries) developed in the 1930s to serve as both a residency permit and a tool to monitor migration
 in the Soviet Union. The name propiska literally means an inscription and in this case, alludes to the inscription
 in a state internal passport permitting a person to reside in a given place. Propiska was documented in local
 police (Militsiya) registers and certified by a stamp made on internal passports. Official permission from local
 authorities was required to register one’s residence or change of residence; residing anywhere without a propiska
 was prohibited until the collapse of the USSR.

 Beginning in 1933, an additional feature of the propiska system was the existence of separate passports
 for residents of the so-called “regime” places, which were settlements where it was practically impossible for
 an outsider to receive a passport and, therefore, the required propiska. The state authorities exercised full
 control over the issuance of passports and propiska in this places. The first “regime” places were Kyiv, Odessa,
 Dnipropetrovsk, and Donetsk (then known as Stalino). Later on, other cities were added. By 1953, there were 340
 “regime” cities, locations, and railway connections.

 Ukraine officially discontinued the institution of propiska with the adoption of a new regulation on identification
 documents on September 2, 1993. However, in practice there was little difference between the old Soviet system
 of propiska and the newly-adopted regulation system. In 2004, after years of debate, the Law on the Right to
 Freedom of Movement and Choice of Place of Residence came into effect replacing the old registry system. Human
 rights groups stressed that a major difference between the propiska system and the new system of registration,
 which is required by law, is that a person may live, work, and receive services anywhere in the country. The
 rationale for the law was not based on denial of services; there was no indication that individuals were denied
 access to services because they were not registered in the locality where they resided. However, the new system
 still has some rigidities that makes it difficult to “de-register” when selling property and “register” while buying
 new property (buyers need to present proof of prospective place of residence while receiving certificate of “de-
 registration” from the old residence, which is not always feasible).

 Sources: Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Ukraine: Information on whether the residence permit (propiska)
 system still exists, 1992; Court Abolishes Propiska Law, Kyiv Post, 29 November 2001, available at http://www.kyivpost.
 com/content/ukraine/court-abolishes-propiska-law.html; Evgenija Navrotskaja, Roma and propiska in Ukraine, 3 April 1999,
 available at http://www.errc.org/article/roma-and-propiska-in-ukraine/593; Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,
 Responses to Information Requests: UKR42598.E, available at http://www.irb-cisr.gc.ca/Eng/ResRec/RirRdi/Pages/index.
 aspx?doc=445385; United Kingdom, Home Office, Country of Origin Information Service, Country of Origin Information
 Report: Ukraine, available at http://www.justice.gov/eoir/vll/country/uk_cntry_assess/2006/ukraine0606.pdf


 15   Paul R. Magocsi, A History of Ukraine: The Land and Its Peoples, 2nd ed., 2010.
                                                                                                                            17
                       CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Ukraine’s system of cities was developed during the Soviet period; as such, their emergence and growth was developed in
a centralized way and was not based on market principles. The demand and supply of housing and other resources and
services was rigid and highly regulated. The dominant approach was development based on economy of scale, narrow
specialization of individual industrial cities, and extensive co-operation among cities and their metropolitan areas. The
territory of the USSR was divided into economic macro-regions hosting a limited number of specialized industrial cities
that would have self-sufficient industries and infrastructure (electricity, water, roads, etc.). With the fall of the Soviet
Union and the introduction of market forces, it became evident that, from a spatial point of view, many of its cities had
been developed in places where they should not have been. For example, many cities had no rural hinterland to rely on
for daily food needs and therefore depended on the supply of subsidized goods. Further, many of the industrial cities in
the Eastern Region were highly dependent on raw materials and subsidized energy provided by other Soviet Republics
were not competitive internationally once borders were opened. Mono-functional cities, which depended economically on
a single or a few industries, were particularly vulnerable to this.


While the fall of the Soviet Union brought the opportunity to move towards a more efficient settlement system, policies implemented
during the transition period re-enforced barriers for internal mobility within Ukraine. During that period, ownership of dwellings
was transferred to the occupants with little or no cost, resulting in a high home-ownership rate—occupants owned 95
percent of households in 2012, according to a World Bank estimate16. Ukraine’s internal migration and urbanization
process and the reorganization of Ukraine’s urban system will be examined in the following sub-sections.




Ukraine’s people do not always move to economic
opportunity
Migration to and between urban areas is an indication that people are looking for better labor opportunities, and is a sign of an
efficient re-organization of human resources within a country. Achieving economic growth and improving living standards
require connecting or bringing people from places that are lagging or declining to places with economic opportunities17,
an essential element to promote Ukraine’s development.


The most notable characteristic of internal migration after the collapse of the Soviet Union is a decrease in the volume of movement.
However, a caveat is necessary when comparing internal migration in the USSR and subsequent internal migration in
Ukraine, especially in the first several years after independence. The termination of the obligatory practice of distributing
higher educational institutions’ graduates across the USSR, as well as the broader economic troubles of the 1990s
(unemployment, high housing prices, restriction of access to higher education due to high cost, increases in transport
tariffs, etc.), led to a decrease in the number of internal migrants. In addition, there was a surge in external migration,
mainly due to the relocation of people between the republics of the former Union, which was only recently classified as
internal migration. After the mid-1990s, the country’s economic performance improved and internal migration increased
slightly18. A final caveat to consider about migration data is that official statistics might not show the entire picture of
internal migration, as many people remained outside the radar of registration but moved through the country.


Recent studies of internal migration in Ukraine reveal that few people are moving to seek new economic opportunities. A
2012 World Bank report on that theme shows that Ukraine migrants are not leaving areas with lagging labor opportunities


     16 World Bank, In Search of Opportunities: How a More Mobile Workforce Can Propel Ukraine’s Prosperity, 2012, available at https://
     openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/12268/NonAsciiFileName0.pdf?sequence=1
     17 The World Bank’s World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography provides an extensive policy oriented discussion about

     the aspects that make urban conditions optimal for the increase of productivity.
     18 European Commission and GVG, Social Impact of Emigration and Rural-Urban Migration in Central and Eastern Europe, Final Country
     Report: Ukraine, 2012, available at ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=8820&langId=en
18
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

as fast as they should19, and that they are not necessarily going to regions with better job conditions. Instead, their
movement seems to be catalyzed by low levels of social spending in their home regions20. The study suggests that
the internal migration rate is half of what might be expected from a country like Ukraine. In addition, an ILO study of
migrants in 2013 found that those who are moving are predominantly male and young; although they make up only 22
percent of the population, migrants aged 15-29 years comprised over 50 percent of internal migrants that year21.


In Ukraine, migrants are predominantly from the age cohort of 15-29 years. The number of people who have higher
education in Ukraine is relatively high and migration to the main education centers of Kyiv, Kharkiv, Lviv, Odessa,
and Donetsk is common as well as to several dozen smaller centers. These young educated people tend to stay in the
big centers as they are attracted by bigger labor market and better opportunities. Further, as there is little support
infrastructure for entrepreneurs beyond the large cities, it is easier to work in these centers with the minimum set of
support instruments. The 2010 Housing Market and Labor Mobility study describes the average renter of accommodation
in Ukraine as someone in their 20-30s, with one or fewer children, and an average salary of about 1200 USD. By contrast,
people with families and generational obligations are more static, and in even more so in inter-generational settings,
where earners take care of not only children but also elderly relatives.


Some of the main barriers to internal migration in Ukraine are: (i) the lack of access to credit and underdevelopment of
the housing and mortgage market; (ii) the costs of moving to economically vibrant regions in the country; and (iii) the
high transaction costs of moving. First, there are poor financial options and access to credit necessary to encourage
internal labor migration. Well-functioning credit markets can help finance mobility and housing arrangements, but in
Ukraine they are underdeveloped, leading to high out-of-pocket payments from households’ savings or borrowing from
relatives, friends, or informal intermediaries to cover the costs of migration from one place to another22. Second, there is
a very limited rental market as well as significant price differentials across the regions of Ukraine, with considerably more
expensive housing in the leading regions than in the lagging regions. This makes it difficult for people in lagging regions
(e.g., Zaporizhzhya and Zakarpatska oblasts) to sell their houses and move to areas with improved job opportunities, but
with higher housing costs23. Lastly, while the propiska registration process (described in detail in Box 2) was reformed in
2004, it is still difficult to obtain residency for migrants in their new destination.




Ukraine continues to urbanize despite its population
decline
The limited internal movement is reflected in a continued but more or less static “urbanization” of the population. In fact, despite its
rapid population decline, Ukraine continues to slowly “urbanize.”24 As discussed in the demographics section, both urban
and rural populations have decreased over the past two decades. However, population decline has been higher in rural
areas, which has caused urbanization levels to continue to slowly increase (see Figure 14 below). We need to distinguish
between the level of urbanization and the share of population living in the cities, since this last one is the passive number
which depends on the whole number of population, which is the case for Ukraine.




   19   Based on the concept of efficient mobility of people for development.
   20   In Search of Opportunities, 2012.
   21  International Labour Organization, Report on the methodology, organization and results of a modular sample survey on labour migration
   in Ukraine, 2013.
   22 Koettl, J., et. al., In Search of Opportunities? The Barriers to More Efficient Internal Labor Mobility in Ukraine, Institute for the Study of

   Labor, 2014.
   23   As examples, leading regions include Kiev and Donetsk (before the conflict), while lagging regions include Zaporizhzhya and Uzhgorod.
                                                                                                                                                       19
                                            CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


  In 1989, 66 percent of Ukraine’s population lived in urban areas. Between 1989 and 2001, the rural population decreased from
  17 million to 16 million (a 6 percent decline), while the urban population fell from 34 million to 33 million (a 4 percent
  decline). The interaction of these dynamics resulted in an increase of 1 percent in Ukraine’s urbanization to 67 percent
  in 2001. Between 2001 and 2011, the rural population further dropped to 14 million (a 10 percent decline), while the
  urban population itself fell further to 31 million (a 4 percent decline). As a result, in 2011 the urbanization level rose to
  68 percent. On average, this shows a steady growth of urbanization levels of approximately 0.15 percent per year since
  1989.



   Figure 14 – Both urban and rural populations declined between 1989 and 2011;
   yet the country continues to urbanize


                                                        Urbanization trends in Ukraine
                                                                      1989-2011

                                                                                                                             80
                        50



                                                                                                                                                       Urban Population
                        40
Population (millions)




                                                                                                                             70




                                                                                                                                  Urbanization %
                        30                                                                                                                            Rural Population

                                                                                                                             60

                        20                                                                                                                             Urbanization



                         10                                                                                                  50

                                1990                 1995                2000                 2005                 2010




   Source: Ukraine Statistics Department



  However, there are some differences in urbanization trends among the regions over the past two decades (see Figure 16). The Eastern
  and Southern regions were already highly urbanized in 1989 – with 84 percent and 70 percent of their populations living
  in urban areas respectively. These regions maintained a more or less stable urbanization level over the 1989-2011 period
  as their urban populations declined at similar rates as their rural populations (See Figure 15). The Central and Western
  regions were the least urbanized in 1989 with 60 and 45 percent of their populations living in urban areas respectively.
  However, the Western region’s urbanization levels remained more or less stable, while the Central region continued to
  slowly urbanize reaching 67 percent urbanization by 2011 (by contrast, the Western region shows the lowest urbanization
  level of all regions in 2011 at 49 percent). This was possible because the Central region’s urban population remained more
  or less stable as its rural population continued to decline.




                        24 Usually, urbanization is understood as growth in the urban population, which causes an increase in the urban/rural population ratio. In the
                        case of declining population, like the case of Ukraine, urbanization can be understood as the increase of the urban/rural population ratio despite
                        the decline of both urban and rural population—so long as the rural population is declining faster.
 20
                                              CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


   Figure 15 – There are strong differences among urbanization levels across the regions

                                              Western                                 Eastern
                         15                                                                                    80

                         10                                                                                    60

                                                                                                               40
                          5
                                                                                                               20
Population (millions)




                                                                                                                                Urbanization %
                          0                                                                                    0

                                              Central                                Southern
                         15                                                                                    80

                         10                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                        Urban Population
                                                                                                               40
                          5                                                                                                                             Rural Population
                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                        Urbanization
                          0                                                                                    0

                                1990   1995    2000     2005   2010    1990   1995     2000     2005   2010


   Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




   Figure 16 – Population dynamics are heterogeneous across Ukraine’s regions. In all cases, however,
   population declines yield increased urbanization rates

                                              Western                                Eastern
                          0

                        -.5
                                                                                                              70
                         -1
                                                                                                                   Urbanization rate (%)




                        -1.5
% change




                                                                                                              50


                                              Central                                Southern
                          0                                                                                                                               Urban pop change

                        -.5                                                                                                                               Rural pop change
                                                                                                              70
                         -1                                                                                                                               Total pop change

                        -1.5                                                                                  50                                          Urbanization

                               2000                            2011   2000                             2011                                      Graphs by region


   Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




                                                                                                                                                                             21
                            CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



A slowly evolving system of cities
Ukraine has 458 cities25 that serve as the urban element of basis for an analysis of Ukraine’s settlement system. As
previously mentioned, of these, Kyiv and Sevastopol until 2013, had the same administrative status as the other 24
Oblasts; 182 are cities of Oblast significance, which have the same autonomy as Raions; and 276 cities are subordinated
to Raions. Figure 17 below presents the spatial distribution of Ukraine’s cities and their population in 2013.


Ukraine is much more densely urban in the Eastern region, which has a significant number of cities concentrated near the
Russian border (see Figure 17). By contrast, the density of cities is much lower in the Western region, which also has a
large number of small towns (less than 10,000 inhabitants). This is partly a reflection of the lower levels of urbanization
of the Western region as well as the high levels of urbanization found in the Eastern region (as discussed in the previous
sub-section). The Southern region has a significant number of cities with population between 50,000 and 100,000 as
well as fewer smaller cities.



Figure 17 – Distribution of cities across Ukraine

 City Population, 2013




           Population
          Estimated, 2013

          0 - 10,000

          10,001 - 20,000

          20,001 - 50,000

          50,001 - 100,000

          100,001 - 500,000

          >500,000




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department



     25 Two additional cities, Chernobyl and Pripyat, are not considered as part of the urban system as they have been abandoned due to radiation
     contamination in the aftermath of the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station in 1986.
22
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


While most Ukrainian cities have less than 20,000 inhabitants, the majority of the urban population26 lives in cities having more
than 100,000 inhabitants (see Figure 18 and Figure 19). In fact, some 34 percent of the urban population is concentrated in
just eight urban centers (Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odessa, Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia, Lviv, and Kryvyi Rih). Moreover,
if the population living in the functional urban area of these eight cities were counted, it would comprise an even larger
percentage of Ukraine’s urban population (62 percent), as each of these urban centers is at the core of significant urban
agglomerations.

Figure 18 – Ukraine has a high percentage of small and mid-sized towns 2013
                                                              Percentage of cities in each category
                                               2%


                                                                                          Small towns (<10k)
                                          9%             15%
                                                                                          Mid-size towns (10k-20k)
                                 12%
                                                                                          Large towns (20k-50k)

                                                                                          Small cities (50k-100k)
                                                           35%
                                    27%                                                   Mid-size cities (100k-500k)

                                                                                          Major cities (>500k)




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department


Figure 19 – Most of the urban population is concentrated in eight major cities 2013
                                                                  Population in each category
                                                    2%



                                                         8%                               Small towns (<10k)

                                                                13%                       Mid-size towns (10k-20k)
                                   34%
                                                                                          Large towns (20k-50k)
                                                                 11%                      Small cities (50k-100k)

                                                                                          Mid-size cities (100k-500k)
                                               32%
                                                                                          Major cities (>500k)



Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

The Western region has many small towns with less than 10,000 inhabitants (Figure 20), but most of the urban population lives in
mid-sized cities. In the other three regions, major urban centers account for a larger amount of the urban population as
they have a large number of mid-sized and large cities. Table 3 shows the five largest urban centers for each region. The
Western and Central regions show a pattern where one city comprises a much larger percentage of the population than
the next four largest of the region’s cities27. A similar pattern is observed in the Eastern and Southern regions, but here
the difference between the largest and the following cities is smaller.


   26   For this analysis, the urban population is the population located in the 458 cities identified in the Ukrainian urban system.
   27  TIn this case larger than what would be indicated by a Zipf law. See Gabaix, X. Zipf’s Laws for Cities: An Explanation, The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 1999.
                                                                                                                                                       23
                      CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Table 3 – Five largest urban centers in each region by population in 2013

                                                                               Percentage of region’s
         Oblast                    City         Population 2013    Region
                                                                                    population

          Lviv                      Lviv            730272         Western             16.0

     Khmelnytskyi              Khmelnytskyi        264988          Western              5.8

       Chernivtsi                Chernivtsi        258842          Western              5.6

         Rivne                     Rivne           250333          Western              5.4

     Ivano-Frankivsk          Ivano-Frankivsk       226018         Western              4.9

        Kharkiv                   Kharkiv          1451028         Eastern             20.6

        Donetsk                  Donetsk            953217         Eastern             13.5

        Donetsk                  Mariupol           461810         Eastern              6.5

        Lugansk                  Lugansk           425848          Eastern              6.0

        Donetsk                  Makiivka          353918          Eastern              5.0

          Kyiv                     Kyiv            2757900         Central             34.0

       Vinnytsia                 Vinnytsia          371698         Central              4.5

        Poltava                   Poltava          296852          Central              3.6

       Chernihiv                 Chernihiv         296089          Central              3.6

        Cherkasy                 Cherkasy          285605          Central              3.5

        Odessa                    Odessa           1014852        Southern              13.1

     Dnipropetrovsk           Dnipropetrovsk       997754         Southern             12.8

      Zaporizhzhia             Zaporizhzhia         770672        Southern              9.9

     Dnipropetrovsk             Kryvyj Rih         656478         Southern              8.4

        Mykolaiv                 Mykolaiv          496188         Southern              6.4


Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




24
                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Figure 20 – The Western region has the greatest number of small towns. Also, its urban population
lives mostly in mid-sized cities (100-500k)

100%

 90%
                                                                               Percentage of cities
 80%                                                                           in each category

 70%                                                                              Major cities (>500k)

 60%                                                                              Mid-size cities (100k-500k)

 50%                                                                              Small cities (50k-100k)

 40%                                                                              Large towns (20k-50k)

                                                                                  Mid-size towns (10k-20k)
 30%
                                                                                  Small towns (<10k)
 20%

 10%

  0%

             Western      Eastern      Central      Southern      Ukraine




   100%

       90%
                                                                               Percentage of population
       80%
                                                                               in each category

       70%                                                                        Major cities (>500k)

       60%                                                                        Mid-size cities (100k-500k)

       50%                                                                        Small cities (50k-100k)

                                                                                  Large towns (20k-50k)
       40%
                                                                                  Mid-size towns (10k-20k)
       30%
                                                                                  Small towns (<10k)
       20%

       10%

       0%

               Western       Eastern      Central      Southern      Ukraine




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




                                                                                                                25
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Between 1989 and 2001, Ukrainian cities in all size categories saw a significant decline in their population, on average 6.3 percent of
their population (See Figure 21). Small cities – having a population between 50,000 and 100,000 in 1989, were the most
affected category over the 1989 – 2001 period, losing on average 7.4 percent of their population. Over this period, mid-
sized cities with populations of 100,000-500,000 inhabitants fared better, losing less population than any of the other
categories.


Over the subsequent 2001-2013 period, cities continued to lose population at more or less same rate, although the situation was
worse for Smaller Cities. Also, over this period more Small Towns were shrinking and the category as a whole was losing
population at a higher rate than the average across the urban system with 75 percent of small towns losing population.
Mid-size towns also experienced greater declines than the urban system average.


On average, Major Cities did better than Small Cities or Small Towns, but the situation was mixed when looking at individual cities.
In fact, when limiting the analysis to administrative divisions, among the 15 largest cities only Kyiv, Sevastopol, and
Vinnytsia grew over the last decade. Among large cities, Kyiv consolidated itself as the country’ growth center, and
remains the main recipient of the cross-regional exchange of population. For Kyiv, the inflow of migrants provides enough
of an increase in population to compensate for natural population decline. Population growth due to internal migration
can also be observed in the largest industrial regions of Ukraine (Kharkiv and Dnipropetrovsk Oblasts)28.


Kyiv Oblast and the neighboring Chernihiv and Zhytomyr Oblasts are the main suppliers of labor migrants to Kyiv city. Odesa
oblast, known for its opportunities in seasonal employment in both agriculture and recreational spheres, also attracts
a significant number of internal labor migrants. Among other regions supplying labor migrants (beside Kyiv, Chernihiv,
and Zhytomyr oblasts supplying labor migrants for the capital), Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast yields a significant number of
migrants for work in Lviv and Kyiv29.


Relative to the population patterns observed in individual cities, agglomerations30 fared much better. The largest agglomeration,
formed around Kyiv, has grown steadily since 1989, so that it is the largest urban center in Ukraine. It is also the
fastest growing one, with total population growth of 7.2 percent between 2001 and 2013. Tables 4 and 5 contrast
the performance of the 15 largest individual cities in Ukraine, where three registered growth, and the 15 largest urban
agglomerations, where six had positive population growth in the last decade.


Even more important, if we look at all the cities in the country, individual cities that showed positive population growth are, in
a significant majority of cases, cities that are part of a larger agglomeration - either as centers themselves or as part of an
agglomeration’s periphery. When ranked by order of population growth between 2001 and 2013 (see Table 6), eleven out of
the fifteen fastest growing cities in the country were part of an agglomeration.




     28 European Commission and GVG, Synthesis Report: Social Impact of Emigration and Rural-Urban Migration in Central and Eastern Europe,
     VT/2010/001, June 2012.
     29 European Commission and GVG, Synthesis Report: Social Impact of Emigration and Rural-Urban Migration in Central and Eastern Europe,

     VT/2010/001, June 2012.
     30 Agglomerations are defined using Night Lights data and are formed by cities that in 2013 had a merged Night Lights urban footprint. See
     Box 3 and the subsequent discussion in Section 4.
26
                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Figure 21 – All categories of cities in Ukraine are losing population


 0.0
                                                                         Average population
                                                                         growth (decline)
-1.0

                                                                            Small towns (<10k)
-2.0
                                                                            Mid-size towns (10k-20k)
-3.0
                                                                            Large towns (20k-50k)

-4.0                                                                        Small cities (50k-100k)

                                                                            Mid-size cities (100k-500k)
-5.0
                                                                            Major cities (>500k)

-6.0                                                                             Average loss over the
                                                                                 cities

-7.0


-8.0


                   1989-2001                    2001-2013




100%

90%                                                                      Percentage of cities
                                                                         losing population
80%

70%                                                                         Small towns (<10k)
60%                                                                         Mid-size towns (10k-20k)

50%                                                                         Large towns (20k-50k)

40%                                                                         Small cities (50k-100k)

30%                                                                         Mid-size cities (100k-500k)

                                                                            Major cities (>500k)
20%

 10%

 0%

                   1989-2001                    2001-2013




 Source: Ukraine Statistics Department



                                                                                                      27
                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



     BOX 3 – DEFINITION OF AGGLOMERATION USING NIGHT LIGHTS SATELLITE IMAGING


     Agglomerations are groupings of individual cities that function as a single city due to the proximity of
     and interaction between their housing, labor and commercial markets. People might work in one city in the
     agglomeration and live in another one. These cities usually have separate geographic and political boundaries
     and had their markets initially separate as well, but they became agglomerated as the cities grew. Satellite night
     lights can be used to trace the evolution of urban ‘footprints,’ which may merge and form an agglomeration (see
     Section 4 below). In total, Ukraine has 23 agglomerations that are composed of 79 cities, approximately four
     cities per agglomeration. The figure below presents Kyiv’s agglomeration and the growth of its night light urban
     footprint between 1996 and 2010. Some of the cities separate from Kyiv in 1996 have grown to become a single
     urban footprint in 2010.


       Figure – Kyiv urban agglomeration (between 1996 and 2010)




                                                                                                    Chernihiv




           1996

           2010           01   2.5   25               75        100
                                                                  Kilometers




28
                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Table 4 – Ranking of Ukraine’s 15 largest cities by population

                   Rank       Rank      Population   Population    Change      Change
      City                                                                                   Oblast        Region
                   2013       1989        1989         2013 e     1989-2001   2001-2013

      Kyiv           1          1       2,572,212    2,757,900      -0.2         7.4           Kyiv        Central

    Kharkiv          2          2       1,609,959    1,451,028      -8.6        -1.4         Kharkiv       Eastern

    Odessa           3          4       1,115,371    1,014,852      -7.7        -1.4         Odessa        Southern

 Dnipropetrovsk      4          3       1,215,941     997,754       -9.2        -9.6      Dnipropetrovsk   Southern

    Donetsk          5          5       1,109,102     953,217       -8.4        -6.2         Donetsk       Eastern

  Zaporizhzhia       6          6        883,909      770,672       -7.5        -5.8       Zaporizhzhia    Southern

      Lviv           7          7        790,908      730,272       -7.3        -0.3           Lviv        Western

   Kryvyj Rih        8          8        739,139      656,478       -7.2        -4.3      Dnipropetrovsk   Southern

    Mykolaiv         9          9        522,343      496,188       -1.6        -3.5        Mykolaiv       Southern

    Mariupol        10         10        518,933      461,810       -5.2        -6.2         Donetsk       Eastern

    Lugansk          11        11        496,813      425,848       -6.8        -8.0         Lugansk       Eastern

   Vinnytsia        12         13        374,304      371,698       -4.7         4.2        Vinnytsia      Central

    Makiivka         13        12        430,201      353,918       -9.4        -9.2         Donetsk       Eastern

   Sevastopol        14        14        356,123      342,580       -3.8         0.0        Sevastopol     Southern

  Simpheropol       15         16        343,565      337,285        0.0        -1.9         Crimea        Southern


Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




                                                                                                                      29
                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Table 5 – Ranking of Ukraine’s largest urban agglomerations

                   Rank      Rank       Population   Population     Change   Change                                                    #
 Agglomeration                                                                                        Oblast          Region
                   2013      1989         1989         2013       1989-2001 2001-2013                                                Cities

        Kyiv         1          1       2946438       3171833       0.5%            7.2%               Kyiv           Central            11

      Kharkiv        2          2        1818712     1620927        -8.8%         -2.2%               Kharkiv         Eastern             7

      Donetsk        3          3        1783774     1506202        -8.9%         -7.3%               Donetsk         Eastern            8

Dnipropetrovsk       4          4       1648499      1369202        -9.2%         -8.5%        Dnipropetrovsk         Southern           4

      Odessa         5          5        1170209     1074570        -7.4%         -0.8%               Odessa          Southern           2

        Lviv         6          6        821698       765901        -6.9%           0.2%               Lviv           Western            4

     Alchevsk        7          8        479787       447975        -1.3%         -5.4%              Lugansk          Eastern            3

      Lugansk        8          7        504538       432483        -6.8%         -8.0%              Lugansk          Eastern            2

     Sevastopol      9          10       368565       354565        -4.2%           0.4%         Sevastopol           Southern           2

      Gorlivka      10          9        479181       353497        -13.6%        -14.6%              Donetsk         Eastern            3

     Cherkasy       11          13       310702       303168         1.6%         -3.9%              Cherkasy         Central            2

  Kramatorsk        12          11       359593       297665        -8.4%         -9.6%               Donetsk         Eastern            4

Sieverodonetsk      13          12       343124       281903        -9.8%         -8.9%              Lugansk          Eastern            4

       Rivne        14          14       255523       274902        7.0%            0.5%               Rivne          Western            2

 Ivano-Frankivsk    15          15       223660       235515        2.0%            3.2%       Ivano-Frankivsk        Western            2

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

Table 6 – Ranking of the fastest growing cities in Ukraine

                   Population        Population       Change                                              Belongs to an
       City                                                            Oblast              Region
                     2001              2013          2001-2013                                            agglomeration Agglomeration

     Dubliany        8469              10240           20.9 %           Lviv               Western              YES               Lviv

     Vynnyky         13654             16278           19.2 %           Lviv               Western              YES               Lviv

     Vyshhorod      22933             26536            15.7 %           Kyiv               Central              YES               Kyiv

     Teplodar        8830              10204           15.6 %         Odessa               Southern             NO

 Novyi Kalyniv       3582               4105           14.6 %           Lviv               Western              NO

      Brovary       86839             98250            13.1 %           Kyiv               Central              YES               Kyiv

     Inkerman        10628             11985           12.8 %        Sevastopol            Southern             YES         Sevastopol

     Ukrainka        14163             15644           10.5 %           Kyiv               Central              YES               Kyiv

      Boryspil      53975             59545            10.3 %           Kyiv               Central              YES               Kyiv

     Illichivsk      54151             59718           10.3 %         Odessa               Southern             YES              Odessa

      Rudky          4942               5434           10.0 %           Lviv               Western              NO

  Pidhorodne         17763             19498           9.8 %       Dnipropetrovsk          Southern             YES       Dnipropetrovsk

     Vyshneve       34465              37457           8.7 %            Kyiv               Central              YES               Kyiv

       Kyiv        2570000           2757900           7.3 %            Kyiv               Central              YES               Kyiv

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

30
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



The largest cities and agglomerations are distributed differently across the country. Only one city in the Western region is ranked
among the fifteen largest individual cities. However, five agglomerations among the fifteen largest are located in this
region, as well as four of the fastest growing cities. This suggests that, despite having the lowest urbanization levels,
the cities in this region are taking advantage of the economies generated by their agglomeration into large-scale urban
regions. By contrast, the Eastern region has five cities among the largest fifteen individual cities, but has none of the
fastest growing cities. Finally, the agglomeration patterns are much more concentrated in the Central region, led by Kyiv’s
agglomeration which gathers 11 individual cities. Figure 22 below plots the location of Ukraine’s cities and agglomerations
(agglomerations are labeled with the name of the main city in them) with colors assigned according to their population
growth rate. Again, this graph shows a strongly declining Eastern region, despite the fact it contains a large number
of agglomerations. The West, by contrast, shows a higher concentration of growing cities as well as cities that are at
least declining less than the averages for urban population and overall national population. The significance of Kyiv’s
agglomeration and its pattern of growth are also noticeable here.


Figure 22 – Ukrainian cities with growing or declining population 2001-2013

Percent Change in Population, 2001-2013




       Percent Change
              by city
     Declining more than national
     average (less than -6.3%)
     Declining less than national
     average (-6.3 to -5.7%)
     Declining less than urban
     average (-5.7 to 0%)
     Growing Cities




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




                                                                                                                                31
                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends




Key messages and implications for further policy
and analytical work
The current dynamics in Ukraine’s urban system remain highly influenced by its origins in the Soviet system. At the
time, urban development was seen as a tool for the higher national objective of achieving socio-economic equality. This
approach, however, had other consequences too. A rigid, centrally defined decision-making process led to situations where
population was not always directed towards the most efficient cities. Many cities were developed based on industries
that survived on demand by and subsidies from the central government. This system left many cities unprepared for the
market economy system adopted following Ukraine’s independence. The consequences of Ukraine’s urban development
policies implemented during the Soviet and transition period continue to affect the country and prevent its urban
system from achieving its full potential. For example, extremely high home-ownership rates of the Soviet era limited the
development of a rental market and, thereby, increased the relative cost of mobility. In addition, continued obstacles
such as lack of access to finance and high transaction costs further threaten the benefits of potential efficiencies from
internal migration. As a result Ukraine’s people are not always moving to economic opportunities.

Urbanization in Ukraine continues to rise despite an overall decline in the urban population. This phenomenon is occurring
because the country’s rural population is decreasing at an even faster rate than its urban population. Yet urbanization
patterns are not homogeneous across the territory of Ukraine. The Eastern and Southern regions are highly urbanized,
but have shown slower urbanization rates in the last two decades, while the historically rural Western region currently
shows faster urbanization rates.

Most cities in Ukraine are shrinking while urban agglomerations are concentrating the little urban growth currently
witnessed in the country. Cities in all regions, especially smaller ones, have been losing population, mostly to the largest
cities, and usually to those that have formed large urban centers, or agglomerations. The growth of agglomerations is
indicative of a movement towards a more efficient urban system. Led by the Kyiv agglomeration, these city clusters hold
the large majority of the cities that are actually growing in population (i.e., eleven out of fifteen fastest growing cities in
the country belong to an agglomeration). This growth might be explained by the fact that these larger groups of cities
can through their agglomeration produce efficiencies by sharing costs, increasing access to and the size of their markets,
and strengthening productivity by enhancing interactions between citizens and firms.

Going forward, Ukraine should reduce barriers to move internally. Low mobility of Ukraine’s internal population is an
obstacle preventing the country from reaping the rewards of its urban potential. An improved mobility might further
spur the growth of certain urban centers with emerging employment opportunities. However, increased mobility most
likely will also deepen the decline of most Ukrainian cities, which would require policies to protect the less mobile and
more vulnerable population that is left behind. Increasing population mobility will require eliminating or smoothening
some of the obstacles to move including making the housing market more fluid and permeable (e.g. increase rental
options, improve access to housing finance) and lowering the transaction costs of moving. In addition, as outlined in the
World Development Report 200931 Governments should be neutral in regards to migration of unskilled labor, encouraging
migration for economic reasons and discouraging migration in search of public services; and strongly supportive of
internal migration of skilled labor. The later can be done through investment in services in peripheral areas to build
portable human capital and increasing the flow of labor market information, among others, so migrants arrive better
informed of employment opportunities.




     31   World Bank (2009), Reshaping Economic Geography – World Development Report.
32
                  CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



In addition, the country needs to put in place the right policies to better manage the population decline of most of its
cities while catering to manage growth in large agglomerations. On the one hand, shrinking cities will need to adapt
their infrastructure, the way their services are financed and delivered, and consolidate their footprint. The Central
Government should in turn create the right mechanisms and incentives (e.g. financial transfers) so that cities focus
on declining efficiently (e.g. agglomerating schools when needed). Given the extent of urban decline, the country should
explore the need of establishing national level programs, such as technical assistance and funds for downsizing, that
provide resources to better manage decline. There is also a need to increase awareness of the scale and type of urban
decline as many cities continue to follow unrealistic population growth projections. On the other hand, growing centers
need to focus on adapting infrastructure and services making sure that new-comers are well absorbed and integrated in
the city; manage peri-urban growth to avoid sprawl, etc. In addition, the realignment of city boundaries or introduction
of metropolitan governance mechanisms might be needed to achieve an effective coordination in agglomerations which
span across administrative units. This is particularly important in the case of public transport.




                                                                                                                     33
                           CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends




III. Regional Economic Trends32
Trends in Ukraine’s economic performance
The economic conditions and institutions that Ukraine inherited from its time as a Soviet republic strongly influenced the
evolution of its economy in the decades following the Soviet Union’s collapse. As part of the Soviet Union, the country’s
economy was centered on the production of intermediate goods that used raw materials and energy from other republics.
The major sectors were steel production, oil processing, coal mining, and other chemical industries. Agricultural production
was also important, with wheat, corn, and sugar beets as the main crops. Almost all factories were state-owned and were
very large, leaving an industrial infrastructure that was not competitive and quite inflexible when the market system
was introduced in the 1990s. In the late 1980s, state enterprises accounted for almost 100 percent of all industrial
production in the regions of Soviet Ukraine33.


With the domestic and international changes in the Soviet Union from 1989, Ukraine’s economy went into deep recession until 1998.
This was mainly driven by radical changes in political governance, a market that struggled to adapt to new competition,
sub-optimal macro-economic conditions, and an agricultural sector that declined despite the support of subsidies. Ukraine
had large manufacturing plants, but suddenly no sure source of raw materials and energy. In addition, the demand for
military goods decreased. Among the transformations faced by the country’s economic institutions were more open
borders and increased competition from international goods34. However, liberalization was not uniform; Eastern Ukraine
kept a larger share of state-owned enterprises, while most private enterprises were located in the Western Ukraine35.
At the same time, despite heavy government subsidies, agricultural output declined by 35 percent between 1990 and
1995. Collective cooperatives and state-owned farms, a legacy from the Soviet period, continued to dominate the sector;
private ownership was allowed, but lack of capital, social attitudes, and the high cost of fuel discouraged it. These
dynamics were exacerbated by a period of hyper-inflation during 1993-9436.


Since 1998 and until the recent conflict, Ukraine has experienced a steady increase in its total GDP (See Figure 23). In 1998,
supported by the devaluation of the Hryvnya, Ukraine’s economy started to recover. This movement was led by growth
in import-substituting (textiles and food) and export-oriented industries (metallurgy and chemicals). The recovery was
interrupted in 2008, due to the effects of the Global Financial Crisis, but the halt lasted only one year37, with GDP
returning to growth until it was halted again by the recent conflict.




     32 In providing a regional overview of the country, this document uses the description of four geographic regions developed by the Kiev

     International Institute of Sociology: East, Center, South, and West.
     33 Ivan Katchanovski, Social Capital and Privatization in Regions of Ukraine, Paper prepared for Presentation at the Annual World Convention
     of the Association for the Study of the Nationalities, Columbia University, New York, April 5-7, 2001, available at http://individual.utoronto.ca/
     ikatcha1/PrivatizationASN.pdf.
     34Vlad Mykhnenko, The Post-Communist State and Capitalism in Transition: Towards a Complementary Relationship, Paper for the Havighurst
     Centre 4th Annual Young Researchers Conference, ‘The Problems of the Post-Communist State’, The Havighurst Centre for Russian and Post-
     Soviet Studies, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio, USA, 5-6 November 2004, available at http://www.cas.miamioh.edu/havighurstcenter/papers/
     Young%20Researchers%2004/Mykhenko.pdf
     35   Social Capital and Privatization in Regions of Ukraine, 2001.
     36 Andrey Androshchuk, “Transition Economies: A Look at Russia, Ukraine and Poland,” Honors College Theses, Paper 32, 2006, available at
     http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/honorscollege_theses/32.
     37 The recovery was quicker than most expected; the World Bank forecasted a decrease between 9 to 15 percent in 2009 for Ukraine. It is
     important to note that most of the impact was in the area of foreign trade of goods and services, an area not reflected in the Gross Regional
     Product. This indicator is used to compare production levels at the regional or oblast level.
34
                                CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Figure 23 – Real GDP decreased sharply after Ukraine’s departure from the Soviet Union
(1991-1998) and experienced a slow recovery lasting until the recent conflict (1999-2012)

 GDP
140 B


120 B


100 B


 80 B                                                                                                                   Global
           Soviet                                                                                                    Financial          Conflict
 60 B      Union                                                                                                        Crisis

                                                                    Recovery
 40 B


 20 B


   0
               1988      1990          1992      1994      1996     1998     2000    2002      2004    2006   2008     2010      2012

Source: World Development Indicators, 2015. The World Bank

GDP per capita also increased steadily from 1998 until the Global Financial Crisis (See Figure 24) but this is partly due to the decline
in population over the analyzed period. In fact, after a short and sharp drop in response to the Global Financial Crisis of
2008, the growth in GDP per capita accelerated to return to pre-Crisis levels in 2012. This steep growth rate in GDP per
capita – steeper than the one observed in the overall growth in GDP - is partly due to the overall decline in the country’s
population. However, given the demographic transition the country is experiencing (discussed in Section 1), the positive
dynamics in GDP output per capita should be viewed with cautious optimism as the decline in population could reverse
the trend in the medium and long term. A review of trends in poverty can be observed in Box 4.



Figure 24 – GDP per capita grew steadily from 1998 until the global financial crisis

4500                                                                                                                                             160

4000                                                                                                                                             140

3500
                                                                                                                                                 120
3000
                                                                                                                                                 100
2500
                                                                                                                                                 80
2000
                                                                                                                                                 60
1500
                                                                                                                                                 40
1000

 500                                                                                                                                             20

   0                                                                                                                                             0
        1987      1989          1991          1993      1995      1997     1999     2001      2003    2005    2007     2009      2011     2013


                         GDP per capita (current US$)                                      GDP (constant 2005 US$) billion

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

                                                                                                                                                       35
                                                   CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends




     BOX 4 – POVERTY IN UKRAINE


     Poverty rates in Ukraine have decreased over the last couple of decades. This has been the result of higher GDP
     per capita growth, but also of policies to redistribute wealth among the population. In fact, between 2006 and
     2011 around 75 percent of the poverty reduction was attributed to redistribution. However, inequality indices
     (Gini; Theil) have decreased only marginally in the last 10 years.

                    70                                                                        Poverty Headcount Ratio (including projections), 2000-2012

                   60
                                                          US$ 5.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Projection
                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Survey data
                    40

                    30

                    20
                                                      US$ 2.50
                     10

                        0
                                         2000                2001                2002                      2003               2004                  2005                    2006                    2007                    2008                          2009                2010                  2011               2012

     Source: ECATSD using ECAPOV. Azevedo and Lomaia (2013)
     Poverty headcount ratio: the proportion of a population that exists, or lives, below the ‘poverty line’.
     (% of population below the poverty line, vertical axis in this graph).

     In Ukraine, poverty is mainly a rural phenomenon (80 percent of the poor are in rural areas). The bottom 40
     are more equally distributed between urban and rural areas.
     The decline in poverty in Ukraine, however, may be threatened in the near future by the impact of the recent
     conflict.

                                      100%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100%

                                      90%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               90%

                                      80%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80%
         Distribution of poor among
            urban and rural areas




                                      70%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Urbanization rate

                                      60%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60%

                                      50%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50%

                                      40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40%

                                      30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30%

                                      20%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20%

                                       10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%

                                       0%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0%
                                             Tajikistan

                                                          Kosovo

                                                                   Bosnia

                                                                            Lithuania

                                                                                        Kyrgyz Rep.

                                                                                                      Moldova

                                                                                                                Latvia

                                                                                                                         Estonia

                                                                                                                                   Bulgaria

                                                                                                                                              Georgia

                                                                                                                                                        Hungary

                                                                                                                                                                  Albania

                                                                                                                                                                             Kazakhstan

                                                                                                                                                                                          Romania

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Serbia

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Slovak Rep.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Czech Rep.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FYR Macedonia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Poland

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Armenia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Montenegro

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Turkey

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ukraine

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Russia




                                  poor 2.50 urban                                                     poor 2.50 rural                                                   percentage urban

     Note: Poor 2.5 urban/rural mean the percentage of people under 2.5 dollars/day poverty line.

36
                                                   CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Despite the steadily upward trend, Ukraine’s GDP remains significantly below pre-1989 levels. Ukraine’s GDP remains at 65
percent of its 1989 level, and its GDP per capita – standing at USD 6,596 (in 2005 PPP dollars) – is still about half of
the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region average as well as the lowest in Europe with the exception of Moldova. Ukraine
has implemented policies and market-oriented reforms aimed at boosting investment, such as Special Economic Zones
(See ANNEX 1 for further information on Special Economic Zones), a flat rate personal income tax, and a simplified
taxation system for SMEs. However, the country still lags behind the scope and degree of reforms made in most other
ECA countries. In particular, Ukraine lags behind peer countries in its transition from a centrally-planned economy to a
market economy, as well as on its institutional and business environment reforms (See Figure 25 below).



Figure 25 – EBRD Transition Index (2012)

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

 1.5

1.0

0.5

  0
        Estonia

                  Hungary

                            Slovak Rep.

                                          Poland

                                                    Latvia

                                                             Lithuania

                                                                         Bulgaria

                                                                                    Croatia

                                                                                              Romania

                                                                                                        FYR Macedonia

                                                                                                                        Slovenia

                                                                                                                                   Turkey

                                                                                                                                            Albania

                                                                                                                                                      Georgia

                                                                                                                                                                Armenia

                                                                                                                                                                          Mongolia

                                                                                                                                                                                     Kyrgyz Rep.

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Moldova

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Montenegro

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ukraine

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Serbia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kazakhstan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Azerbaijan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tajikistan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Uzbekistan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Belarus

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Turkmenistan
Note: The measurement scale of the indicator ranges from 1 to 4+, where 1 represents little or no change from a rigid centrally-planned economy and
4+ represents the standards of an industrialized market economy. The index covers reform efforts in several areas, including small-scale privatization
efforts, enterprise restructuring, price liberalization, and trade and foreign exchange policy.


Source: World Bank, PCN For P148768: Ukraine: Skills For Employment And Productivity




       38 Information obtained from Arias, Omar S., Carolina Sánchez-Páramo, María E. Dávalos, Indhira Santos, Erwin R. Tiongson, Carola Grun,
       Natasha de Andrade Falcão, Gady Saiovici, and Cesar A. Cancho, Back to Work: Growing with Jobs in Europe and Central Asia. Washington, DC:
       World Bank, 2014.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                37
                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Ukraine’s slow structural shift towards services
During the decade leading up to the conflict, the nation’s major industries were consistently mining-related39, industrial40, or agricultural.
Industrial production has maintained its importance in Ukraine, although its share of the economy has decreased since
2002, from 28 to 25 percent (see Figure 26). Mining, food processing, and machine-building are the dominant sub-sectors
of industrial production in Ukraine, which together accounted for almost 60 percent of the total industrial gross value
added (GVA) of the country.41 Among these, coal has played a crucial economic role, and as such has been at the center
of several important economic policies designed to stimulate the mining industry (See Box 5 below). The agricultural
sector also plays an important role in the country’s economic growth as well as its regional development as many small
settlements are dependent on agricultural production and/or processing. However, in the 2002-2010 period it has slightly
decreased from 14 to 12 percent of the total GVA of the country. In 2012, agriculture contributed nine percent of the
Ukraine’s gross GVA and was a significant share of the country’s exports.42 Overall, Ukraine has become one of the top
10 exporters globally for several agricultural commodities such as wheat, corn, sunflower oil, and honey.43


Recently, the services sector has come to lead the country’s economy. The services sector now ranks first among economic
sectors, having increased its share of the GVA from 42 to 45 percent from 2002 to 2010. If financial services were added,
the services sector would have counted 51 percent of GVA in 2010. The financial services sector itself has become a very
important player in the economy; its portion of GVA doubled over the 2002-2010 period from 3 to 6 percent (see Figure
26). Over the same period, the trade sector increased slightly from 12 to 13 percent of the total economy.

Figure 26 – GVA shares: the service and finance sectors now lead Ukraine’s economy, but the
industrial sector still occupies a prominent place
 100%                             Finance                                                         Finance

 90%
                                                                                                  Electricity, gas, water
                                                                                                  Community services, entertainment
 80%
                                  Services                                                        Health care
 70%                                                                                              Education
                                                                                                  Public administration
 60%
                                                                                                  Real estate, engineering, business services
 50%                                                                                              Transport and communications
                                  Trade
                                                                                                  Hotels and restaurants
 40%
                                                                                                  Trade, repairs, personal items
 30%
                                                                                                  Construction
                                  Industry
 20%                                                                                              Manufacturing
                                                                                                  Extractive industries
  10%
                                                                                                  Fishing
                                  Agriculture
  0%                                                                                              Agriculture, hunting and forestry
                       Ukraine 2002                             Ukraine 2010

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department
     39   Coal and electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals.
     40   Machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, and food-processing,
     41  Disaggregation into sub-sectors at the level of large-scale firms is possible using AMADEUS, a comprehensive, pan-European database
     containing financial information on over 11 million public and private companies in 41 European countries. AMADEUS contains data for Ukraine
     for the years 1997-2009,
     42   State Statistics Service, Statistical Yearbook of Ukraine: 2012, 2013,
     43   Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAOSTAT), Website 2012 at http://faostat.fao.org/site/291/default.aspx,
38
                CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



BOX 5 – THE RISE AND FALL OF UKRAINE’S COAL INDUSTRY


In 2013, Ukraine produced 83.7 million tons of coal, ranking 11th in the world. Coal is mainly mined in the Donetsk
and Lviv-Volyn basins. Donetsk Basin, located in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts (in Eastern Ukraine), is the largest
in Ukraine with 92 percent of Ukraine’s coal reserves.
The coal industry was traditionally one of the main industries FIGURE: COAL BASINS IN UKRAINE (2013)
of Ukraine; however, the fall of the Soviet Union, the collapse of
domestic demand, and the recession affecting heavy industry
caused the coal industry to crash in the first half of the 1990s.
Beyond the macro-economic factors, the industry suffered
from inefficiency, low productivity, huge debts, corruption,
and outmoded equipment that the country could not afford to
improve. In addition, the industry was beset by labor strikes due
to unpaid wages and hazardous working conditions. Between
1990 and 1995, coal output decreased by nearly 50 percent to
less than 70 million tons/year. The productivity of Ukrainian
coal miners – about 600 thousand workers were employed
directly in coal extraction in 1995 – was low. Coal exports Source: Eurocoal Website
almost totally halted in 1995, while imported coal and other fuels captured a large share of the Ukrainian market
as a result of high domestic coal prices maintained by the government, inefficient and delayed delivery, and poor
coal quality. In addition, as mining companies – especially in mono-functional towns – continued to provide a wide
range of public services to local communities, including pre-school education, health care, housing, recreation,
these costs further reduced the competitiveness of Ukrainian coal mines.
A first wave of restructuring measures was carried out during 1996-2000 that focused on closing uneconomic
coal mines with the target of 20 mines per year; by 2001, 90 mines had been closed and privatizations of many
others had been undertaken. In 2001, a second wave of measures was adopted which reversed the previous policies
target, and focused rather on supporting the privatization of profitable mines and using subsidies to increase
productivity of others. Consequently, during this period 39 mines were modernized and the largest number of
mine privatizations took place. Under the current Ukrainian Energy Strategy, revised in 2012, coal remains one
of Ukraine’s pre-eminent sources of energy while also maintaining its strategic role as Ukraine’s main safeguard
against excessive reliance on energy imports. Currently the power generation sector consumes about 25 to
30 million tons of coal annually, almost half of all processed coal production. The Ukrainian Energy Strategy
anticipates a significant increase of coal-fired generation going forward, with power sector coal needs more than
doubling by 2030. As approved by the Cabinet of Ministers, the Energy Strategy of Ukraine proposes three stages
of reform and development through 2030: (i) Coal industry reform period with completion of the privatization of
state enterprises, introduction of public-private partnerships, and closing of the most unprofitable mines (2011-
2015); (ii) Modernization of mines by private investors (2015-2020); and (iii) Stable growth of the coal industry
(2020-2030).
In 2012, there were 143 mines in Ukraine. State subsidies for the coal sector in 2013 amounted to 13.3 billion
UAH (approx. 1.7 billion USD), which is comparable to the entire defense budget of the country. Coal industry
has been dramatically affected by the current conflict, since three-quarters of all coal mines are located on the
controlled territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts. Coal production decreased by 20% in 2014 and by 60% in
February 2015 relative to February 2014. No coal subsidies are stipulated in 2015 budget.

Sources: Institute for Economic Research and Policy Consulting, “Ukraine’s Industrial Sector: Analysis and Latest Trends,”
February 2014. Viachaslau Herasimovich, “Ukrainian Coal Mining Sector Review,” CASE Ukraine, September 21, 2008. World
Bank, “Ukraine - Coal industry restructuring sector report,” 1996

                                                                                                                             39
                                                  CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends
   The economy’s shift from heavy industry and mining to services has also been accompanied by a decrease in the role of agriculture.
   From 2002-2010, the contribution of agricultural production to the economy decreased from 14 to 12 percent, with
   declines in grains, sugar beets, sunflower seeds, vegetables, beef, and milk. This decline might reflect the impact of the
   overall shift of the population and economic activities from rural to urban areas (as discussed in Section 2), and from
   less to more productive sectors. However, with the recent decline of the ferrous and energy sectors, agribusiness’ share
   in output as well as exports has increased again.

   The structural transformation can also be observed in the shift in the employment distribution from industry and agriculture to
   services. According to the Background Paper for the World Development Report 2013: Ukraine Case Study: Jobs and
   Demographic Change, 2012. Compared to 2000s, for example, the share of total employment in agriculture fell from 21.6
   percent to 15.3 percent in 2013, while the share employed in services (in the private sector) rose from 25.4 percent to
   34.5 in 2010 (latest data available). Ahead of agriculture but a distant second place to the services sector, the industrial
   sector currently provides 17 percent of employment. The public sector as a whole represents the remaining 20 percent of
   employment44, with public administration jobs making up six percent of the total.

   However, employment has by and large not moved to the high-productivity sectors in Ukraine (Figure 27). While a significant number
   of workers have left the agricultural sector since the early 2000s – a sector with below-average labor productivity –
   they have not always moved to higher-productivity sectors. Instead, many workers have gone into construction (which
   rose from 4.4 percent to 4.6 percent of total employment), transportation (from 6.7 to 6.8 percent) and retail – the
   three sectors with the lowest overall labor productivity. Finance, a high-productivity sector, has strongly increased its
   participation in the GVA as shown in Figure 26. However, despite the doubling of its share of employment (from 0.8
   percent to 1.6 percent), the number of employees in finance remains low compared to traditional sectors. Although other
   highly-productive sectors such as healthcare have expanded in recent years, they also remain a relatively small portion
   of overall employment.

 Figure 27 – The change in the share of employment by sector between 2001 and 2008 in
 percentage points against sectoral productivity in 2001. The economy’s average productivity rate is
 provided for comparison
                                 1.0
High




                                                                                                                                             Mining        Health
                                0.5                                                                                                 Admin.
Labor productivity, 2001




                                                                                                                                Manufact.
                                  0                                                                                          Hotels
                                              Agric.                                                 Electr.                     Finance
                                                                                                                 Educ.         Fishing
                                                                                                                                  Housing
                                -0.5
                                                                                                                                Service

                                -1.0
                                                                                                                                                 Transp.
                                                                                                                                        Retail
                                                                                                                           Constr.
Low




                                -1.5

                                       -0.1                                      -0.05                                      0                                       0.05
                                         Less workers                          Changing employment, 2001-2008                                         More workers

 Note: The trend line is depicted in green.
 Source: World Bank, PCN for P148768: Ukraine: skills for employment and productivity, based on ILO and UN data 45.

                           44   Kupets, Olga, et.al, Background Paper for the World Development Report 2013: Ukraine Case Study: Jobs and Demographic
                           Change, 2012, 2.2. Description of the labor market situation, available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTNWDR2013/
                           Resources/8258024-1320950747192/8260293-1320956712276/8261091-1348683883703/WDR2013_bp_Jobs_And_Demographic_Change.pdf.
                           45   See McMillan and Rodrik (2011) for a methodological discussion on measuring structural transformation
  40
                                                                   CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends
       Among transition economies, Ukraine has the lowest level of labor productivity. In 2011, GDP per person employed was USD
       10,098 in Ukraine (Figure 29)46. This rate is lower than the rate in most countries of the former Soviet Union, including
       Moldova, the Russian Federation, Armenia, and Belarus. In addition to this low baseline level, productivity growth has
       been slow over the years, albeit accelerating in the years before the Global Financial Crisis in 2008 (see Figure 28). The
       reasons for this slow growth in labor productivity are multiple, but a major impediment is the rigidity of the labor market.
       Currently, there is limited mobility for labor migration within the country as well as significant disparity between the
       growing demand for high-skilled service workers in the service sector and the limited number of high-skilled workers.47


     Figure 28 – GDP per person employed in countries of the former Soviet Union 2001 (1990 PPP)

                                     35000
GDP per person employed (1990 PPP)




                                     30000

                                     25000

                                     20000

                                     15000

                                     10000

                                         5000

                                             0
                                                         Ukraine               Moldova             Uzbekistan                 Georgia             Russian Fed.             Armenia               Belarus


      Source: World Development Indicators


     Figure 29 – Trend of GDP per person employed in Ukraine (based on 1990 PPP)

   14000


   12000


 10000


          8000


          6000


           4000


           2000


                                     0
                                          1989

                                                 1990

                                                        1991

                                                               1992

                                                                      1993

                                                                             1994

                                                                                    1995

                                                                                           1996

                                                                                                  1997

                                                                                                         1998

                                                                                                                1999

                                                                                                                       2000

                                                                                                                               2001

                                                                                                                                        2002

                                                                                                                                               2003

                                                                                                                                                      2004

                                                                                                                                                             2005

                                                                                                                                                                    2006

                                                                                                                                                                           2007

                                                                                                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                                                                                         2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2012




                                                                                                   GDP per person employed (constant 1990 PPP $)

      Source: World Development Indicators 2015, The World Bank


                                     46    Measured in constant 1990 purchasing power parity (PPP) prices.
                                     47Arias, O.S., C. Sanchez-Paramo, M.E. Davalos, I. Santos, E.R. Tiongson, C. Gruen, N. de Andrade Falcao, G. Saiovici, and C.A. Cancho, Back to
                                     Work: Growing with Jobs in Europe and Central Asia, Washington, DC: World Bank, 2014.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     41
                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Remittances are increasingly important to the
Ukrainian economy
As a consequence of increased migration outflows (discussed in Section 1), remittances have become a growing element of the
economy. According to World Bank data, remittance inflows to Ukraine increased from USD 829 million to USD 5,607
million between 2006 and 2010 (Figure 30) – a factor of almost seven48. In 2013, the National Bank of Ukraine reported
that the amount of remittances transferred to Ukraine was USD 8.5 billion, representing 4.7 percent of Ukraine’s GDP
for that year49. However, the actual amount of remittances may be twice the size of the reported number50, given that
many Ukrainians opt for unofficial means for transfers. It is estimated that nearly 60 percent of overall remittances are
not transferred through the banking system.


In fact, in 2010, official remittances were nearly equivalent to the amount of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). In addition, they
represent an important source of foreign currency for Ukraine, with 4.67 and 4.43 billion received in 2007 and 2010 in
US Dollars, respectively. Consequently, personal remittances have become a large part of the balance of payments of the
country and helped ameliorate the trade deficit that widened considerably during 2005-2008. The growth of the deficit
was caused by higher prices in imported oil and gas, growth in domestic demand for goods exceeding growth of exports,
and the Global Financial Crisis.


In the short run, remittances are being used fundamentally for domestic consumption. Remittances are an increasingly important
source of extra income for migrants’ families51. A recent study shows that almost all of remittances are used for living
expenses (73 percent) and consumer goods (26 percent), whilst only 3.3 percent is used for setting up a business.
Anecdotic evidence suggests that remittances are often being sunk into real estate investments. However, while in the
short term remittances can stimulate the local economy through consumption, over the longer term they are best used
by nations to enhance investments (i.e. human capital) and thus boost productivity, which is especially needed in Ukraine
given the current demographic trends of population decline and aging.


Over half of all remittance-receiving households in Ukraine are concentrated in the Western region. This region is followed by the
Eastern region, where 20 percent of households receive remittances. The Central and Southern regions have much lower
shares. 56 percent of remittances come from countries in the EU, with Poland and the Czech Republic as the largest
contributors; 40 percent from Russia; and the remaining four percent from a variety of countries. Most remittances flow
to middle class and lower middle class households52 and to urban areas53.




     48 O. Kupets, The Development and the Side Effects of Remittances in the CIS Countries: the Case of Ukraine, CARIM-East Research Report
     2012/02, European University Institute Robert Schuman Center for Advanced Studies, 2012, available at http://www.carim-east.eu/media/
     CARIM-East-2012-02.pdf.
     49   National Bank of Ukraine; see http://www.bank.gov.ua/doccatalog/document?id=80651.
     50   Fedorak, Z., “Nashi sered chuzyh (Ours Among the Aliens),” Economic News, 2007 (in Ukrainian).
     51 International Organization for Migration, Migration in Ukraine: Facts & Figures, September 2011, available at https://www.iom.int/jahia/
     webdav/shared/shared/mainsite/activities/countries/docs/Ukraine/Migration-in-Ukraine-Facts-and-Figures.pdf.
     52   Modular Survey on Labor Migration in Ukraine, 2012, International Labour Organization
     53   Kupets, O., The Development and the Side Effects of Remittances in the CIS Countries: The Case of Ukraine, 2012
42
                               CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



 Figure 30 – Remittances to Ukraine by expatriates, 2001-2013


              10000                                                                                               6



                                                                                                                  5
              8000


                                                                                                                  4
              6000
Million US$




                                                                                                                      % of GDP
                                                                                                                  3

              4000
                                                                                                                  2


              2000
                                                                                                                  1



                 0                                                                                                0
                      2001   2002   2003   2004    2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013



                                    Remittances (Million US$)              Remittances (% of GDP)



 Source: Authors’ analysis based on World Development Indicators Data, The World Bank




 A diverse set of economic regions
 There are important differences in the economic structures of the regions of Ukraine. As previously mentioned, the Eastern region
 is a traditionally industrial area, while the Central region is the country’s leader in the financial, trade, and services
 sectors. The Southern region is also an important industrial center, while the Western region, as it is less urbanized, has
 the greatest concentration of agricultural activities in the country (See Figure 31).


 The evolution of the economic sectors has been different across regions, with the financial sector growing with particular strength
 in the Central region. In the Central region, the financial sector’s share rose from 4 to 8 percent from 2002 to 2010,
 surpassing the share of the industrial sector, which lost three percentage points. The services sector, which is heavily
 concentrated in Kyiv, occupied approximately 50 percent of the central region’s economic activity. The Southern region
 also registered a notable increase in financial services’ share of the economy, rising from 2 to 4 percent. If financial
 services are included with other service industries shares, the service sector accounted for 48 percent of the Southern
 region’s economy, followed by the industrial sector, which decreased from 33 to 31 percent from 2002 to 2010.




                                                                                                                                 43
                                CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



The Eastern region also saw a significant shift towards the financial sector, although industrial activities remain secondary only to
services; meanwhile, the Western region also increased its share of production in the financial and service sectors. Industry’s share of
the Eastern region’s economy fell drastically from 38 to 20 percent over the 2002-2010 period. The decrease was mostly
due to displacement caused by the rise of the financial sector. In the Eastern region, the financial sector’s participation
more than tripled, from 2.5 to almost 6 percent. In the Western region, the agricultural sector decreased five percentage
points from 2002-2010; however, the trade sector grew nearly that amount (3 percentage points) over the period.


Figure 31 – GVA shares: Eastern and Southern regions remain more industrial, the Central region is
predominent in trade, services and financial sector


100%                                                                                                                               Finance

                                                                                                                                   Electricity, gas, water
 90%
                                                                                                                                   Community services, entertainment
 80%
                                                                                                                                   Health care

 70%                                                                                                                               Education

                                                                                                                                   Public administration
 60%
                                                                                                                                   Real estate, engineering, business services

 50%                                                                                                                               Transport and communications

                                                                                                                                   Hotels and restaurants
 40%
                                                                                                                                   Trade, repairs, personal items
 30%
                                                                                                                                   Construction

 20%
                                                                                                                                   Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                   Extractive industries
 10%
                                                                                                                                   Fishing

  0%                                                                                                                               Agriculture, hunting and forestry
         Western 2002




                        Western 2010




                                       Eastern 2002




                                                      Eastern 2010




                                                                     Central 2002




                                                                                    Central 2010




                                                                                                   Southern 2002




                                                                                                                   Southern 2010




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




44
                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Overall, industrial activity continues to be highly concentrated in a few oblasts. The clear leader is Donetsk Oblast, which accounts
for 21 percent of Ukraine’s total industrial output, followed by Dnipropetrovsk with 16 percent. Thus, these two oblasts
account for some 36 percent of Ukraine’s industrial production. Adding Luhansk (8 percent), Zaporizhia (5 percent), and
Kharkiv (5 percent) oblasts, all of which are located in the Eastern region, increases the share to almost 55 percent.
Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts are home to major elements of the metallurgical, chemical, power, and heavy engineering
industries. These two oblasts are the industrial heartland of Ukraine, and were estimated to host about 900 large-scale
industrial plants before the conflict, including 140 collieries, 40 metallurgical plants, and seven thermal power stations,
as well as 177 operations involving hazardous chemicals, including 113 operations using radioactive materials.


A more disaggregated analysis of sectoral employment supports the conclusions previously discussed and sheds light on some
important trends. Box 6 presents the methodology used and Table 7 presents a summarized version of the results. The first
four columns (“Growth 2002-2010”) of the table present the results from a comparison of the regions’ location quotients
in 2000 and 2010 for each sector (see explanation of the term in Box 6. An upward-pointing arrow indicates that the
quotient has grown, i.e., the sector has increased in importance in that region. The following four columns (“Importance
2010”) show whether the quotient in 2010 was above or below 1. A plus mark (+) represents a value that is higher than 1,
while a minus mark (-) represents a value lower than 1. Quotients above 1 indicate that the sector’s share of employment
in the region is greater than the sector’s share of employment at the national level.




   BOX 6 – LOCATION QUOTIENT ESTIMATES OF SECTOR EMPLOYMENT IN THE REGIONS


  Location quotients are used to determine the relative importance of each sector in different regions. The location
  quotient determines whether the fraction of people employed in a sector is larger or smaller relative to the
  national average. If we define rt 
                                    s to be the share of the total workers in region r at time t who work in sector s,

  and define   
                s
                t to be the share of the total national employment at time t that is due to employment in sector s,
  we can write the location quotient for sector s , region r, and time t, LQrts as:

           rt
              s

  LQrt
    s=     ts
  This location quotient reveals the extent to which the share of an industry’s employment in a given location is
  larger or smaller than that sector’s share of overall national employment. For example, if manufacturing employs
  40 percent of the country’s workforce and a location quotient for manufacturing is 1.1, then manufacturing
  employment in that location is 44 percent of that location’s workforce. In general, if LQrt s > 1, then the sector
  s is over-represented in terms of employment relative to the country’s employment in that sector. The opposite
  happens if LQrt s < 1.




                                                                                                                                  45
                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Table 7 – Growth of sector employment in regions and relation of that sector employment against
the sector’s employment nationally using location quotients

                                                      Growth 2000-2010                                Importance 2010
                 Sector
                                            Western   Eastern   Central     Southern    Western      Eastern     Central     Southern

     Agriculture, hunting and fishing,
                                                                                           +           -           -            -
                                              ➪


                                                       ➪

                                                                  ➪


                                                                              ➪
                  forestry


                                                                                           -           +           -            +
                                             ➪


                                                       ➪

                                                                  ➪


                                                                              ➪
                  Industry



                                                                                           +           +           -            -
                                              ➪


                                                       ➪

                                                                  ➪


                                                                              ➪
               Construction

   Trades; repair of motor vehicles,                                                       -
                                                                                                       +           -            +
                                              ➪

                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪


                                                                              ➪
 household goods and personal uses;
       hotels and restaurants
                                                                                           -
         Transport, storage, and
                                                                                                       +           +            +
                                             ➪


                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪

                                                                              ➪
            communication


                                                                                           -           -           +            -
                                             ➪


                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪

                  Finance                                                     ➪

                                                                                           -           -           +            -
                                              ➪

                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪

                                                                              ➪

                Real Estate



                                                                                           -           -           +            -
                                              ➪

                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪

                                                                              ➪



          Public Administration



                                                                                           +           -           +            -
                                              ➪


                                                       ➪

                                                                  ➪


                                                                              ➪




                 Education



                                                                                           +           -           +            -
                                              ➪


                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪

                                                                              ➪




                Health care

     Other community and personal
                                                                                           +           -           -            +
                                             ➪


                                                       ➪


                                                                  ➪


                                                                              ➪




     services; activities in the field of
            culture and sports

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

Figure 32 to Figure 35 below show the three dimensions highlighted by the location quotient derived for employment
activity in each region: change, importance in each region, and size of the market. The vertical axis shows the location
quotient in 2010, the horizontal axis shows the location quotient change in percentage between 2000 and 2010, and the
relative sizes of the bubbles in the plot represent the number of workers in that sector in the region.


Agriculture is still very important in the Western region, although services have been increasing. The sector still plays a leading role
in employment in the Western region, at nearly 25 percent, and a location quotient larger than 1 (1.33). Furthermore,
Figure 32 shows that services, such as public administration, health, and education, are increasingly important. Finance,
one of the leading sectors in other regions, remains lagging in terms of the employment it generates, despite the growth
in output by this sector (Figure 31).




46
                                                   CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



 Figure 32 – Sectoral employment in the Western region by location quotient

                         1.40
                                                                                                                                Agriculture

                         1.30


                         1.20                                              Other                                          Education
                                                                                                                                      Construction
Location Quotient 2010




                         1.10                                                                                               Health


                         1.00
                                                                                                                                              Public admin

                         0.90                                                  Transport
                                                                                                                     Trade and services
                         0.80                              Industry

                                         Finance
                         0.70
                                                                                                             Real Estate

                         0.60


                         0.50
                             -0.16                 -0.11               -0.06                    -0.01                 0.04                    0.09           0.14
                                                              Location Quotient percentage change 2010-2000

 Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

 Figure 33 – Sectoral employment in the Central region by location quotient

                         1.55


                         1.45
                                                                                                                                                 Finance

                         1.35
                                                                                                                     Real Estate
Location Quotient 2010




                         1.25
                                                                                                                          Public admin


                          1.15
                                                              Education              Health
                                           Agriculture
                         1.05
                                                                                                         Transport
                                                            Construction
                         0.95                                                        Other
                                                                                              Trade and services

                         0.85
                                                                                              Industry

                         0.75
                                 -0.15        -0.10            -0.05             0               0.05              0.10               0.15           0.20    0.25
                                                              Location Quotient percentage change 2010-2000

 Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

                                                                                                                                                                    47
                                                   CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends
As shown in Figure 33 the Central region is strongly focused on high skill services, while employment in more traditional
sectors like industry and other services has stayed fairly stable and at levels similar to the country’s average. Finance
and public administration show a strong growth in their quotients, although, as in other regions, there are few people
employed in these sectors. The presence of a strong finance sector, as well as other high output sectors like health, is to
be expected as this region hosts Kiev, Ukraine’s capital and largest city, and one of the few cities growing in the country.
Possibly as a consequence of new migrants, employment in construction is more important here in relative terms than in
the rest of the country. However, it has been decreasing in the region over time. Finally, despite a large number of people
employed in agriculture, the relative importance of this sector is low, and it too has been decreasing over time.


The industrial sector remains predominant in the Eastern region (Figure 34); however, other high skill sectors, such
as trades and services, have not grown much in relative terms despite being the second largest sector in terms of
employment. This region has slowly evolved, but the industrial sector remains at the core of its economic activity. For
instance, the coal industry, despite having gone through severe crises, still makes up a large portion of the production
portfolio of the region (see Box 5 above). As the most urbanized region in the country (see Section 2: Urbanization and
the Urban System above), it is not surprising that trade and services, as well as construction, occupy an important
place in employment. Yet trades and services have not been growing, while construction and agriculture have seen
increases. Similarly, high skill sectors, like public administration and finance, have been decreasing and occupy low levels
of importance relative to the rest of the country.


The industrial sector also plays a key role in the Southern region (Figure 35), as does the trades and services. The
Trades and Services sector is gaining in importance, particularly in the area of tourism services. Manufacturing and
manufacturing-related activities like transportation and storage, water supply, and management are also playing an
increasing role. Growth in this region is the most concentrated of all the regions as only two main sectors are growing in
importance according to the location quotients. Other high skill sectors, like finance and public administration, remain
small and are decreasing. This may be an indication that the region’s economy has been having difficulties in its evolution
into a services-oriented economy.

Figure 34 – Sectoral employment in the Eastern region by location quotient

                              1.50

                                                                                                                        Industry
                              1.40


                              1.30


                              1.20
     Location Quotient 2010




                                                                                 Trade and services
                              1.10
                                                                                                      Transport
                                                                                                                              Construction
                              1.00

                                                                                  Real Estate               Health
                              0.90
                                                                Other
                                                                                                           Education
                              0.80
                                             Public admin               Finance

                              0.70
                                                                                                                                                    Agriculture
                              0.60


                              0.50
                                     -0.15              -0.10            -0.05                  0                      0.05                  0.10                 0.15
                                                                Location Quotient percentage change 2010-2000

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

48
                                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends
Figure 35 – Sectoral employment in the Southern region by location quotient


                           1.15



                           1.10
                                                               Transport

                                                                                                                        Trade and services
  Location Quotient 2010




                           1.05



                                                 Real Estate                   Health                                   Other
                           1.00

                                                                                                             Industry
                                           Public admin
                                                                                                Education
                           0.95


                                                                                  Agriculture
                                                   Finance
                           0.90
                                                        Construction


                           0.85
                                  -0.15         -0.10                  -0.05             0                  0.05        0.10                 0.15
                                                          Location Quotient percentage change 2010-2000

Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




Key messages and implications for further policy
and analytical work
Overall, Ukraine presents some indicators (GDP, GDP per capita, and poverty) that show steady progress over the last
decade. However, continued progress in these areas is highly uncertain due to (i) the observed, negative population trends;
(ii) the current conflict; and (iii) the slow progress that Ukraine has made, in terms of institutional adaptation and
reforms, in moving toward a market-oriented system.

It is not uncommon that a declining population initially has a positive impact on economic indicators, but its effect on
economic performance over the long run is uncertain. The higher GDP per capita that is observed following population
decline is generally linked to the fact that Capital is durable. Such economies may experience an increase in their capital
per worker ratio, which may render each inhabitant marginally more productive. Additionally, decreasing population
causes an initial shortage of labor, increasing relative demand for it, and potentially resulting in a reduced unemployment
rate as well as higher wages. These dynamics have been observed in countries that have experienced sharp population
decline such as Japan54. The negative effects of population decline appear later, and are generally visible in the decline
of demand for consumption. The effects over time of diminished demand as well as expectations of further population
decline reduce incentives for investment and affect GDP growth negatively55.



     54 OECD, “Regional factors: Population and GDP per capita,” in OECD Regions at a Glance 2009, OECD Publishing, 2009, available at http://
     dx.doi.org/10.1787/reg_glance-2009-26-en.
     55 Markus Brückner and Hannes Schwandt, Income and Population Growth: Discussion Paper No. 7422, Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor,

     May 2013, available at http://ftp.iza.org/dp7422.pdf.
                                                                                                                                                    49
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Additionally, fixed costs in the provision of services also become more burdensome as they are shared among fewer
people. Overall, given the demographic trends, the observed increase in GDP per capita in Ukraine should be viewed with
cautious optimism; if appropriate measures are not adopted, the increase might not continue over the mid-term or longer
term.

The current conflict can bring a halt in the steady progress achieved in economic and poverty indicators over the
last decade. From destruction of capital to institutional destabilization, the effects of the current conflict could cause
lasting damage to economic activity. Furthermore, the conflict pushes people from unsafe areas, causing large costs to
households and disrupting economic activity. Unless these movements somehow allocate households to more productive
areas that are also well-prepared to receive them, it is very likely that the costs for these displaced households will be
high and the adaptation process will be long.

Another red flag is the slow adaptation of Ukraine’s firms and institutions to a market economy system. Compared
to other countries in the region, Ukraine lags behind in its transition from a centrally-planned economy to a market
economy, as well as on its institutional and business environment reforms (for instance, in measures of the ease of doing
business, Ukraine ranks 96th worldwide and 22nd in the ECA region56). The EBRD transition index finds Ukraine doing
poorly in several areas, including small-scale privatization efforts, enterprise restructuring, price liberalization, and trade
and foreign exchange policy. Unless changes are made in these spheres, continued progress will be threatened.

In terms of structural transformation of the economy, Ukraine has moved slowly from an industrial enterprise-centered
economy to a services-centered economy, with a finance sector at the forefront of this change. Services have grown
significantly in a number of areas, including retail, property, and information and communications technology (ICT).
However, progress has been slow and has not occurred uniformly across the regions. Industry remains very important in
the Southern and Eastern regions, while the Western region has seen a slow increase in the importance of services as the
agriculture sector’s dominance wanes. Finance’s share of national Gross Value Added (GVA) has nearly doubled, but its
share of the labor market is still minor and should not be expected to replace jobs in traditional sector. Overall services
grew 40 percent from 2002-2010. Ukraine will need to increase the skills of its labor force to take advantage of this
growing economic sector. Information-based sectors could have a wider employment potential in the country.

International migration has been an important phenomenon that has affected not only population but also economic
dynamics. Resources provided by remittances are large in magnitude, but their effects appear most likely beneficial
only in the short term. Remittances provide short-term benefit by alleviating income problems of local consumers.
However, data indicate that they are mainly used for consumption and not for long-term investments in human capital or
entrepreneurship activities. Additionally, they can have medium- and long-term negative consequences, such as exchange
rate appreciation and resultant negative effects on exports; linking the local economy to negative global shocks; and in
some cases, hysteresis57, as some people may forego work in favor of relying on remittances and lose their labor skills
over time.

As discussed in the previous sections, going forward, the country should aim at increasing labor mobility and accelerate
institutional and business environment reforms. Facilitating increased labor mobility could further increase the gains
from rising productive sectors (finance, information and communication technologies, education, and medicine). This will
be especially beneficial if it is focused on facilitating population movements from low productivity rural sectors to high
productivity urban sectors, or from low productivity to high productivity urban areas.




     56 World Bank Group, Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency, available at http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/
     ukraine/. Only Kiev is considered.
     57 Fajnzylber, P., and J. Humberto Lopez, eds., Remittances and Development: Lessons from Latin America, Washington, DC: The World Bank,
     2008, available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/Resources/Remittances_and_Development_Report.pdf
50
                         CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends




IV. Cities of Ukraine: Engines Of Economic Growth
The roles of cities in economic growth
Cities, under the right conditions, can be true engines of economic growth. Cities provide a common space for collaborations
and interaction for both firms and workers, providing an essential stage for agglomeration economies to occur through
better sharing, matching and learning mechanisms58. Agglomeration economies refer to the benefits of locating close
together; this applies to both firms and workers. As firms cluster together, they broaden the market for their suppliers.
With more buyers, suppliers’ average cost of production goes down and this leads to a drop in prices as well. Sharing
increases profits through this lowering of costs as well as through allowing suppliers to provide highly-specialized goods59.
Another dynamic of larger market scale brought by agglomeration is an increase of the matching probability between
demand and supply. For example, workers more easily find suitable jobs and firms more easily find the supplies they
need. Finally, as both firms and workers aggregate in cities, they learn from each other more efficiently simply by their
proximity and interactions. This learning channel yields increased productivity, especially in sectors like modern industry
and services, in which high skills and innovation are more important. The learning mechanism not only affects actors in
the same industry or sector (localization economies)60, but also spurs innovation across sectors and between workers
with different skills (urbanization economies). Also, spatial concentration of activities is conductive to the spillover of
knowledge and innovations across industries and sectors of the economy.

These benefits can spread to the country as a whole if cities are positioned to take advantage of a regional network, or,
if they engage with global system of cities61, and they can offer a gateway to the global economy for the entire national
economy. Concentrations of offices of global companies, financial market institutions, large-scale infrastructure, and
world-class education and cultural institutions enable cities to attract global partners and global markets and potentially
bring benefits to their metropolitan areas, broader region, and the entire country.

The positive impact of agglomeration economies on economic growth may be undercut by congestion costs such as
traffic congestion and air pollution, which, if growth is not properly managed, can increase as cities become larger and
denser. However, with sustainable management, agglomeration economies exceed congestion costs, and the overall net
effect is an increase in productivity. To achieve increased productivity, the right mix of good governance, a beneficial
business climate, and an efficient provision of public goods, usually in the form of public services and infrastructure62, is
necessary.

Understanding the evolution of a country’s system of cities, as well as their role in economic growth, is fundamental for
sound policy formulation. This section will explore the role of cities in Ukraine through two dimensions: first, by looking
at the aggregate contribution of the urban sector to Ukraine’s economy, second, by making a city-level assessment of
the demographic, economic, and spatial evolution of Ukrainian cities over the past two decades. For the first assessment,


   58 Duranton, et. al., provide a review of the formal treatment of these ideas in urban economics (Duranton, G., and D. Puga, “Micro-Foundations
   of Urban Agglomeration Economies,” in Henderson, J. Vernon, and Jacque Thisse, eds., Handbook of Urban and Regional Economies, Vol. 4,
   Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004). These ideas have been widely studied since their initial articulation by Marshall (Marshall, A., Principles of
   Economics, London: Mac-Millan, 1890).
   59   World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography. (2009).
   60 Jacobs, J., The Economy of Cities, New York: Vintage, 1970, and McCann, P., Urban and Regional Economics, Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University
   Press, 2001.
   61   For example, per the Globalization and World Cities Research Network Kyiv is classified as a Beta world city..
   62 This not only ensures taking full advantage of agglomeration, but also that benefits of rapid urbanization are more widely shared. Kuncoro,
   Ari, “Spatial Agglomeration, Site Productivity and Local Governance: Indonesian Experience from 1980 to 2003,” In Yukon Huang and Alessandro
   Magnoli Bocchi, eds., Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia, Washington, DC: World Bank, (EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009),
   forthcoming.
                                                                                                                                                     51
                            CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


     different aspects of urban and rural economic activity will be contrasted using both aggregated regional data and firm-
     level data. For the second, night light (NLs) data will be used to track trends in economic activity at the city level, both
     spatially (i.e., the evolution of the night lights footprint and light intensity) and through time by drawing on demographic
     data analyzed in Section 2. The use of NLs as a proxy for economic activity is based on empirical evidence that they are
     correlated with economic activity (Henderson, et. al., 2009). On this basis, two city typologies are developed to assess
     how cities evolved in economic, demographic, and spatial terms over the past two decades. The first city typology
     compares Ukraine’s cities against a benchmark that defines urban as those cities emitting NLs of intensities higher than
     urban threshold, which in the case of Ukraine is 19.563. This analysis identifies settlements that grew enough in light
     intensity over the period to be considered to have met the urban threshold. Others, by contrast, are shrinking to the point
     that they are no longer considered urban by the standard of NLs. The second typology focuses on settlements that met
     this urban threshold over two periods of time. This typology analyzes cities across two dimensions: changes in urban
     footprint (defined by NLs), and changes in light intensity. Finally, these two typologies are triangulated with geographic
     and demographic data to further illuminate the evolution of the urban system in Ukraine and its main challenges.




     Urban economic activity in Ukraine
     In Ukraine, the predominant share of economic activity is concentrated in urban areas, significantly exceeding the share of
     rural areas. Figure 36 shows how urban production in Ukraine is much higher than rural production measured by GVA
     over the period 2002-2010. Regional differences can also be observed. The Central region has the highest production for
     both rural and urban areas64. This region, in which Kyiv plays a leading role, has the greatest urban GVA in the country65,
     followed by the Southern and Eastern regions, respectively. As expected, the Western region ranks last in terms of urban
     production. The ranking is similar for rural GVA, except for the period 2002 to 2004, where the rural production in the
     Eastern region was higher than in the Southern region.

     Urban sectors are much more productive than rural sectors. As discussed in Section 1, Ukraine’s population has decreased
     overall, but the decline has been sharper in rural areas than in urban areas. This pattern, together with internal migration
     to large urban areas, has increased the share of the population that resides in cities. If agglomeration economies discussed
     above were not present (or were offset by congestion costs), labor productivity measured in GVA ratios for urban and
     rural sectors would closely follow urban-rural population ratios as shown in Figure 37. However, urban production grew,
     relative to rural production, at a much faster rate than urbanization during the period 2002-2010.


        63  For Ukraine, this threshold was determined to be 20.94 DN. Intensity of night-time light here is measured on a “Digital Number” (or DN)
        scale This threshold has been selected by calibrating the lights data against higher resolution land use cover maps for the region – in particular,
        the European Space Agency’s GlobCover 2009 map and the MODIS Collection 5 Land Cover Type map. See the SAR Urbanization Flagship for
        a discussion of the data. It is important to note that this differs from the product that forms the basis of Henderson et al.’s research (See
        Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space, American Economic Review ,102), as well as that used by most other researchers, in that it
        does not suffer from the saturation problem.
        64 For rural production, this is due mainly to climate conditions and a larger concentration of the most fertile black soils, especially compared

        to the Eastern and Southern regions.
        65 Gross Value Added (GVA) data by sector, as reported by the State Statistics Service of Ukraine, is used to measure urban production for the
        years 2002-2010. The sectors can be divided into those that are typically urban and those that are typically rural according to the following
        classifications: Agriculture, Hunting, and Forestry, and Fishing are elements of rural production, and Manufacturing, Construction, Trades,
        Repairs, Personal Products, Hotels and Restaurants, Mining, Transport and Communications, Real Estate, Engineering, Business Services,
        Public Administration, Education, Health Care, Community Services, Entertainment, Electricity, Gas, Water, and Finance are elements of urban
        production. These groupings are a simplification of the urban and rural divide, which is more complex. For example, the legal residence of
        businesses may be located in cities, where they report their employment and overall economic production, although their main economic activity
        occurs in rural areas. The city of Kyiv is emblematic of this; as a region, it is one of the largest exporters of agrarian products in Ukraine and
        hosts the headquarters of most of the large agro-holdings groups. See for example the case study for the grain sector in The EBRD’s Experience
        with Policy Dialogue in Ukraine (2014).
52
                                                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


    Figure 36 – Ukraine’s urban GVA (upper graph) is much greater than its rural GVA (lower)*
                                                                            Urban GVA

                                       250
Real local currency (000s million)




                                       200



                                       150



                                       100



                                        50



                                        0

                                             2002         2004                2006            2008       2010




                                                                            Rural GVA
                                        50
  Real local currency (000s million)




                                        40




                                        30




                                        20




                                        10


                                             2002         2004                2006           2008       2010


                                                                  Western               Eastern
                                                                  Central               Southern
                                                                  Ukraine


     *The scale of the y-axis differs between graphs for purposes of illustration

     Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

        In fact, urban production was between four and five times higher than rural production in Ukraine. This ratio has
        increased steadily in the last decade, except for a mild decline between 2007 and 2009. By contrast, the dotted lines
        below, representing the ratio between urban and rural population in each of the regions, shows that urban population is
        about twice the size of the rural population and its increase has been much less steep.
                                                                                                                                  53
                               CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

     Figure 37 – Urban-rural GVA ratios are much greater than urban-rural population ratios, indicating
     much higher productivity in the urban sector

                                                  Urban and Rural Production vs Urban and Rural Population
     7

     6

     5

     4

     3

     2

     1

     0
         2002 Ukraine     2010 Ukraine   2002 Southern   2010 Southern   2002 Central     2010 Central   2002 Eastern   2010 Eastern   2002 Western   2010 Western

                                           Urban GVA/Rural GVA                          Urban Population/Rural Population

     Source: Ukraine Statistics Department

     Figure 37 also shows that the impact of urban areas in production differed significantly between regions during 2002-
     2010, with the Central region showing the highest ratio of urban to rural production and the Western showing the
     lowest. Production in the Central region was predominantly urban relative to the other regions. In 2008, for instance, the
     region’s urban production was almost eight times as great as its rural production. Urban population was nearly twice
     that of rural population in this region, but was significantly lower than the ratio of production and much more stable
     than other regions. By contrast, the Western region had the lowest urban production relative to its rural production in
     the period. Still, even in this relatively more rural region, urban production was not only more important than rural (note
     the line above is >1), but the ratio of urban to rural production was also higher than the urban to rural population ratio.
     This dynamic was found in all regions, except for the Eastern region. The Eastern region had the highest urban to rural
     population rates – higher even than the urban to rural GVA ratios – suggesting that urban productivity in this region was
     lower than in the other regions.


     Firm-level data66 shows how the largest cities in Ukraine acted as magnets for growth, continuing to attract workers and
     firms. Table 8 shows the cities67 with the greatest concentration of firms. The first noticeable pattern is that the largest
     cities held the largest number of firms. This happened not only because they offered the largest markets, but also
     because of the location and urbanization economies mentioned earlier. The table also shows that the ranking of cities
     in terms of the number of firms they host is quite stable; among the largest 15 cities in 2000, all but one ranked in the
     top 15 locations in 2008. This is consistent with the idea of agglomeration economies, as the largest cities provided
     a better economic environment for firms. There are several Western cities, such as Ivano-Frankivsk, that ranked much
     higher in the number of firms than their population ranking would suggest. This would suggest that these cities might
     have possessed characteristics that made them attractive for firms to locate there68. This trend could be due to the
     convenient location for new firms of the Western region in terms of its proximity to the large market of Western Europe.
     By contrast, the opposite reasoning could be applied to those cities whose rank in number of firms was lower than their
     population ranking; in relative terms, they may have been less attractive for firms than their population would suggest.


         66  Firm-level data was obtained from AMADEUS, a large-scale, firm-level survey. AMADEUS is a comprehensive, pan-European database
         containing financial information on over 11 million public and private companies in 41 European countries. There is data for a representative
         sample of firms in Ukraine for the years 1997-2009 in an unbalanced panel.
         67   These correspond to individual cities and not to agglomerations.
         68 In particular, Ivano-Frankisk presented one of the most intense growth rates, 122 percent over the period, which suggests that economic
         activity was very robust and that firms located there were of significant size. Similarly, Lviv presented exceptional growth of nearly 90 percent.
54
                      CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

Table 8 – 20 cities with the highest number of firms in 2000 and 2008

                                                             Population
                                                                                  Population            Firm Ranking          Firm Ranking
        Region                       CITY                      (2013
                                                                                Ranking (2013)             in 2000               in 2008
                                                             estimated)

        Central                      Kyiv                    2,757,900                  1                     1                     1

        Eastern                    Kharkiv                    1,451,028                 2                     2                     2

        Western                      Lviv                     730,272                   7                     3                     6

        Eastern                    Donetsk                     953,217                  5                     4                     5

        Southern                    Odesa                     1,014,852                 3                     5                     4

        Southern               Dnipropetrovsk                 997,754                   4                     6                     3

        Southern                Zaporizhzhya                   770,672                  6                     7                     7

        Southern                   Mikolaiv                   496,188                   9                     8                     9

        Southern                  Simferopol                  337,285                   15                    9                     8

        Eastern                    Lugansk                    425,848                   11                    10                    10

        Central                   Vinnitsya                    371,698                  12                    11                    13

        Southern                  Kriviy Rig                  656,478                   8                     12                    12

        Western                Ivano-Frankivsk                226,018                  28                     13                    17

        Southern                   Kherson                    299,052                   16                    14                    14

        Central                    Poltava                    296,852                   17                    15                    11

        Western                     Rivne                     250,333                  25                     16                    23

        Central                      Sumi                      269,177                  21                    17                    15

        Western                   Chernivtsi                  258,842                   23                    18                    26

        Western                 Chmelnitskiy                  264,988                   22                    19                    22

        Eastern                    Mariupol                    461,810                  10                    20                    21

Source: AMADEUS data

This firm-level survey also suggests that economies of scale, urbanization economies, and agglomeration economies play
important roles in the economic performance of firms in cities in Ukraine. Location economies, although weaker, are also
supported by the data. The upper left panel of Figure 38 shows a positive relationship between the productivity of firms
and the number of employees in the firm. This is a sign of (internal) economies of scale, which arise from the ability of
larger firms and plants to better exploit fixed costs69. Urbanization economies arise from the dynamics of a large number
of different industries and firms located in the same place. The upper right panel of Figure 38 suggests that there is

   69 According to the World Development Report 2009, internal economies of scale come mainly from technological factors as well as pecuniary
   (being able to purchase inputs at discount values for example).
                                                                                                                                                55
                                                                CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

            indeed a positive relationship between the number of firms in a city and a firm’s profits per employee70. Urbanization
            economies highlight the importance of the sharing mechanism and how knowledge generated in one industry goes beyond
            it to improve the performance of firms in other industries as well. The lower right panel shows the relationship between
            the average profit per employee of firms and their average industry size71. The relationship is weaker than the previous
            ones, but still positive, suggesting the presence of localization economies, which arise from a high number of firms in
            the same industry. Finally, the lower left panel shows a positive relationship between the population density of the city
            and firms’ average profit per employee. This is a sign of overall agglomeration economies mentioned previously. These
            agglomeration economies most likely come from a combination of the analyzed localization economies, urbanization
            economies, and internal economies of scale. These effects have been assessed in the economics literature as potentially
            important determinants of development72.

            Figure 38 – The performance of firms based on firm, city, and industry characteristics73
                                                              Economies of Scale (2000-2008)                                                                    Urbanization Economies (2000-2008)
                                           50                                                                                                       50
     Average profit per employee (000s)




                                           40                                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                       Profit per employee (000s)
                                           30                                                                                                       30

                                           20                                                                                                       20

                                           10                                                                                                        10

                                               0                                                                                                     0

                                          -10                                                                                                       -10

                                          -20                                                                                                       -20
                                                   0   10     20       30        40      50       60     70      80                                       0   1000   2000      3000     4000       5000   6000   7000
                                                                       Firm number of employees                                                                             Number of firms in city


                                                                     Agglomeration Economies                                                                                Location Economies
                                           50                                                                                                        55

                                           40
                                                                                                                                                     45
      Profit per employee (000s)




                                                                                                                       Profit per employee (000s)




                                           30
                                                                                                                                                     35
                                           20
                                                                                                                                                     25
                                           10

                                               0                                                                                                     15

                                          -10                                                                                                         5

                                          -20                                                                                                        -5
                                                   0   1000   2000     3000      4000    5000     6000   7000   8000
                                                                                                                                                     30000              40000                    50000           60000
                                                                            Population density                                                                                   Industry size

          Source: Data from AMADEUS on Ukraine firms from 2000-2008



                                          70   Profits per employee reported throughout Figure 39 are city-wide averages at the firm level.
                                          71 AMADEUS calculates industry size using both the total number of employees and the size of firms assets in the same industry at the
                                          national level. This is an approximation to a measurement of localization economies, which would optimally show the size of the industry in a
                                          single location. Due to data limitations, we have only industry size at the national level.
                                          72 Bazoglu, Nefise. 2008. Cities in Transition: Demographics and the Development of Cities. Philadelphia: Pennsylvania State University, and
                                          Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review 86 (1): 54–70.
                                          73 The figures used are derived from averages at the city level using the 50 cities with the largest number of observations, as these provide the
                                          least statistical ‘noise’ and greatest reliability
56
                       CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Analysis of dynamics of economic growth using
night lights data
Urban production has played a fundamental role in the recent economic growth of Ukraine, but from aggregate data
it is difficult to assess how particular cities have performed. No country has been able to achieve prosperity without
both strong urbanization and strong urban economic growth. In Ukraine, this process has not been uniform, and much
economic activity has usually been concentrated in a small number of cities. However, measuring economic activities at
the city level in Ukraine has been challenging, as city level economic activity data has rarely been available. Along with
demographic indicators, this section will use the empirical regularity that there is a strong correlation between emitted
night lights and the economic activity of an urban location in order to illustrate trends about economic production by
Ukrainian cities (and their night lights footprint)74. This is especially useful since no official city-level GDP data is available
for all cities. Using a subset of 31 cities for which the McKinsey Global Institute reports estimated GDP, the positive
correlation between GDP and night lights for the city is evident (Figure 39). Annex III provides more details on the utility
of using this methodology in the Ukrainian context, while Annex IV presents an additional growth robustness analysis
with variations based on the urban threshold.


Night lights data possess useful analytical characteristics related to their availability, their granularity, and the fact that they
provide information on brightness and location dimensions. The night lights (NLs) data used covers the 1996-2010 period
and is based on spatial observations of Ukrainian cities and the lights they emitted at night. Light is determined to be
urban when it goes beyond a brightness threshold, and this is used to determine urban footprints.

Figure 39 – There is a strong positive correlation between urban GDP and night lights




Source: McKinsey Global Institute (city GDP data) and author’s calculations.

   74  Henderson, et al. (2012) (Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space, American Economic Review, 102) develops a theoretical model that
   suggests an optimal way to combine night lights data and available GDP data. It is based on the idea that both pieces of information can exhibit
   measurement error, but that there is no reason to assume these errors will be correlated with each other. Henderson, et al. (2011) applies this
   to a sample of 170 countries, while Henderson, et al., (2012) (A Bright Idea for Measuring Economic Growth, American Economic Review: Papers
   & Proceedings, 101) further develops the approach by providing additional examples of how night lights readings react to documented economic
   and social phenomena, and suggests a model that focuses on night lights density. Based on this, Henderson, et al. argues that the night lights
   data can be used to proxy GDP growth in settings where GDP data is either of poor quality or entirely unavailable. This approach has been
   recently expanded upon in several other papers that confirm the positive relationship between observed night lights and economic activity (See
   Alder, 2013; Baum-Snow and Turner, 2012; Baum-Snow, Brandt, Henderson, Turner and Zhang, 2013; Pinkovskiy, 2013; and Storeygard, 2013).


                                                                                                                                                      57
                                             CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

     Figure 40 – Night lights and urban footprints in Ukraine 1996 and 2010
          Urban Footprint 1996
                                                                                                BELARUS

                                                                                                                         Chernihiv
                                                                                                                         Chernihiv                                                     RUSSIAN FEDERATION
                                                                                                                     !
           POLAND
                                                                                                                                                           Sumy
                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                       Kovel'
                                                       Kovel' Rivne
                                                   !          Rivne
                                                                !
                                                                                                              Kyiv
                                                                                                              Kyiv
                                                                                              Zhytomyra   !
                                                                                              Zhytomyra
                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                   Kharkiv
                                                                                                                                                                                   Kharkiv
                                 L'viv
                                 L'viv                                                                                                                                         !
                             !
                                                           Ternopil'
                                                           Ternopil'                                                                                           Poltava
                                                                                                                                                               Poltava
                                                       !                   Khmel'nyts'kyz
                                                                           Khmel'nyts'kyz                                         Cherkasy
                                                                                                                                  Cherkasy                 !
                                                                       !                                                      !
                                                                                        Vinnytsya
                                                                                        Vinnytsya
                                                                                      !
                                         Ivano-frankivs'k
                                          Ivano-frankivs'k
                                     !
                Uzhhorod
                Uzhhorod
            !                                                                                                                         Kirovohrad
                                                                                                                                      Kirovohrad                                                            !
                                                                                                                                  !                                 Dnipropetrovs'k
                                                                                                                                                                    Dnipropetrovs'k                             Luhans'k
                                                                Chernivtsi
                                                                Chernivtsi                                                                                          !
                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Donets'k
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Donets'k
     HUNGARY                                                                                                                                                            Zaporiyhzhya
                                                                                                                                                                        Zaporiyhzhya         !
                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                   MOLDOVA
                                                                                                                                 Mykolayiv
                                                                                                                                 Mykolayiv
                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                          Odesa
                                                                                                                                           Kherson
                                                                                                                                           Kherson
                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                              !



                                 ROMANIA



                                                                                                                                                         Simferopol'
                                                                                                                                                         Simferopol'
                                                                                                                                                     !




     0          125        250               375                500
                                                                  Kilometers




                                                                                                BELARUS

                                                                                                                         Chernihiv
                                                                                                                         Chernihiv                                                     RUSSIAN FEDERATION
           POLAND
                                                                                                                                                           Sumy
                                                     Kovel'
                                                     Kovel' Rivne
                                                   !        Rivne
                                                                 !
                                                                                                              Kyiv
                                                                                              Zhytomyra
                                                                                              Zhytomyra
                                                                                                                                                                                   Kharkiv
                                 L'viv
                                                           Ternopil'
                                                           Ternopil'                                                                                           Poltava
                                                                                                                                                               Poltava
                                                                           Khmel'nyts'kyz
                                                                           Khmel'nyts'kyz                                         Cherkasy
                                                                                                                                  Cherkasy
                                                                                        Vinnytsya
                                         Ivano-frankivs'k
                                         Ivano-frankivs'k
                                         !
                Uzhhorod
                                                                                                                                      Kirovohrad
                                                                                                                                                                        Dnipropetrovs'k                         Luhans'k
                                                                Chernivtsi
                                                                Chernivtsi
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Donets'k
      HUNGARY                                                                                                                                                           Zaporiyhzhya



                                                                                    MOLDOVA
                                                                                                                                 Mykolayiv

                                                                                                          Odesa
                                                                                                                                           Kherson
                                                                                                                                           Kherson



                                 ROMANIA



                                                                                                                                                         Simferopol'
                                                                                                                                                         Simferopol'




      0         125        250               375                500
                                                                  Kilometers

     Source: McKinsey Global Institute (city GDP data) and author’s calculations.
58
                     CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

NLs measurements are available at a very fine scale in two dimensions: light intensity and location of that intensity. As
a consequence, they are very useful in analyzing the evolution of economic activity over time and space. Additionally, as
indicated in Section 2, as individual cities in close proximity grow towards each other to constitute an agglomeration,
their NLs footprints can likewise merge and reflect that agglomeration. NLs analysis treats agglomerations as a single
city or urban entity. In 2010 Ukraine had 23 agglomerations based on the NLs definition.

Visual analysis of NLs urban footprints at the national level provides insights about the location of major urban centers
and their dynamics over time. Figure 40 shows the urban footprints detected by NLs in 1996 and 2000 in Ukraine. Three
patterns can be observed: (i) a strong concentration of the urban centers in the East of the country; (ii) the growing and
expanding footprint of the Kyiv agglomeration; and (iii) a growth in the number of urban areas – measured by NLs – in
the West and a decline in the East. This tracks with the demographic analysis presented in Section 2 showing a sharp
population decline of cities located in the Eastern region and a population increase in the concentration of cities around
Kyiv and in the Western Region.

A visual representation of compound growth of NLs suggests an important shift from the Eastern and Southern Regions
towards the Western and Central Regions.75 Figure 41 shows the percentage growth of night lights in the Ukrainian
territory between 1996 and 2010. This shift of lights from East to West might have multiple causes. First, as discussed
in Sections 1 and 2, two decades ago, the East of the country presented high urbanization levels (more than 70 percent),
as well as a concentration of most of the country’s industry. By contrast, the West presented lower urbanization levels
(around 50 percent) and remained a predominantly rural region. These characteristics, especially in the West, have been
changing. Both the Western and the Central region have had Ukraine’s greatest urbanization rates. This does not mean
that they are currently more urbanized than the Eastern and Southern regions in absolute terms; rather, while starting
at lower urbanization levels, their rates of urbanization have been greater. Second, the rural population has migrated
its economic activity from rural to urban at greater rates in the Western and Central regions too (see Section 3). As a
result, the relative growth in urban production has been much greater, which could explain, at least partially, the striking
change observed in Figure 41.

Another important aspect of this observed shift is the heterogeneous relationship found between night lights levels and
economic activity across regions. The second column of Table 4 of Annex III shows that, when elasticity is allowed to
vary across regions76, it is significantly different between them. This shows that, all else being equal, the region where a
city is located affects the relationship of NLs to economic activity (i.e., how much light a city emits per unit of economic
activity). For example, a city in a region with a higher NLs GVA elasticity will exhibit higher growth in GVA for a given
growth in NLs compared to a city in a region with lower NLs GVA elasticity. The regional differences in NLs and GVA
elasticity can be explained by differences in sector composition, population and production density, and policies related
to energy. Regional differences also show up when considering only urban economic activity and lights.

The elasticity between NLs and economic activity was largest for the Eastern and Southern regions77, i.e., for similar growth
in NLs levels, economic activity was higher in the East and South. The opposite was the case for the West and Central
regions; for these regions, an additional unit of light yielded fewer units of economic activity. This explains statistically
why the higher compound growth in lights in these two regions (see Figure 41) was not necessarily accompanied by
higher growth in economic activity. As discussed previously, one economic reason for this heterogeneity is likely due to
the differences in the initial distribution of sectors (the East being initially much more urban and industrial while Central
region being more service-oriented).

Observing the evolution of economic activity at the oblast level also sheds some light on how the sector and urban
population distribution shifts might have affected the NLs trend from East to West observed in Figure 42 (left panel).
This figure shows that the urban production, as measured in GVA, is still concentrated largely in the oblasts of the
Eastern region. However, over the period 2002-2010, growth is clearly evident in the oblasts of the Western and Central


   75 Notice that in Figure 42 each pixel shows compound percentage growth relative to an initial condition, rather than absolute growth or
   absolute levels.
                                                                                                                                              59
                             CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


     Figure 41 – Compound growth/decline in NLs in Ukraine between 1996 and 2010

     Compound Growth Rate, 1996-2010




     regions (Figure 42 right panel). At the same time, urbanization rates showed steady growth since 1989 in the Central
     and Western regions (See Figure 43). Urban production as a measure of GVA is often higher than rural production. Thus,
     urbanization may bring an increase in production. Again, despite the fact that oblasts showing higher labor productivity
     are concentrated in the Eastern part of the country(Figure 42, left panel), as captured by real GVA per worker, Central
     and Western regions have shown the greatest increases (Figure 44, right panel). Overall, these data suggest that the East
     to West trend observed in Figure 44 is mainly dynamic (corresponds to changes over time), and that these dynamics
     might be driven by an increasingly important urban sector in the West and Central regions. Still, the West has quite a
     ways to go before it reaches the East’s levels of production and urbanization.




        76 Bickenbach, et. al. (2013) (Night Lights and Regional GDP, Kiel Institute for the World Economy Working Papers) uses data on Brazil,

        India, United States and some countries in Western Europe to show that the relationship between economic activity and night lights is not
        unchanging when looking at sub-national or regional units.
        77   Comparisons between regions are made with respect to an omitted category, in this case the Southern region.
60
                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Figure 42 – Urban GVA production at the oblast level
 Real Urban GVA by Oblast, 2010                          Real Urban GVA Growth, 2002-2010

                Luts’k                                                   Luts’k




  Real GVA
  weighted by mean                                        Percent Change GVA
        < 0.40                                                 16-18
        0.41 - 0.60                                            19-32
        0.61 - 0.80                                            33-43
        0.81 - 1.00                                            44-60
        > 1.00                                                 61-75




Figure 43 – Urbanization shows steady growth mainly in the Central and Western regions
 Urbanization Rates by Oblast, 1989-2000                 Urbanization Rates by Oblast, 2000-2011

                Luts’k                                                   Luts’k




  Urbanization Rate                                       Urbanization Rate
       < 0.15                                                  < 0.15
       0.16 - 0.30                                             0.16 - 0.30
       0.31 - 0.45                                             0.31 - 0.45
       0.46 - 0.50                                             0.46 - 0.50
       > 0.50                                                  > 0.50




Figure 44 – Real GVA growth per worker shows strongest increase in the Western and Central region
 Real GVA per Worker, by Oblast, 2010                    Real GVA per Worker Growth, 2002-2010

                Luts’k                                                   Luts’k




  Real GVA                                                Percent change
  weighted by mean                                        GVA
       < 0.80                                                  < 30
       0.81 - 1.00                                             31 - 40
       1.01 - 1.20                                             41 - 50
       1.21 - 1.40                                             51 - 60
       > 1.41                                                  > 61




                                                                                                    61
                            CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



     First typology of Ukrainian cities using NLs: found,
     appear, disappear, and missed cities
     A first typology of cities was created by matching urban footprints – based on NLs data – and the official location of
     Ukraine’s 458 cities using data for 1996 and 2010. Of those settlements defined as cities by the Ukrainian government,
     most produce enough light to go beyond the urban threshold (discussed in Footnote 17 above). Others, however, due to
     their relative low scale of economic activity, did not pass this threshold in the two years analyzed. Based on this threshold,
     a first typology of cities was created which classified all 458 cities into one of four categories: Found, Appear, Disappear,
     or Missed (refer to BOX 7 below for detailed definitions). Two caveats are necessary concerning conclusions reached from
     this typology classification. First, the analysis is made using night lights as a proxy for economic activity, although the
     night lights data is not used to forecast individual, city-level GDP78. Annex III shows that night lights data and economic
     activity have a strong relationship, but the correlation is not exact. As such, additional demographic and economic city-
     level indicators, such as firm-level data, are used to complement the analysis. Second, the elasticity between night lights
     and economic activity is estimated to be different between the regions (also discussed in Annex III). As a consequence,
     conclusions drawn from comparisons of cities in different regions based solely on night lights data are less reliable than
     comparisons for a single city across time.




        BOX 7 – A FIRST TYPOLOGY OF UKRAINE’S CITIES


        Found cities are settlements that produced NLs in both 1996 and 2010 that go beyond the urban threshold; as a
        consequence, they are considered cities in both periods. We can calculate a series of indicators for these Found
        cities that allow us to get a better sense of the spatial and total evolution of their economic activity over time.
        254 (55%) of Ukraine’s 458 cities were classified in this category; their average population was 93,445 in 2013.

        Appear cities are settlements, which at the first date (1996) did not meet the “city” threshold by NLs standards,
        but had done so when measured in 2010. They were 50 such cities in 2013. Conversely, Disappear cities are
        settlements, which in 1996 were classified as cities by NLs standards, but by 2010, no longer fit the standard.
        37 (8%) of the cities were classified in this category.

        Missed cities are settlements which did not meet the threshold for classification as cities by NLs standards
        in 1996 or 2010. 116 (25%) cities were in this category. These cities may be growing or declining in terms of
        economic activity, but do not produce enough light to be considered an urban area. The average population of
        these Missed cities was 18,000 in 2013, which indicates that this category comprises many small towns (small
        towns refers to settlements with less than 10,000 inhabitants. See Section 2 for these definitions).

     According to these criteria, 55 percent of Ukrainian cities were classified as Found, 11 percent were Appear, 8 percent
     were Disappear, and 25 percent were Missed. Missed cities are small – with populations ranging from 1,000 to 31,196 –
     which suggests that the NLs basis for the typology’s “city” standards is valid and that these are not important economic
     centers (See Figure 45 and Figure 46). By comparison, Found cities have an average population of 97,663, which suggests
     that NLs data indeed represents the urban settlements in the country.



        78 Forecasting GDP for specific cities can be problematic because the methods used to derive the urban boundaries for individual cities ignore
        the problem of “overglow” (which causes light from a city to appear to bleed out beyond the boundary itself). This problem is a potential source
        of measurement error, which can become exacerbated the more fine the spatial resolution employed to obtain night lights data to derive GDP
        growth estimates.
62
                      CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Missed cities are spread across all regions, but the Eastern region held the lowest number. Most of the Missed cities are
located in Lviv and Odessa. Some examples of Missed cities are: Bilozerske (Donetsk) in the Eastern region, Nosivka
(Cernihiv) in the Central region, Rozhyshche (Volyn) in the Western region, and Nova Odesa (Mykolaiv) in the Southern
region.

The Eastern region has the highest number of Disappear cities (45 percent of all Disappear cities), followed by the Central
and Southern regions with 27 and 24 percent, respectively (See Figure 47 and Figure 48). Some oblasts have been hit
harder by the decline of cities than others. Luhansk Oblast alone has 24 percent of all Disappear cities, Donetsk has 19
percent, and Zaporizhia 11 percent. Some examples of Disappear cities are: Zymohiria (Luhansk) in the Eastern region,
Ochakiv (Mykolaiv) in the Southern region, Khyriv (Lviv) in the Western region, and Dovbysh in the Central region.

The Western region dominates in terms of Appear cities, having 31 of Ukraine’s 50 such cities (60 percent) based on
NLs standards in 2010. The Central region has the next highest amount, with 17 Appear cities. In the Western region,
the cities are concentrated in a few oblasts—10 cities in Lviv oblast alone, six in Ivano-Frankivsk, and five in Chernivtsy.
Some examples of Appear cities are: Gorokhiv (Volyn) and Novoselytsia (Chernivtsy) in the Western region, and Biliaivka
(Odessa) in the Southern region.

Figure 45 – Distribution of found, appear, disappear, and missed cities by population in 2013
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
 10%
 0%
        Small Towns    Mid-size Towns      Large Towns      Small Cities   Mid-size Cities     Major Cities
          (<10k)         (10k-20k)          (20k-50k)       (50k-100k)     (100k-500k)          (>500k)

                      Found                Appear             Disappear          Missed
Source: Ukraine Statistics Department Data

Figure 46 – Distribution of missed cities by population in 2013
                                              Distribution of missed cities across city sizes
                                         Others
                                         (>20k)
                                           8%


                                                                                             Small Towns
                                   Mid-size Towns                                              (<10k)
                                     (10k-20k)                                                  40%
                                        52%




Source: Ukraine Statistics Department
                                                                                                                               63
                                              CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

     Figure 47 – Distribution of found, appear, disappear, and missed cities by geographic location (2013)

     100%

     90%

     80%

     70%

     60%

     50%

     40%

     30%

     20%

      10%

      0%
                       Eastern                          Southern                                Central                                  Western                            Total



                       Found                                       Appear                                               Disappear                                 Missed


     Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




     Figure 48 – Distribution of found, appear, disappear, and missed cities (2013)

     100%

     90%

     80%

      70%

     60%

      50%

      40%

      30%

      20%

      10%

       0%
            Cernihiv



                                   Charkiv




                                                                                                                                              Kiev




                                                                                                                                                                              Lviv

                                                                                                                                                                                     Mykolaiv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Zhytomyr
                                                                     Dnipropetrovsk

                                                                                      Donetsk

                                                                                                  Ivano-Frankivsk




                                                                                                                                                                  Luhansk
                        Cernivcy



                                             Cherkasy

                                                          Crimea




                                                                                                                     Kherson

                                                                                                                               Khmelnytskyi



                                                                                                                                                     Kirovohrad




                                                                                                                                                                                                Odessa

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Poltava

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rivne

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sevastopol

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sumy

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ternopil

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vinnytsia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Volhynia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zakarpattia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Zaporizhia



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kiev City




                                                          Found                                                     Appear                                  Disappear                            Missed


     Source: Ukraine Statistics Department




64
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Second typology of Ukrainian cities using NLs:
identifying growing and declining cities
A second city typology classified cities across two dimensions – change in their NLs urban footprint and change in their
NLs intensity – as a proxy of economic activity.79 NLs data was used to assess whether economic activity was increasing
or decreasing, as well as to determine whether a city’s footprint was growing or shrinking in area. These two dimensions
make the analysis using NLs unique and were the basis for a second typology of cities. For this typology, a city’s “baseline”
footprint and light intensity was compared to that of a following analyzed year. In this case the comparison was made
between 1996 (T0) to 2010 (T1)80. The typologies were built as described in BOX 8, and cities were classified according
to the following types:
Type 1 cities (in BLUE) are cities presenting a thriving urban core (growing light intensity) and growing urban footprint.
Type 2 cities (in GREEN) are cities presenting a dimming urban core (declining light intensity) and shrinking urban
footprint.
Type 3 cities (in BLACK) are cities presenting a dimming urban core and expanding urban footprint.
Type 4 cities (in RED) are cities presenting a thriving urban core and shrinking urban footprint81.




   BOX 8 – A SECOND TYPOLOGY OF UKRAINE’S CITIES


   The second typology was calculated by looking at the combination of light intensity change and urban footprint
   area change for each city, as explained below, between 1996 and 2010:
   	       - Urban footprint area change corresponds to the change in area of what is considered the urban
   footprint by NLs standards in T0 against what is considered the area of urban footprint in T1. Area Change is
   estimated as (B – A) / A.
   	       - Intensity change refers to the change in brightness in the urban core (footprint in T0) between these
   two years. Intensive change is estimated as Y – A.


                                                                                 CITY FOOTPRINT (1996 - 2010)

                                                                                                                 T0NTL              T1NTL

                                                                                       T0footprint                   A                  Y

                                                                                       T1footprint                   Z                  B

                                                                                 The columns represent the summed
                                                                                 nighttime lights values for the
                                                                                 identified footprint



   79 A third dimension is determined by “extensive growth,” which measures the growth of lights in the periphery. It is calculated by establishing
   the periphery as the portion of the urban footprint that exists in the second period but did not exist in the first, and then comparing the
   amount of light emitted by this periphery in both periods. This interpretation, however, is a little less intuitive for the case of shrinking cities, in
   which the periphery is disappearing as the city shrinks. An analysis employing this fourth dimension can be found in Annex VI.
   80   Two years of NLs are required to do this analysis, so cities classified as Disappear, Missed, and Appear are excluded from it.
   81 This type only includes two cities: Donetsk and Zaporizhia. Thus, the section abstains from drawing strong conclusions about this type since
   they would only be based upon two observations.
                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                 CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends

        There is a strong positive correlation between area growth and intensive growth, which is exactly what the second
        typology intends to capture (See Figure 49). A strong correlation means that in most cases when economic activity
        increased in the city’s core, cities also tended to grow in area or that when economic activity decreased in the city’s
        core, cities also tended to shrink in area. The first case, corresponding to Type 1 cities, are cities that are both growing
        in area and in the amount of lights emitted by their cores. Again, this implies a thriving core and a spillover effect that
        leads to a growing periphery. The second case, corresponding to Type 2 cities, are those which have a core with dimming
        NLs intensity and a shrinking urban NLs footprint. For Type 2 cities, not only are NLs values in the city’s core declining,
        but their area is also shrinking; i.e., in 2010 some of the urban footprint no longer has NLs above the urban threshold. The
        positive correlation is not observed in Type 3 cities, which present a decrease in NLs activity in the core of the city, but
        an expansion of this activity in the new surrounding areas. This is a sign of sprawl, but also of a growing importance of
        areas that previously were considered urban by NLs standards. Finally, Type 4 cities show a densification of its economic
        activity, represented by a thriving core, in terms of night lights, but a shrinking NLs footprint. Table 9 presents summary
        statistics for each city type. Annex V presents the full list of Ukrainian cities classified according to this typology.


         Figure 49 – Changes in NLs urban footprint vs. changes in NLs intensity in the urban core
                                            Periphery expansion and intensive growth. Ukraine 1996-2010

                                   Type 3                                                                            Type 1
     percentage area growth




                                   Type 2                                                                            Type 4




                                                                    percentage intensive growth




        Type 1 cities – with a thriving core and expanding urban footprint – are on average larger, declining less in population
        terms, and more productive than other types. They have on average 176,300 inhabitants and although – on average –
        they are still experiencing demographic decline, their decline is the lowest compared to the other types. They present also
        the highest levels of economic activity per capita, as measured by night lights divided by the city population, suggesting
        that these cities are most productive. Once more, recall that night lights are used to determine typologies, but that they
        also portray economic activity to some extent. In addition, these cities have a higher average total economic growth
        (585 percent), captured by night lights data than the rest suggesting that these cities are the true growth engines in the
        country. However, the simultaneous growth of the urban footprint with the observed demographic decline suggests that
        these cities are sprawling82. Examples of Type 1 cities are: Odessa, Lutsk, Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Lviv. Around 22 percent of
        cities in Ukraine fall under this type.


                              82  Sprawling is a hypothesis based on the growth of the urban footprint despite population decline. However, the NLs footprints do not
                              correspond to the city’s boundaries and therefore population data might not correspond to the population living inside the urban footprint
                              defined through NLs.
66
                       CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Type 2 cities are, on the contrary, declining in all aspects – with decreasing economic activity - as captured by night lights
in both the core and the periphery – a shrinking urban footprint, and declining population. These cities are smaller than
thriving Type 1 cities; their average population is 54,000 inhabitants. In addition to experiencing a decline in economic
activity, these cities present a sharp decline in population – with 0.54 percent annual decline on average – and have
lowers levels of productivity than thriving Type 1 cities measured by NLs per capita. Examples of a Type 2 city are:
Dnipropetrovsk, Hirnyk, and Kramatorsk. The majority of cities in Ukraine (53 percent) fall under this type.



Table 9 – Typology of cities based on NLs observations between 1996 and 2010: selected statistics

                                                                  Growing area                                      Shrinking area

                                                     Type 1: Thriving core, expanding area             Type 4: Thriving core, shrinking area44
               + Intensity growth
                                                                  Mean (Std dev)                                    Mean (Std dev)

            Population 2013 (000s)                                  176.3 (411.1)                                       861 (129)

        Average annual population growth
                                                                   -0.20 % (.477)                                    -0.59% (0.041)
                  (1989-2013)

                Total NLs value
                                                                   13.49 (37.01)                                      69.11 (44.80)
          (000s of NLs units) in 2010.

                NLs per capita
                                                                   0.065 (.062)                                      0.077 (0.048)
           (000s of NLs units) (2010)

                                                                 321% (4.36)
                NLs growth                                                                                         142.6% (1.23)
                                                     Examples: Odessa, Lutsk, Kyiv, Kharkiv,
    (% Growth of NLs units) (1996-2010)                                                                     Examples: Donetsk, Zaporizhia
                                                                     Lviv

                                                     Type 3: Dimming core, expanding area               Type 2: Dimming core, shrinking area
               - Intensity growth
                                                                  Mean (Std dev)                                    Mean (Std dev)

            Population 2013 (000s)                                  49.1 (80.4)                                       54.0 (115.3)

        Average annual population growth
                                                                   -0.56% (.584)                                      -0.57% (.541)
                  (1989-2013)

                Total NLs value
                                                                    2.62 (5.89)                                        2.72 (8.68)
          (000s of NLs units) in 2010.

                NLs per capita
                                                                   0.032 (.069)                                       0.043 (.102)
           (000s of NLs units) (2010)

                                                                                                                   -15400% (314)
                NLs growth                                       142% (.056)
                                                                                                          Examples: Dnipropetrovsk, Hirnyk,
    (% Growth of NLs units) (1996-2010)              Examples: Mykolaiv, Sumy, Kirovohrad
                                                                                                                    Kramatorsk.




   83  Only one city, Donetsk, located in the oblast of the same name, is not in this typology as it presents a negative area change and a positive
   intensity growth.
   84 This type only includes two cities: Donetsk and Zaporizhia. Thus, the section abstains from drawing strong conclusions about this type since
   they would only be based upon two observations.
                                                                                                                                                      67
                                CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


     Type 3 cities, which represent a dimming core and an expanding NLs footprint, have experienced the fastest population
     decline and present the lowest levels of productivity. These cities show a 0.63 percent annual population decline on
     average (while numerically close, the statistical impact of this rate is significantly lower than that observed in cities of
     Type 2). The growth of the urban footprint accompanied by the observed demographic decline suggests that these cities
     are sprawling. Examples are Mykolaiv, Sumy, and Kirovohrad. Approximately 24 percent of cities in Ukraine fall under
     this type.

     There are only two cities in the final category of Type 4 cities: Donetsk and Zaporizhia. These cities are historically large
     cities that have recently seen their footprint shrink. At the same time, economic activity, as captured by night lights
     data, has increased in the core. This suggests a densification of economic activity. Despite showing declining population,
     this densification could induce agglomeration economies that further improve their economic performance.

     There are important demographic and economic differences captured by this second typology. Table 9 shows the averages
     of indicators for each city type. The differences suggest that the combination of night light intensity and growth that
     determine this second typology may also correspond to its population and economic dynamics. Figure 50 shows that the
     distribution of city sizes is different between types. Type 1 cities are overall larger, while Type 2 has the largest share of
     small towns. The dynamics among the types also vary. Figure 51 shows that Type 1 cities have more cities with positive
     growth, while many Type 2 and Type 3 cities are declining in population more than even the national average.



     Figure 50 – The distribution of city sizes varies across types in the second typology; type 1 cities
     are overall larger85

                                                   Type of city according to size

     100%
      90%
      80%
      70%
      60%
      50%
      40%
      30%
      20%
      10%
      0%
                1. Thriving core, expanding area       2. Dimming core, shrinking area   3. Dimming core, expanding area

                             Small Towns (<10k)           Mid-size Towns (10k-20k)       Large Towns (20k-50k)
                             Small Cities (50k-100k)      Mid-size Cities (100k-500k)    Major Cities (>500k)




        85   Type 4 is excluded as it has only two cities, Donetsk and Zaporizhia. However, both are major cities.
68
                           CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Figure 51 – The distribution of cities by economic growth varies across types in the second
typology; type 1 cities have more cities with positive growth86

                                    Type of city according to growth category

100%

 90%

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%

 10%

  0%
          1. Thriving core, expanding area      2. Dimming core, shrinking area     3. Dimming core, expanding area
                   Declining more than national average        Declining but less than urban average
                   Declining but less than national average    Positive growth




The characteristics used to identify this second typology also have a strong relationship to population dynamics. Figure
52 shows that almost all Type 2 cities are experiencing negative population growth as well as negative area growth. The
other two types are split between negative and positive population growth, meaning that some cities continue to expand
in area despite their population decline. Similarly, Figure 52 shows that cities of Type 2 show overall negative growth in
intensity87 and negative growth in population.

The other two types are split between positive and negative population growths. Figure 52 and Figure 53 show that a
classification based on NLs groups cities into meaningful clusters in the sense that they also share some demographic
characteristics. Overall, the shrinking footprints imply a loss of population. However, in some cases there could be
population loss despite increases in area (in Types 1 and 2), which suggests a sort of sprawling; this dynamic affects a
fairly large number of cities. Similarly, although a minority, some cities show population growth accompanied by a decline
in economic activity in the core as measured by reduced intensity growth, as well as some cities that present population
decline with a significant increase in the light emitted at the core (mainly cities of Type 1). In the later, shrinking does
not seem to come at the expense of economic growth. One possible explanation for this is that the city was oversized
and is moving towards a new population equilibrium (lower population) that is linked to lower congestion costs which in
turn lead to an increased productivity.




   86 Type 4 is excluded as it has only two cities, Donetsk and Zaporizhia. Both are in the growth category of declining but less than national

   average.
   87   Recall that growth in night lights intensity tends to also reflect growth in intensity of economic activity in the city.
                                                                                                                                                  69
                                                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


                          Figure 52 – The distribution of cities by economic growth varies across types in the second
                          typology; type 1 cities have more cities with positive growth

                                                            Periphery expansion and population growth 1996-2010
                    Annual percentage area growth




                                                                     Annual percentage population growth




      Figure 53 – Intensity of night lights has a strong relationship to population dynamics


                                                            Intensive growth and population growth
 Annual percentage population growth




                                                         Annual percentage intensive growth 1996-2010




70
                                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


As expected, the second city typology also reveals differences in the distribution of city types across regions (Figure
54). While 76 percent of the Western region’s cities are thriving (Type 1), only 7 percent of Eastern region cities can be
classified as such. In contrast, 81 percent of the Eastern region’s cities are in the Type 2 category. The southern region
also has many cities in that category, and has the least Type 3 cities. The Central region has the largest share of Type 3
cities, where economic activity is declining in the core but growth is occurring in the urban footprint.

Figure 54 – The distribution of types of cities varies by region;the western region has the majority
of thriving (type 1) cities88
                                        Type by region
100%
90%
                                                                                                        1. Thriving core, expanding area
80%
70%
                                                                                                        2. Dimming core, shrinking area
60%
50%
40%                                                                                                     3. Dimming core, expanding area
30%
20%
                                                                                                        4. Thriving core, shrinking area
 10%
 0%
                 Western               Eastern                  Central               Southern




Agglomerations: important engines of growth
Agglomerations – groupings of individual cities that function as a single city due to the proximity of and interaction
between their housing, labor, and commercial markets and whose NLs footprints merge – are considered as one urban
entity under the NLs analysis. In total, Ukraine has 23 agglomerations that are composed of 79 cities, an average of
four cities per agglomeration. The figure below presents Kyiv’s agglomeration and the growth of its NL urban footprint
from 1996 until 2010. As can be seen, some cities that were separate cities surrounding Kyiv in 1996 merged to produce
a single urban footprint by 2010. Table 10 below presents the full list of Ukraine’s agglomerations and their respective
population totals.

Figure 55 – Kyiv’s agglomeration 1996-2010

                                                                          Chernihiv




       1996

       2010         01   2.5   25        75      100
                                                   Kilometers




       88     Type 4 has only two cities, Donetsk and Zaporizhia. Donetsk is in the Eastern region, while Zaporizhia is in the Southern region.
                                                                                                                                                  71
                    CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Table 10 – Ukraine’s agglomerations: merged NL urban footprints (2013)


                                                                                  Population of
        Main City                    Oblast         Cities in Agglomeration   agglomeration 2013e

           Kyiv                        Kyiv                   9                     3171830

         Kharkiv                     Charkiv                  6                    1620930

         Donetsk                     Donetsk                  8                    1506200

         Odessa                      Odessa                   2                     1074570

      Dnipropetrovsk              Dnipropetrovsk              2                     1017250

           Lviv                        Lviv                   4                     765901

         Luhansk                     Luhansk                  2                     432483

        Sevastopol                  Sevastopol                2                     354565

         Horlivka                    Donetsk                   1                    353497

     Dniprodzerzhynsk             Dnipropetrovsk              2                     351950

         Cherkasy                   Cherkasy                  2                     303168

       Kramatorsk                    Donetsk                  4                     297665

      Sieverodonetsk                 Luhansk                  4                     281903

          Rivne                       Rivne                   2                     274902

      Ivano-Frankivsk            Ivano-Frankivsk               1                    235515

          Lutsk                      Volhynia                 2                     234147

        Drohobych                      Lviv                   4                     162527

         Alchevsk                    Luhansk                  3                     144807

        Stakhanov                    Luhansk                  3                     139474

      Krasnoarmiysk                  Donetsk                  3                     125239

        Krasnodon                    Luhansk                  2                     65344

      Nova Kakhovka                  Kherson                  2                     58853

        Debaltseve                   Donetsk                  2                     38126




72
                        CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends


Agglomerations are particularly important engines of growth. 43 percent of Ukraine’s agglomerations experienced
positive economic growth according to NLs data compared to only 22 percent of individual cities. Total production
(as measured by total NLs in the urban footprint) of agglomerations was 14 times higher - on average – than that of
individual cities. Part of this is of course due to their relative greater scale. However, labor productivity (measured by NLs
per capita) is also much higher on average (17 percent higher in agglomerations than in individual cities) with a significant
difference between the means; and spatial productivity (measured by NLS by km2) is also higher (100 percent higher in
agglomerations relative to individual cities). All of these differences are statistically significant. Additionally, almost all
urban economic growth – as measured by total NLs – is concentrated in the growing agglomerations, suggesting they
are the true engines of growth in the country. Kyiv, Kharkiv, Donetsk, and Lviv are the fastest growing agglomerations
of NLs; Dniprodzerzhynsk, Dnipropetrovsk, and Kramatorsk are the fastest declining.

There is also a close correlation between agglomerations and types of cities (See Figure 56). 40 percent of agglomerations
are Type 1, as opposed to 22 percent of individual cities. By contrast, cities are more likely to be classified as Type 3,
i.e., dimming and expanding, if they are individual cities: nine percent of agglomerations are Type 3, while 24 percent
of individual cities are. Type 2 cities are a little more evenly distributed (50 percent of agglomerations and 53 percent
of individual cities). Of the two cities categorized as Type 4, Donetsk is an agglomeration. Consequently, in this case,
the analysis utilizing night lights data strongly supports the conclusions made in Section 2 that agglomerations are the
country’s centers of growth.


Figure 56 – Distribution of agglomerations and individual cities by city type; agglomerations are
disproportionately thriving (type 1)89

Type of city for individual cities and cities that belong to an agglomeration

 100%

  90%
                                                                             1. Thriving core, expanding area
  80%

  70%
                                                                             2. Dimming core, shrinking area
  60%

  50%
                                                                             3. Dimming core, expanding area
  40%

  30%
                                                                             4. Thriving core, shrinking area
  20%

  10%

   0%
               Agglomeration           Single city




   89  Type 4 has only two cities, Donetsk and Zaporizhia. Donetsk is part of an agglomeration (it is also its main city); Zaporizhia is an individual
   city.
                                                                                                                                                         73
                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends




Built-up areas
Built-up areas are another spatial measure of economic growth of great importance. These areas indicate the presence
of population and corresponding economic activity, although the dynamics of built-up areas may not follow these others.
For example, since built residences and infrastructure is durable, it can remain even after population has declined.
Similarly, policies that support building could increase the observed built-up area, while the same area sees its economic
activity move away.

Ukraine has shown a large increase in built-up areas despite its population decline. The Global Human Settlement Layer,
developed by the GLOB-HS and E-URBAN teams, provides accurate measurements of built-up areas. Based on this data,
Table 11 shows information on built-up areas for the 40 countries with the highest increases over the last 40 years.
Ukraine ranks 5th, with 76,202 square kilometers added to the built-up area foundation. This is striking, given that during
the same period the country experienced negative population growth; in fact, Ukraine and Romania are the only two
countries in this ranking that registered negative population growth. As a consequence, Ukraine presents the highest
rate of built-up area per person. Some of the policies that motivated the building of homes during the Soviet era have
been previously discussed in Section 2, but the growth of these built-up areas in Ukraine continued after independence.
This is demonstrated by the fact that Ukraine occupies 4th in the world in producing new built-up areas over the last 15
years (See Figure 57)


Figure 57 – Ukraine is 4th in absolute number of new built-up areas over the last 15 years

                                               New built-up areas 2000-2014
50,100,000,000

45.100.000.000

40.100.000.000

35.100.000.000

30.100.000.000

25.100.000.000

20.100.000.000

15.100.000.000

10.100.000.000

 5.100.000.000

  100.000.000
                            China
                   United States
                             India
                           Russia
                          Ukraine
                       Indonesia
                        Germany
                            Japan
                            Brasil
                           France
                           Turkey
                           Mexico
                              Italy
                           Poland
                          Nigeria
                         Vietnam
                    South Africa
                            Spain

                        Thailand
                        Pakistan
                               Iran
                          Canada
                           Burma
                      Uzbekistan
                      Philippines
                           Algeria
                       Argentina
                               Iraq
                            Egypt
                         Ethiopia
                     Bangladesh
                       DR Congo
                         Morocco
                        Columbia
                    Korea, South
                           Sudan
                         Uganda
                        Tanzania
                           Kenya
                     Afghanistan
                              Peru
                 United Kingdom




     built-up 2000-2014



Source: Global Human Settlements Layer – European Commission



74
                            CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



This striking growth in construction could represent a response to the lifting of long-standing limitations on construction
as well as a strong focus of household investments in the real estate sector. Current economic trends (Figure 58) do
not seem to justify the strong growth in built-up areas, suggesting that this growth is happening as a consequence of
institutional changes and current policies. Several characteristics of the Ukrainian housing market are relevant here. First,
the many restrictions on construction that existed during the Soviet era prevented Ukrainians from having access to a
wider array of housing choices. Despite high urbanization levels, many families still shared residences at the beginning of
the 1990s. Construction followed the elimination of many of these restrictions, which included limitations on the size of
structures built in rural areas, on construction of new urban residential units outside of the cooperative system, and on
construction of commercial buildings. Second, the influx of remittances provided a new source of capital to finance new
housing projects to meet public demand. Finally, with a local financial sector that does not provide abundant investment
opportunities, real estate has been the main sector of investment or households in Ukraine. This reality further motivated
residential and commercial construction.90




Table 11 – Top global increment of built-up last 40 years

                                                                                                                        BU surface per capita
   Country                 GHSL built-up areas (sq km)                 WB population (millions of persons)
                                                                                                                            (m2/person)
                                                                                                              2013-
                    1975      1990      2000      2014     2014-1975   1975      1990      2000      2013              1975    1990    2000    2004
                                                                                                              1975
 United States     66,522    93,653    128,794   171,857   105,335     215.97   249.62    282.16    316.13    100.16   308.0   375.2   456.5   543.6
 China             33,580    47,251    66,370    109,782    76,202     916.40   1135.19   1262.65   1357.38   440.99   36.6    41.6    52.6    80.9
 India             10,176    14,051    19,285    39,898     29,722     622.23   868.89    1042.26   1252.14   629.91   16.4    16.2    18.5    31.9
 Russian           21,139    29,997    40,147    50,479     29,340     134.20   148.29    146.60    143.50     9.30    157.5   202.3   273.9   351.8
 Federation
 Ukraine           12,018    16,367    22,937    33,239     21,222     48.76    51.89      49.18     45.49    -3.27    246.5   315.4   466.4   730.7
 Germany           11,875    16,423    21,983    28,633     16,758     78.67    79.43      82.21    80.62      1.95    150.9   206.8   267.4   355.2
 Brazil            16,797    19,950    27,572    33,159     16,362     108.22   149.65    174.50    200.36    92.14    155.2   133.3   158.0   165.5
 Indonesia         11,532    14,078    18,789    27,218     15,686     129.21   178.63    208.94    249.87    120.66   89.3    78.8    89.9    108.9
 France             8,245     11,714   15,894    21,256     13,020     54.03    58.41      60.91    66.03     12.00    152.6   200.5   260.9   322.1
 Japan             9,335     12,483    16,294    22,106     12,771     111.94   123.54    126.87    127.34    15.40    83.4    101.0   128.4   173.6
 Mexico             6,343     9,350    13,295    18,047     11,704     61.71    86.08     103.87    122.33    60.62    102.8   108.6   128.0   147.5
 Italy             5,826      8,333    11,568    15,533     9,707      55.44    56.72     56.94     59.83      4.39    105.1   146.9   203.2   259.6
 Turkey            4,250      6,155     8,831    13,540     9,290      39.19    53.99      63.17     74.93    35.75    108.5   114.0   139.8   180.7
 Canada             6,756     9,522    13,146    15,317     8,560      23.21    27.79      30.77     35.16    11.95    291.1   342.6   427.2   435.6
 Australia         6,306      8,882    12,257    14,605     8,299      13.89     17.07     19.15     23.13     9.24    453.9   520.5   639.9   631.4
 Romania            4,265     5,762    8,093     12,559     8,293      21.29    23.20      22.44     19.96    -1.33    200.3   248.3   360.6   629.1
 United             6,648     8,864    11,436    13,813      7,165     56.23    57.25     58.89      64.10     7.87    118.2   154.8   194.2   215.5
 Kingdom
 Poland             3,740     5,516     7,740    10,743     7,004      34.02     38.11    38.26     38.53      4.52    109.9   144.7   202.3   278.8
 South Africa       3,321     4,819     6,457    8,969      5,648      24.73    35.20     44.00     52.98     28.25    134.3   136.9   146.8   169.3
 Spain              2,902     4,059     5,661     7,972      5,071     35.53    38.85     40.26     46.65      11.12   81.7    104.5   140.6   170.9
 Nigeria            1,893     2,769    3,830      6,615      4,723     63.57    95.62     122.88    173.62    110.05   29.8    29.0    31.2    38.1
 Argentina          3,471     4,849    6,532     7,885       4,414     26.07    32.62     36.90      41.45    15.38    133.1   148.6   177.0   190.2

Source: Global Human Settlements Layer – European Commission



    90    Monitoring of Execution of the Master Scheme of Territorial Development of Ukraine (Law).
                                                                                                                                                  75
                                          CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



Figure 58 – Prosperity is not pushing the massive addition of built-up areas in Ukraine

                                                                       Built-up vs. GDP pro capita

                             60,000




                             50.000




                             40.000
  GDP pro capita (WB 2013)




                             30.000




                             20.000




                             10.000




                                 0
                                      0      100      200        300                400                 500   600   700   800

                                                              Built-up surface pro capita (GHSL 2014)

Source: Global Human Settlements Layer – European Commission



Key messages and implications for further policy
and analytical work
Ukrainian cities are important engines of economic growth. Not only is urban sector production much greater than
rural production in absolute terms, it is also much more productive per capita. Agglomeration economies have yielded
higher productivity as cities offer settings for firms and workers to take advantage of sharing, matching, and learning
mechanisms. Firm-level data showed that larger cities attracted more firms and cities with higher population density
hosted more productive firms.

Nightlights (NLs) patterns exhibited by cities are also quite different across Ukraine’s regions, with a noticeable shift of
NLs growth from East to West. Urban footprints captured by NLs are growing rapidly in the West while they are either
declining or growing significantly slower in the East. One possible explanation is the stronger growth of the urban sector
in the West (Western and Central regions) relative to 1996 levels. The East (Eastern and Southern regions), while starting
at a higher level of urbanization, has further urbanized more slowly, resulting in a slower growth of NLs. Similar dynamics
show up in the first city typology91 of NLs urban footprints and city location dynamics.

76
                      CHAPTER 1 The urban system: Demographics and Economic Trends



The Eastern region has the highest number of Disappearing cities, followed by the Central and Southern regions. By
contrast, the Western region had the most Appearing cities, followed by the Central region.

Cities that increase in brightness and expand in footprint are on average performing better in other indicators (i.e.,
population decline, total economic activity and productivity). These cities (Type 1) have significantly lower declines in
population and higher concentrations of economic activity as measured by light emissions per capita as well as rate of
growth. The majority of the largest cities of the country are Type 1. Among the cities whose core is declining in night
lights, results are mixed. Those with expanding footprints (Type 3) seem to be growing more rapidly in economic terms.
However, they are also losing population more rapidly than those cities that have a dimming core and whose footprint is
shrinking (Type 2). Only two cities comprise Type 4. These are large cities that, despite losing population, present growing
economic activity.

Built-up areas in Ukraine have grown significantly, at a pace that does not seem to correspond to economic or demographic
indicators. Despite its decline in population, Ukraine ranked 4th globally - in terms of growth of built-up area - over the
past 15 years. Consequently, it presents the highest rate of new built-area per person. These trends are most likely
a result of long-suppressed housing demand that motivated construction upon the lifting of Soviet-era construction
limitations, as well as a result of a strong focus of household investments in the real estate sector.

Finally, agglomerations are particularly important engines of economic growth in the country. Agglomerations constitute
a majority of the few urban centers that are actually growing in population in Ukraine. In addition, according to NLs
measurements, agglomerations are more productive in both per capita and per km2 terms. There are also close correlations
between agglomerations types of cities (for example, all major cities are in the Found category), and more agglomerations
are thriving and growing (Type 1 in the second city typology).

Going forward Ukraine should recognize the role of urban areas in economic growth and make sure that they count with
the right tools to reach their full potential. To achieve increased productivity in urban centers, the right mix of good
governance, a beneficial business climate, and an efficient provision of public goods, usually in the form of public services
and infrastructure is necessary so that agglomeration economies are fostered and congestion costs reduced. In urban
areas experiencing population growth, cities will to focus on adapting infrastructure and services making sure that new-
comers are well absorbed and integrated in the city; manage peri-urban growth to avoid sprawl, etc. In addition, the
realignment of city boundaries or introduction of metropolitan governance mechanisms might be needed to achieve an
effective coordination of agglomerations which span across administrative units. This is particularly important in the
case of public transport. The country also needs to put in place the right policies to better manage urban population
decline. As observed in this section an important number of cities – despite declining in population – continue to grow
economically. This means that in these areas, shrinking is not necessarily coming at the expense of economic growth.
While this might be a reflection of a temporal increase in productivity due to an increase in the capital per worker ratio -
as observed at the national level – it might also be linked to a decline of congestion costs associated with the city moving
towards a new population equilibrium. In these cases, city administrators should aim at managing population decline in
an efficient and harmonious way making the best out of it (e.g. turning brownfields into public space, optimizing public
transportation).




   91 The first typology of cities is defined based on whether cities emit enough light to be considered urban areas in the initial and subsequent
   years analyzed. The second typology based on the growth of the light emitted in the core of the city and whether the city’s NLs footprint grew
   or shrank.
                                                                                                                                                     77
78
CHAPTER 2
Cities and the
Inter-Governmental
Fiscal System

                     79
                       CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




Key Highlights and Implications for Further Policy
and Analytical Work
Ukraine is undergoing a major reform of its inter-governmental fiscal system. Until 2014, the majority of fiscal revenues
were not raised by city governments but came from retained shares of national taxes and transfers. The allocation of
these transfers was largely based on the existing network of service facilities and staffing as opposed to the demand for
services. The system of intergovernmental transfers has led to wide disparities across city types in per capita levels of
expenditures per function. The highest per capita expenditures were observed in cities with declining core and periphery,
and the lowest – in growing cities with expanding footprint. Such financial disincentives, combined with legal constraints
on local government’s discretion in downsizing the network of facilities and their staff, impeded fiscal adjustments
necessitated by Ukraine’s demographic and economic changes.

In December 2014, the Budget Code was significantly changed. As a result, the new equalization system will factor in per
capita revenue levels and thus significantly decrease the disincentive that focuses on infrastructure need. Such re-design
of the transfer mechanism would likely realign resources among local governments, channeling more resources to large
and growing cities. Derivation-based sharing of revenues although partially mitigated with a new basic grant, will likely
exacerbate the impact on shrinking cities. It will, however, improve the efficiency of spending. These changes are expected
to improve fiscal autonomy and to better align public services with the need of local communities.

Going forward, in addition to operationalizing the new Budget Code, Ukraine’s policy makers may rethink the structure
of functional sub-national expenditure in view of changing demographics. So far, expenditures for education have been
steadily increasing despite the rapidly aging population placing increasing demands on the health system. By earmarking
new subventions separately for education and health, the new system can further entrench under-utilized social
infrastructure. More generally, the focus of reforms in the short-term could be on increasing the yield of user fees and
property taxes as a way to make cities assume their responsibility to collect own revenue. In the medium term, some of
these taxes could be reassigned from national to the subnational level as a way to increase horizontal accountability of local
officials to their residents as well as fiscal responsibility. Finally, addressing the fiscal fragmentation and amalgamating
the bottom tier should remain a priority for the government as a way to improve fiscal efficiency in service provision.




80
                             CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




I. The Inter-Governmental System
Ukraine is a unitary state with three tiers of sub-national government as presented in the introduction section of this
study. Its current territorial division suffers from excessive fragmentation at the bottom tier. This is common in other
post-Soviet countries, where local self-government was established in pursuit of greater democracy and local control
rather than efficiency of public services. Given that local authorities bear responsibility for major social services, such as
education and health care, the average locality’s size of 1,400 residents at the lowest administrative level of government
is too small to achieve the minimum efficient scale of provision93. Addressing the fiscal fragmentation issue has been
attempted in several administrative-territorial reform proposals aimed at amalgamating the bottom-tier municipalities
in order to increase their average size and reduce disparities in population size. However, none of those reforms has been
fully implemented. The recently-adopted Law on Voluntary Amalgamation of Territorial Units, which is accompanied by
new Budget Code provisions, is the first sound step towards re-starting such reforms, but it still has to be implemented.

About 70 percent of the national population resides in urban areas. This share is higher than the 50 percent average of
the world’s middle-income countries, but on par with the 70-percent average in Europe and Central Asia94. Of the total
urban population, 27.5 million reside in cities while the remaining 3.8 million reside in town-lets. (The distinction between
a city and a town-let designation is not entirely determined by population size as there are five town-lets with population
over 15,000 people while at the same time almost a quarter of cities have populations under 10,000).


Figure 59 – Sub-national governments account for almost half of public expenditures92
 46%                                                                                                       240



 45%                                                                                                       230



 44%                                                                                                       220



 43%                                                                                                       210



 42%                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                         Subnational public
                                                                                                                         expenditures in constant
                                                                                                                         2013 prices, bln. UAH(rs)
 41%                                                                                                       190

                                                                                                                         SNG share in GG expenditures

 40%                                                                                                       180
                2009               2010               2011                2012               2013




   92   Figures that do not include a source in this Chapter were developed by World Bank staff working on the report.
   93 World Bank. 2008. Ukraine - Improving Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and Public Health and Education Expenditure Policy: Selected
   Issues. Washington, DC: World Bank.
   94   World Bank. 2014. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                                                                                                                                                     81

                                                                       17
                                    CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System

 All local governments combined (at all three tiers covering both rural and urban settlements) account for almost half of
 total national public expenditures and are responsible for the majority of public expenditures on essential social services
 (see Figure 59 above). In particular, in 2013 sub-national governments accounted for 80 percent of public expenditures
 in health and 70 percent of public expenditures in education in 2013. In fact, the three social sectors (education, health
 care, and social welfare) accounted for over 80 percent of sub-national expenditures (See Figure 60 below). While
 showing some fluctuation from year to year, on average total sub-national expenditures have increased in real terms by
 12 percent over 2009-2012. This is roughly proportional to Ukraine’s GDP growth.

Figure 60 – Sub-national expenditures are dominated by the three social sectors
           18%                                                                                            100%

           16%
                                                                                                          80%
           14%

           12%




                                                                                % of total expenditures
                                                                                                          60%
           10%
% of GDP




            8%
                                                                                                          40%
            6%

            4%                                                                                            20%

            2%

            0%                                                                                             0%
                          09




                                  10




                                             11




                                                                                                                   09
                                                      12




                                                                                                                                10
                                                                    13




                                                                                                                                        11




                                                                                                                                                  12




                                                                                                                                                         13
                                           20




                                                                                                                                      20
                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                       20
                                20




                                                                                                                              20
                        20




                                                                                                                 20
                                   Other          Housing and Utilities   Social Welfare                                Health Care      Education


 Given the sub-optimal size of local governments, it is not surprising that other studies have found under-utilized social
 infrastructure in Ukraine. Ukraine has one of the lowest student/teacher ratios in the world, combined with a low teaching
 load per teacher95. Similarly, more health care inputs (hospitals, beds, doctors, nurses, and non-medical staff) per 10,000
 residents are used in Ukraine than in in the new EU member states and the EU countries in general; this dynamic is
 further aggravated by an inflated average length of stay in public health care facilities96. In addition to the fragmented
 territorial structure, the efficiency of service delivery is further undermined by demographic changes combined with legal
 constraints on local governments’ discretion in closing health facilities and schools or firing personnel. Despite Ukraine’s
 aging population, the structure of sub-national expenditure has not shifted from education to health care. In fact, sub-
 national expenditures on education have been steadily increasing from 4.5 percent of GDP in 2009 to 5 percent of GDP
 in 2013 (see Figure 61 above).

 Sub-national governments have little authority to increase their revenues. The limited revenue rate- setting discretion
 that they have only applies to the short list of their own sources of local revenues, which accounts for only 10 percent of
 sub-national budgets. Over 80 percent of sub-national revenues come from retained shares of national taxes and other
 transfers (see Figure 62 below). While the sub-national revenues from all property taxes combined are on par with other
 countries in the region (0.78% of GDP in 2012), most funds for sub-national expenditure come from the national taxes
 on land and vehicles over which local governments have no rate-setting or collection authority. By contrast, taxation of
 structures (the only local property tax) generated less than 0.01% of GDP in both 2012 and 2013.

 The low level of revenue autonomy at the sub-national level allows sub-national governments to avoid deprives the system
 of an appropriate level of accountability and fiscal responsibility for subnational governments. The heavy dependence
 on shared tax revenues and all other transfers from the national budget (see Figure 61) has stood at above 80 percent

           95   Id. World Bank. 2008.
           96   Ibid.
82
                                          CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System

  of total local revenues over the last five years. Even the City of Kyiv, the wealthiest local government, receives almost
  a quarter of its revenues in the form of grants from the national budget and another 40 percent from national taxes
  collected in its territory. It is not surprising to see that the steady increase in the total volume of grants over the years
  coincided with increasing expenditures on education despite a decline in school-age population. For other countries, Figure
  63 below reveals high transfer dependence in countries where sub-national governments play a larger role in the provision
  of health care and education. Given that Ukraine’s local governments play a larger share in the provision of social services,
  such as general education and health care, than most other countries in the region, such high transfer dependence is
  unavoidable.


  Figure 61 – Composition of sub-national revenues, 2005-2012
                   20%



                                                                                                                             Grants
                   15%
                                                                                                                             Other Taxes
   % of GDP




                   10%                                                                                                       PIT


                                                                                                                             Taxes on goods and services

                    5%
                                                                                                                             Property Taxes


                                                                                                                             Non-Tax
                    0%
                                                  07



                                                               08




                                                                          09




                                                                                  10



                                                                                          11




                                                                                                       12
                              05




                                        06




                                                                                        20




                                                                                                     20
                                                                                20
                                                20




                                                                        20
                                                             20
                            20




                                      20




  Figure 62 – Decentralization of social services is associated with transfer dependence

                    0.1                                                                 0.1
                   0.95                                                                0.95
                   0.90                                                                0.90
Grant dependence




                   0.85                                                                0.85
                   0.80                                                                0.80
                   0.75                                                                0.75
                   0.70                                                                0.70
                   0.65                                                                0.65
                   0.60                                                                0.60
                   0.55                                                                0.55
                   0.50                                                                0.50
                          0.00     0.20      0.40          0.60        0.80    1.00           0.00      0.20        0.40           0.60       0.80         1.00

                                          Education Decentralization                                           Healthcare Decentralization


 Note: Transfer dependence is measured by the share of total sub-national revenues accounted for by all kinds of
 transfers, including sharing of revenues from national taxes obtained at the source. In the case of Ukraine, transfers
 include all sub-national revenues except those from local taxes and non-tax sources.




                                                                                                                                                                  83
                              CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System

To reinforce incentives for fiscally responsible behavior under such high transfer dependence, local government financing
of its spending decisions—at least at the margin—becomes critical.97 Additional spending should require raising additional
tax revenue (rather than seeking higher transfers from the central government). A key problem with transfers is that
the local governments receiving them are likely to perceive the additional funds as having a zero marginal cost to them
in political and economic terms. In contrast, the use of local revenues is likely to make local governments face the real
economic as well as political costs of obtaining and expending additional public funds, thus increasing fiscal responsibility
and political accountability of local officials. In addition, financing local government expenditures via transfers can reduce
the predictability of funds and therefore the ability of local governments to plan and budget; this is especially the case
when the transfers are determined on an ad hoc basis, as in the case of additional grants described later in this chapter.

The Budget Code of Ukraine was significantly changed in December 2014. According to the explanatory notes accompanying
the legislative amendments, one of the main objectives was to implement a new model of inter-governmental relations and
strengthen the financial basis of local government. Thus, the amendments include a number of provisions to bring public
services closer to their users, improve fiscal autonomy of local governments, and strengthen their local governments’
financial independence.

Recent amendments to the Budget Code call for earmarked subventions to fund education and health care while revising
the formula for equalization grants covering the remaining functions of sub-national governments.98 Among other
provisions, the amendments established a legal framework for financing amalgamated sub-national units. However,
most of the amendments concerned the revenue side, reducing the share of revenues from the Personal Income Tax, and
natural resource royalties previously decreed for sub-national budgets.



Inter-Governmental Structure
In Ukraine, the right to self-government is articulated in terms of “territorial communities,” which do not have to coincide
with the statistical definition of a settlement or administrative division. Local self-governance has been guaranteed
beginning with the 1996 Constitution (Article 140) and the subsequent Law on Local Self-Governance in Ukraine adopted
in 1997. Even in the case of cities, a unit of local self-government can include a bigger city and several other adjacent
settlements.

In terms of fiscal analysis, however, Ukraine’s governance features cities from all three tiers of sub-national government
with different assignments of revenue sources and expenditure responsibilities. Thus, many subventions from the
national budget are allocated only to the sub-oblast cities, which are mandated to fulfill the social entitlements for which
these monies are earmarked. Equalization grants from the national budget only extend to the sub-oblast level, while for
sub-district cities the equalization grants are allocated by their respective districts. As inter-governmental revenues –
constituting the bulk of city revenues – are passed on to the 275 sub-district cities (out of a total of 458 cities reviewed
in this study) by their respective districts, the analysis of patterns in city finances has to be placed within the context
of Ukraine’s overall system of inter-governmental relations.

In addition to the flow of inter-governmental revenues, the administrative status of a city also appears to be related
to its demographic characteristics. There appears to be a close relationship between the 2001-13 annual percentage
population decline and the administrative type of cities: the highest annual percentage population decline of 1.27% is
observed in the bottom-tier cities and a lower rate of 0.47% is observed at the intermediate tier, while top-tier cities


     97 Thus revenue autonomy does not require that local governments control (i.e., determine bases and rates for) all their revenue sources. It would
     be sufficient if they could substantially increase or decrease rates for a few taxes accounting for a meaningful share of their revenues, while
     the rest continued to come from a predictable and stable sharing of national tax revenues. However, there would be little revenue autonomy
     achieved if any additional revenue from higher local taxes was almost entirely offset with reduction in grants from the central government.
     98   Adopted by the Parliament on December 28, 2014 and January 15, 2015.
84
                       CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System

experienced a positive growth of population over the same time period. In addition to higher rates of population decline,
bottom-tier cities are characterized by having the smallest populations among the tiers as of 1989: more than half fell
into the category of mid-size towns (10-20,000 residents), with the rest of bottom-tier cities equally split between the
small town category (under 10,000 residents) and the large town category (between 20-50,000 residents). Therefore,
the excessive territorial fragmentation of sub-national government is not entirely a rural problem, but might also lead to
sub-optimal efficiencies in service provision in the bottom-tier cities.

Ukraine’s previous system of inter-governmental fiscal relations was shaped by the adoption of the Budget Code in
2001. At that time, the main political impetus for change was the discontent and political pressure exercised by local
governments in response to the poor management and alleged abuses by regional governments during the years of
transition prior to the reform. Among other provisions, the 2001 Budget Code made distinctions between delegated and
own responsibilities and provided different “revenue baskets” from revenue-sharing to ensure that enough funding was
present to finance the delegated responsibilities. Nevertheless, the Budget Code allowed sub-national governments to
spend any revenues from the delegated basket in any sector they wished as long as higher priority was given to the core
(“protected”) economic items.

As part of the reforms initiated with the adoption of the 2001 Budget Code, the non-transparent discretionary system
of inter-governmental revenues was supposed to be replaced with a formula-driven equalization system. The major
changes brought by the Budget Code included re-assignment of expenditure responsibilities among different levels
of government; long-term assignment of revenues from national taxes to local budgets; formula-based calculation of
equalization transfers; clear and transparent structure for the earmarked transfers; and delineation of conditions and
limits on local borrowing. The equalization grant determination was expected to be based on objective, neutral criteria
applying a uniform formula across the country to assess the revenue capacity and expenditure needs of sub-national
units. That system still employed negative transfers for rich jurisdictions while increasing objectivity in the sub-national
budget process and increasing budget predictability for local governments.

However, the predictability of the formula-driven system was compromised by a dozen new allocation factors that had
been added to the formula over the years. Furthermore, the ad hoc nature of these changes entrenched inefficiencies by
basing financing on characteristics of networks of local facilities and their staffing levels, thus implicitly financing the
existing network of service facilities and staffing as opposed to funding an objectively-determined demand for services.

The recent amendments to the Budget Code attempt to move away from financing existing infrastructure. The new
system of grants entirely disregards expenditure needs in the allocation of general-purpose grants, which are now
called “basic grants” instead of “equalization grants” in the past. The new general-purpose grants only aim to equalize
disparities in the revenues from the national PIT and CIT taxes that are decreed for local budgets on a derivation basis.

The recent amendments also encourage voluntary amalgamation of bottom-tier jurisdictions. A mechanism has been
developed in the Budget Code amendments for moving amalgamated communities into direct inter-governmental fiscal
relations with the national government, and granting them powers equivalent to those of sub-oblast-significant cities.
Similar to previous arrangements with national government provided for oblasts, sub-oblast cities and raions, it will
establish such direct inter-governmental fiscal relations also for amalgamated communities. The Government of Ukraine
declared that such changes represent a starting point for a transition from a three-tier to a two-tier system of local
self-government.




                                                                                                                         85
                               CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




Functional Responsibilities
In the assignment of functional responsibilities to local governments, a distinction is made between so-called “own
functions” versus “delegated or obligatory functions.” Obligatory functions are mandatory for all local government units
at the given level (see Table 12 below). “Own functions” include “hard” municipal services, such as local roads and
transport infrastructure, municipal transit, solid waste management, housing, and utilities. While the Law on Local
Self-Government does not differentiate functional responsibilities among types of cities, the Budget Code delegates
responsibilities in an asymmetric way with a larger portion being delegated to the higher-tier cities (see Annex VII).

While the average city size of 60,000 residents makes it viable for an average city to provide major social services,
including education and health care, almost a quarter of cities have fewer than 10,000 residents, which may be too small
to achieve the minimum efficient scale of provision.99 This is somewhat mitigated with the asymmetric delegation of
expenditure responsibilities in the Budget Code (see Annex VII). Thus major social services – including education, health
care, and social welfare – are mostly delegated to the top- and intermediate-tier cities, while bottom-tier cities are only
responsible for pre-school education and cultural/recreational centers. However, even among the intermediate-tier cities
there are four that have fewer than 10,000 inhabitants, indicating size alone isn’t determinative of responsibilities.

There are legal constraints on local government discretion in closing or rationalization of social infrastructure. Thus,
Article 26 of the Local Self-Government Law requires a local referendum to close a pre-school institution. Reportedly,
local governments are also bound by physical norms, such as staffing levels and other inputs mandated on the basis of
facility characteristics100. For example, the number of doctors is mandated based on the existing number of beds in health
facilities, or non-teaching staff based on the number of square meters of a school. Under current law, these physical
norms for decision-making have to be applied to the existing oversized and underutilized network of service facilities,
rather than have such decisions based on the actual demand for services.

Recent amendments to the Budget Code assigned some additional expenditure responsibilities to sub-national
governments. Expenditures for certain activities in social and cultural sectors were shifted to the oblast and local levels.
Previously such responsibilities (and related facilities) were all funded from the State budget. Furthermore, now sub-
national governments have to finance construction and maintenance of roads from the local budget; prior to 2015, they
drew from the national Road Fund.




     99 A large number of empirical studies that have sought findings regarding economies of scale for local government services show that most

     economies of scale are exhausted for local governments with populations over 10,000 residents. Economies of scale means the average cost
     decreases as the volume of service provision increases; for example, per-student costs of education are lower in municipalities with more
     students.
     100   Id. World Bank. 2008.
86
                         CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System


Table 12 – Functional responsibilities

       Function                         Own Responsibilities                                Delegated Responsibilities

    General public
                           Self-administration powers; municipal archives                              None
      services

                                                                                   Residence registration; emergency response;
 Defense, public order
                                    Civic defense; municipal police                permits for demonstrations and recreational
     and safety
                                                                                  events; administrative courts; civil registration

                              Land use management; urban planning;
                                                                                  Price control; consumer protection; investment
                            construction and maintenance of local public
                                                                                    promotion; identification of non-residential
   Economic affairs       roads; transit fares, routes and schedules; public
                                                                                   properties; enforcement of building and land
                           parking; markets and fairs; licensing of outdoor
                                                                                                  codes; land titles
                                             advertising

                              Licensing the use of natural resources of
    Environmental           local significance; preservation; solid waste             Re-forestation; enforcement of waste
      protection           management; local programs of environmental                         management laws
                                             protection

                           Utility rates; public housing; water supply and
    Housing and           sewage systems; residential fuel supply; upkeep
                                                                                       Free housing for entitled individuals
 communal services          of public spaces and landscaping; upkeep of
                                              cemeteries

        Health                  Maintenance of municipal institutions                   Subsidized medicine and supplies

 Recreation, culture,
                                Maintenance of municipal institutions             Preservation of cultural and historical heritage
    and religion

                          Provision of general education; school transport;
      Education                                                                                   Free textbooks
                               maintenance of municipal institutions

                            Targeted assistance for disabled; municipal
                                                                                Child protection; municipal and regional
                         welfare programs; housing assistance for disabled,
    Social welfare                                                           programs of labor protection and employment;
                          veterans and other entitled individuals; burial of
                                                                                            long-term care
                                         indigent persons

Source: Law of Ukraine on local self-government (no. 280/97-vr, articles 25-41)




                                                                                                                                 87
                                               CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




  II. Revenue Sources
  Local government revenue sources fall into three main categories: (i) Own-source revenues (including property taxes
  and other local taxes, charges and fees); (ii) Shared revenues (e.g., PIT, excises, environmental tax, land fees, license fees,
  royalties for common natural resources)101; and (iii) Vertical transfers from higher-level governments (from the central,
  oblast and raion governments to cities). Similar to consolidated sub-national revenues, over 80 percent of city revenues
  come from retained shares of national taxes and other transfers (Figure 63). On average, less than 10 percent of total
  city revenues come from own sources, such as local taxes and non-tax charges.

  As can be expected from the asymmetrical allocation of revenues sources, there are clear differences in the composition
  of revenues among cities at different tiers of government (Figure 63). In 2013, cities at higher tiers of government were
  less dependent on explicit grants while relying more on non-tax revenues and locally retained shares of national taxes.
  This is likely to be a reflection of the arrangements for derivation-based sharing of revenues from national taxes, which
  had a larger share of tax collections (e.g., PIT) allocated to the budgets of higher-tier governments. Since, until 2015,
  equalization grants were filling the gap between projected revenues and expenditures of cities, higher revenues from
  shared taxes in higher-tier cities were associated with smaller allocations of equalization grants. One has to note that in
  per capita terms bottom-tier cities received almost four times more in explicit grants than the intermediate-tier cities
  while having more than half of the amount of revenues from other sources. As will be later corroborated in the analyses
  of expenditures, this is likely to be related to the sub-optimal scale of service provision at the bottom tier.


  For the most part, there were no major differences in revenue composition observed among the night light categories of
  cities102 (Figure 64). This not surprising as each night light category includes cities from both bottom and intermediate
  tiers of government (the two top-tier cities belong to sub-type A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery).


  Figure 63 – Type of city revenues and % of total provided by different tiers of government, 2013

                  100%                                                                                                     100%
                   90%                                                                                                     90%
                   80%                                                                                                     80%
                   70%                                                                                                     70%
                   60%                                                                                                     60%
UAH per capita




                                                                                                     % of total revenues




                   50%                                                                                                     50%
                                573




                   40%                                                                                                     40%
                                                       2,334




                                                                              8,100




                   30%                                                                                                     30%
                   20%                                                                                                     20%
                   10%                                                                                                      10%
                    0%                                                                                                      0%
                                   p                    te                                                                              p                    e
                                 To                  dia                  m                                                           To                  iat       tto
                                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                    e                  tto                                                                             med        Bo
                                                 erm                 Bo
                                                                                                                                                  Int
                                                                                                                                                     er
                                              Int
                                                                                      Taxes on                                                         Taxes on
                                                                                                  Local taxes                                          personal
                 Transfers             Shared Taxes            Other Taxes            natural                                     Special funds                     Non tax revenues
                                                                                                  and duties                                           property
                                                                                      resources


                  101 Under derivation-based sharing, national government taxes are collected by the national tax authorities and then partially (or in some cases,
                  fully) allocated to the budget of the local government in whose territory collection takes place. As it is a form of inter-governmental transfer,
                  derivation-based sharing of revenues from national taxes is discussed in the corresponding section below.
                  102   The night light categories used for this Chapter are the six categories presented in the Annex VI. Extensive growth.
  88
                          CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



However, bottom-tier cities are more likely to be among the Missed Disappear and Appear categories and thus have no
type assigned in the second night light typology. This explains a higher dependency on explicit grants for cities with no
type, given that such transfer dependency was common for bottom-tier cities. For the same reason, in the sub-type F
(thriving core, shrinking footprint), explicit grants accounted for a smaller share of revenues than shared tax revenues
as both cities comprising this sub-type belong to the intermediate tier, and were thus less dependent on transfers103.
However, this pattern cannot explain the lower transfer dependence in sub-type D cities (growing light intensity in
shrinking footprint), even though it has the highest proportion of the bottom-tier cities (70 percent). The low amount of
transfer dependency in sub-type D is due to one of the lowest per capita allocations of explicit grants, rather than higher
revenues raised locally. Note that sub-types B (Declining in all aspects) and E (Growing light intensity in an expanding
periphery) received among the highest amounts of grants per capita despite also having average levels of locally-derived
revenues. As we will see later, this translated into the highest per capita expenditures on social services among categories
of cities.

Figure 64 – Composition of city revenues by night light type as % of total, 2013
100%                                                                                      9,000

 90%                                                                                      8,000
 80%                                                                                      7,000
 70%
                                                                                          6,000
                                                                         UAH per capita


 60%
                                                                                          5,000
 50%
                                                                                          4,000
 40%




                                                                                                                    4,504


                                                                                                                             2,760
                                                                                                            5,457




                                                                                                                                     5,753
                                                                                                  4,136




                                                                                                                                                            7,194
                                                                                                                                                  852
                                                                                          3,000
 30%
                                                                                          2,000
 20%
                                                                                          1,000
                                                                                                                    1,092




                                                                                                                                     1,249
                                                                                                                             1,027




                                                                                                                                                  1,738
                                                                                                            1,166
                                                                                                  1,176




 10%




                                                                                                                                                            978
  0%                                                                                         0
          A




                                                                                                  A
                                                    F




                                                                                                                                                  F
                 B


                         C


                                  D


                                          E




                                                          No type




                                                                                                            B


                                                                                                                    C


                                                                                                                             D


                                                                                                                                     E




                                                                                                                                                           No type
                                                        Taxes on                                                      Taxes on
                                                                         Local taxes                                  personal
  Transfers        Shared Taxes       Other Taxes       natural                                   Special funds                              Non tax revenues
                                                                         and duties                                   property
                                                        resources

Notes: : These figures only include transfers received by the city proper, but not its subdivisions.
A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
B: Declining in all aspects;
C: Dimming periphery;
D: Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint;
E: Declining economic activities in the core, growing area with stronger peripheries;
F: Thriving core, shrinking footprint.


As with the administrative tiers of cities, the patterns in revenue composition show a similar relationship to city population
size (Figure 65 below). Larger cities tend to depend less on explicit grants while relying more on non-tax revenues and
locally-retained shares of national taxes. Again this appears to be driven more by differences in per capita amounts of
explicit grants rather than per capita yield of locally-derived revenues (own-source and shared at source). In per capita
terms, small towns received over ten times more in explicit grants than major cities, while the difference in locally-derived
revenues was less than two-fold.



   103 As type 4, coinciding with sub-type F, is comprised of just two major cities (Donetsk and Zaporizhia), we do not attempt to find any

   generalized patterns for this type/sub-type of cities.
                                                                                                                                                                 89

                                                                    17
                                                  CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



  Figure 65 – Composition of city revenues by population size as % of total, 2013
                         70%
                                                                                                                                            14,000
                                                                               Special funds                                                                                                               Transfers
                        60%                                                                                                                 12,000
                                                                               Non-tax                                                                                                                     Shared Taxes
                        50%                                                    revenues
                                                                                                                                            10,000
% of total revenues




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Other Taxes
                         40%                                                   Local taxes




                                                                                                                          UAH per capita
                                                                               and duties                                                    8,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Taxes on natural
                                                                                                                                                                                                           resources
                        30%                                                    Taxes on personal                                             6,000
                                                                               property                                                                                                                    Taxes on personal
                                                                                                                                                                                                           property
                         20%                                                                                                                 4,000
                                                                               Taxes on natural                                                                                                            Local taxes and




                                                                                                                                                         11,246



                                                                                                                                                                          3,826



                                                                                                                                                                                          5,794
                                                                                                                                                                                  2,619
                                                                                                                                                                  7,341




                                                                                                                                                                                                  863
                                                                               resources                                                                                                                   duties
                         10%                                                                                                                 2,000
                                                                               Other taxes                                                                                                                 Non tax revenues
                          0%                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Special funds
                                         ies




                                                                               Shared taxes
                                        ies
                                           s




                            Sm ns



                                       ies
                                          s
                                      wn

                                     wn




                                     cit



                                     cit
                                      w



                                    cit




                                                                                                                                                              ies



                                                                                                                                                             ies
                                                                                                                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                 Sm ns
                                   to




                                                                                                                                                            ies
                                   to




                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                                           wn
                                  to



                                 all



                                jor




                                                                                                                                                          wn




                                                                                                                                                          cit



                                                                                                                                                          cit
                               ize




                                                                                                                                                           w
                               all




                                                                                                                                                         cit
                             rge
                             ize




                                                                                                                                                        to




                                                                                                                                                        to
                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                       to
                           Sm




                            ds




                                                                                                                                                      all



                                                                                                                                                     jor
                                                                                                                                                    ize
                          ds

                           La




                                                                                                                                                    all




                                                                                                                                                  rge
                                                                                                                                                  ize
                         Mi




                                                                                                                                                 Ma
                                                                               Transfers




                                                                                                                                                Sm




                                                                                                                                                 ds
                        Mi




                                                                                                                                               ds

                                                                                                                                                La



                                                                                                                                              Mi
                                                                                                                                             Mi
   Furthermore, the relationship between transfer dependence and population size does not seem to stem from population
   decline (Figure 66 below). While the per capita yield of locally-derived revenues was inversely related to population decline,
   this dynamic did not hold for the per capita amount of grants. The amount of grants decreased with population decline
   up to the national average rate, possibly reflecting the use of a smaller client population size in the determination of
   expenditure needs in the equalization grant formula. However, for cities with population declining at a rate above the
   national average, more resources were allocated in grants per capita than for cities with population declining more than
   the urban average but less than the national average. The greater allocation of grants per capita to cities with population
   declining more than the national average might have been due to adjustments for under-utilized social infrastructure in
   the calculation of expenditures needs.

  Figure 66 – Composition of city revenues as % of total relative to population decline, 2013
                       9,000
                                                                                                                          100%
                       8,000                                                                                                90%
                        7,000                                                                                               80%
                                                                                                    % of total revenues




                                                                                                                             70%
                       6,000
                                                                                                                            60%
UHA per capita




                       5,000                                                                                                50%
                                                                                                                             40%
                                       6,683




                                                                             5,544
                                                      5,796




                                                                    4,647




                       4,000
                                                                                                                            30%
                       3,000
                                                                                                                             20%
                       2,000                                                                                                  10%
                        1,000                                                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                                                    th




                                                                                                                                                                       ra n




                                                                                                                                                                       ra n




                                                                                                                                                                       ra n
                                                                                                                                                                     ve ha




                                                                                                                                                                     ve a




                                                                                                                                                                     ve a
                                                                                                                                                  ow




                                                                                                                                                                  l a s th




                                                                                                                                                                  l a th




                            0
                                                                                                                                                                         ge




                                                                                                                                                                         ge




                                                                                                                                                                         ge
                                                                                                                                                                 na st
                                                                                                                                                gr




                                                                                                                                                                na ore
                                                                                                                                                              ba les




                                                                                                                                                                na es
                                                                                                                                                ive




                                                                                                                                                            tio m
                                                                                                                                                            tio t l
                                                                                                                                                           ur ut
                                                        th




                                                   ra n




                                                   ra n




                                                   ra n




                                                                                                                                                        na g bu
                                                                                                                                             sit




                                                                                                                                                        na ning
                                                 ve ha




                                                 ve a




                                                 ve a




                                                                                                                                                                gb
                                                      ow




                                              l a s th




                                              l a th




                                                                                                                                           Po
                                                     ge




                                                     ge




                                                     ge
                                             na st




                                                                                                                                                           nin




                                                                                                                                                           nin
                                                    gr




                                            na ore




                                                                                                                                                            cli
                                          ba les




                                            na es




                                                                                                                                                         De
                                 ive




                                                                                                                                                        cli




                                                                                                                                                        cli
                                        tio m
                                        tio t l
                                       ur ut




                                                                                                                                                      De




                                                                                                                                                      De
                                    na g bu
                              sit




                                    na ning
                                            gb
                            Po




                                       nin




                                       nin




                                        cli
                                     De
                                    cli




                                    cli
                                  De




                                  De




                                                                            Taxes on                                                                                                 Taxes on
                                                                                                   Local taxes                                                                       personal
                      Transfers            Shared Taxes       Other Taxes   natural                                                                   Special funds                                     Non tax revenues
                                                                                                   and duties                                                                        property
                                                                            resources
  90
                        CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




Own Sources of Revenues
Until 2015, the Tax Code authorized just five revenue instruments for own sources of local government revenues (Table 13).
Recent amendments abolished one of the five revenue instruments (the fee for the certain business activities), while
extending the coverage of the local property tax to include land and movable property. For the items on the list of
authorized local revenue instruments, local authorities have some discretion in setting the rates subject to nation-wide
ceilings or floors. However, the tax base is defined in national legislation and the actual administration of these revenue
instruments is carried out by the national revenue authority. Further, with respect to the portion of the revenues from the
national land tax that is shared with local budgets, sub-national governments can offer tax exemptions and other kinds
of preferential tax treatment and hardship relief. With respect to non-agricultural land plots with no appraised value,
local councils are to set land tax rates in UAH per square meter differentiated by location with a ceiling of three times
the base rate prescribed for the respective locality in the Tax Code.


Table 13 – Own sources of local government revenues

                        Who can
   Tax name                                Who defines the base                                 Who sets the rate
                        introduce

                                                                           For each type of property and ownership, national legislation
    Tax on real                            National legislation (total
                      Mandated by                                         sets the rate ceiling in % of the minimum wage per 1 sq. meter
   estate other                              area of a residential
                    national legislation                                   of tax base while local councils can adopt a reduced rate for
     than land                                    property)
                                                                            apartments under 240 sq. m. and houses under 500 sq. m.

                                                                         For businesses with fewer than 10 employees and less than 1mln
                                              National legislation
                                                                          UAH in income, local councils set the rate within the range set
                      Mandated by            (duration of business
    Single tax                                                             by national legislation (10-20% of minimum wage per month);
                    national legislation    activity in months or in
                                                                         for larger businesses, rates are set by national legislation as % of
                                               business income)
                                                                                                   business income

  Fee for certain
                      Mandated by          National legislation (days      Local councils within the range set by national legislation for
     business
                    national legislation     of business activity)             each type of activity (% of minimum wage per day)
    activities

  Fee for parking                          National legislation (area       Local councils within the range set by national legislation
                      Local councils
    of vehicles                            of public parking spots)         (0.03 to 0.15% of minimum wage per 1 sq. meter per day)

                                              National legislation
                                                                             Local councils within the range set by national legislation
   Tourist tax        Local councils       (value of accommodation
                                                                                                     (0.5 to 1%)
                                               services rendered)

Source: Tax Code

Note: To index for inflation, tax rates are set not in nominal amounts, but as a fraction of the minimum wage, which is
periodically adjusted by the national government.




                                                                                                                                             91
                                            CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



Until 2015, business taxes were the most utilized of all own revenue instruments available to local governments in Ukraine.104
By far the largest per capita yield was recorded for the Single Tax, which is paid by small business in lieu of the income
tax and other national taxes. The next most utilized own source of local revenues were fees for certain business activities
(essentially a business license with an element of imputed income taxation). The least utilized revenue instrument was
the property tax on structures, on average generating only 28 kopiyok (cents) per person. For any category of cities, the
Single Tax accounted for more than 80 percent of own tax revenues.
Table 14 – Utilization of local revenue instruments by cities as % of UAH per capita, 2013

                           Revenue source              % of own tax                  Average                            Minimum                 Maximum          Coef. of
                                                         revenues                                                                                               variation

                 Tax on real estate, other than              0.3%                     0.28                                 0.00                   9.59            2.78
                              land

                             Single Tax                     90.9%                     97.57                                0.00                  420.52           1.04

      Fee for certain business activities                    7.2%                     9.12                                 0.00                  82.63            1.35

                  Fee for parking of vehicles                 1.1%                    0.78                                 0.00                  11.96            2.89

                             Tourist Tax                     0.6%                     1.05                                 0.00                  61.85            5.90


There is a strong relationship between the night light topology and the utilization of own sources of revenues. Cities that are
thriving in all respects (type 1 or sub-type A) generated at least 50 percent more revenue than the average per capita
revenue from each own revenue instrument except for the Tourist Tax105 (Figure 67). This is particularly true for parking
fees. Similarly, the Found and Appear night light typologies have higher per capita revenues from own taxes than Missed
and Disappear cities. A possible explanation might be the creation of small businesses – part of the positive relationship
between night lights and economic activity previously discussed in Section 4.


Figure 67 – Utilization of local revenue instruments by cities, UAH per capita, 2013
                  150                                                                                              2


                                                                                                                  1.5
                  100
UAH per capita




                                                                                                 UAH per capita




                                                                                                                    1

                   50
                                                                                                                  0.5


                       0                                                                                           0
                                   Single tax                Business patents                                               Real estate tax      Parking fees   Tourist tax

                                                              Type 1        Type 2           Type 3                     Type 4        No type



                 104 These relative contributions of businesses vis-a-vis residents in the total revenues from local taxes might look different in 2015, after

                 property taxes on land and vehicles have been moved from the list of national taxes to the list of local taxes. When the vehicle tax was still a
                 national tax in 2013, ninety percent of its revenues came from individual car owners while the rest came from corporate entities. Similarly, two
                 thirds of the land tax revenues came from individual owners and only one third came from corporate entities.
                 105The more nuanced approach to the typology reveals that high per capita amount of revenues from the Tourist Tax found for type 2 is
                 actually driven by sub-type B (declining in all aspects).
92
                                          CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



There is also a noticeable association between population decline and the yield of local taxes (Figure 68). Cities with higher
population decline appear to raise less revenue per capita from own taxes relative to the yield of national taxes shared
with local governments.



Figure 68 – Utilization of local revenue instruments by city night light typology, UAH per capita, 2013
                  200                                                                                                 4
UAH per capita




                                                                                                    UAH per capita
                  100                                                                                                 2



                   0                                                                                                  0

                                 Single tax                          Business patents                                          Real estate tax              Parking fees            Tourist tax



                                      Positive growth                 Declining but less than urban average                              Declining but less than national average



There is only a weak association between population size and per capita revenues from own taxes, but which does not hold
at all for the Tourist Tax (Figure 69). Major cities have particularly high per capita revenues from parking fees and the
Single Tax.




Figure 69 – Utilization of local revenue instruments by city population size, in UAH per capita, 2013

                  250                                                                                                 4
                  200
 UAH per capita




                                                                                                     UAH per capita




                                                                                                                      3
                  150
                                                                                                                      2
                  100
                   50                                                                                                     1

                    0                                                                                                 0
                                Single tax                       Business patents                                                 Real estate tax                Parking fees             Tourist tax



                        Small towns                 Mid size towns                 Large towns                            Small cities                     Mid size cities            Major cities




Before the revamping of the list of local tax handles with the introduction of the 2011 Tax Code, per capita revenue had been
steadily declining capita terms (Figure 70). This might be explained in part by the economic crisis. The decline in per capita
revenues had been larger in cities with declining population.

Abolishment of a plethora of unproductive local taxes with the 2011 Tax Code coincided with a dramatic increase in per capita
revenues. Cities that had experienced a larger revenue loss before 2011 also saw larger revenue increase in the years
after. Throughout this up-and-down cycle, there is a noticeable association between the rate of population decline and
the levels of local tax collection (Figure 71).




                                                                                                                                                                                                        93
                                    CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



 Figure 70 – Per capita revenue from own taxes and the night light typology of sub-oblast cities, in
 UAH, 2013

                  250



                  200
 UAH per capita




                  150

                                                                            A

                  100                                                       B
                                                                            C
                                                                            D
                   50
                                                                            E
                                                                            F
                    0                                                       No type
                        2006   2007 2008   2009 2010   2011   2012   2013


 Note: Due to lack of data, bottom tier cities are not included.
 A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
 B: Declining in all aspects;
 C: Dimming periphery;
 D: Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint;
 E: Declining economic activities in the core, growing area with stronger peripheries;
 F: Thriving core, shrinking footprint.


 Figure 71 – Per capita revenue from own taxes and population decline of sub-oblast cities, in UAH, 2013

                  250




                  200




                  150
UAH per capita




                                                                                Positive growth
                  100
                                                                                Declining but less than
                                                                                urban average

                   50                                                           Declining but less than
                                                                                national average

                                                                                Declining more than
                    0
                                                                                national average
                        2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013



  Note: Due to lack of data, bottom tier cities are not included.

  94
                           CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




Shared Tax Revenue and Other Transfers
Local governments are assigned a share of revenues from national taxes (e.g., PIT) on a derivation basis. That is, these
revenues are (partially) shared with the locality where they are collected. In addition to the PIT revenues, until 2015
top-tier local governments also received 50% of the revenue from royalties on forests, water, and mineral resources of
national significance (except oil and gas), and 100% revenue from other common natural resources (including land) and
excise taxes. The 2015 amendments to the Budget Code changed sharing rates for many of these taxes. In addition, the
national property taxes on land and vehicles, the revenues from which had been previously allocated to local budgets, now
have become entirely local taxes.

Under this derivation-based sharing, national government taxes are collected by the national tax authorities. Then they are
partially (or fully in the case of the land tax) allocated to the budget of the local government in whose territory collection
takes place. This revenue-sharing occurs based on uniform sharing rates (so that all lower-level government jurisdictions
receive the same share of revenues collected within their jurisdiction as in the case of excise tax revenues) or based on a
differentiated sharing rate structure in which different jurisdictions receive a different percentage of the shared revenue
source, as in the case of PIT.

Until the recent amendments to the Budget Code, the rates of derivation-based sharing of revenue from the national
PIT were as following106: Up to year 2014, the City of Kyiv received 50% of the PIT revenue collected in its territory (40%
stating in 2015), (i) Up to year 2014, The City of Sevastopol received 100% of the PIT revenue collected in its territory,
(ii) 75% of the PIT revenue was allocated to the budget of the districts and sub-oblast cities where collection takes place
(60% starting in 2015), (iii) 25% of the PIT revenue was allocated to the budget of the bottom-tier jurisdiction where
collection takes place (ending in 2015).

The derivation-based sharing of revenues from national taxes is complemented by explicit grants from the national government
to oblasts and districts and from there passed on to constituent cities and rural municipalities. As can be seen from Figure
61 above, grants from the central budget to sub-national levels have been steadily increasing from a 5.95 percent share
of GDP in 2007 to 8.53 percent in 2012 and then slightly reversing to 7.70 percent of GDP in 2013.

This non-transparent discretionary process was replaced with a formula-driven equalization system for local government
finances as part of substantial reforms initiated with the adoption of the Budget Code in 2001. The major changes brought
by the Budget Code included reassignment of expenditure responsibilities among different levels of government; long-
term assignment of shares from national tax revenues to local governments at the point of collection; formula-based
calculation of the equalization grants; clear and transparent structure of the earmarked transfers; and the articulation
of the conditions and limits on local borrowing. As a result, the formulation of local government budgets started being
based on more objective, neutral criteria using a uniform formula across the country to compute revenue capacity and
expenditure needs.

The legal basis for the present system of inter-governmental transfers is provided by the Budget Code (Article 96). Before
changes in 2015, the 2001 Budget Code envisioned four types of transfers: equalization grants, (i) subventions, (ii)
additional grants, (iii) other funds transferred to the state budget and local budgets from other local budgets (mutual
settlements).




   106 The sharing rates are mostly an outcome of political bargaining. Thus, the recent reduction of Kyiv City’s share in the PIT revenues from 50
   to 40 percent was initially proposed as 20 percent.
                                                                                                                                                      95
                         CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



Equalization grants aim to cover the gap between assessed expenditure needs and “potential” revenue from own and
shared taxes. Until the recent amendments to the 2001 Budget Code, the total pool of equalization transfer funds had
been comprised of negative transfers from rich jurisdictions and topped up with annual appropriations from the national
budget. Thus, the overall size of the available pool of funds had been arbitrary and non-fixed. Currently, some of these
central government grants are passed by districts to sub-district municipalities. The additional equalization transfers are
allocated among regions based on specific features of depressed and mountainous areas, and areas with low population
levels and the network of public institutions. Thus, no less than three-quarters of additional equalization grants has to
be passed on by oblasts to the sub-oblast units.

Subventions are used to transfer funds to be used by the recipient government for the purpose – and in the manner
– specified by the grantor. They are mostly used to fund social entitlements delegated to sub-national authorities for
fulfillment. Subventions can also be used to fund other earmarked uses such as public investment projects.

Additional grants are unplanned transfers allocated in the course of the fiscal year. They can be used to compensate local
governments for revenue losses resulting from changes to national government policies, such as tax preferences. They are
also used as a mechanism to share with local governments any over-collection of revenues from national taxes.

Other funds (mutual settlements) can be transferred between different governments in exchange for mutually-agreed
public services provided by the recipient of the transfer. For example, one local government can provide services to the
residents of other local governments.

In 2013, less than half of overall transfers came through equalization grants, which offered local governments both
predictability and discretion in allocating these resources according to local priorities (Figure 72). The rest came through
subventions, which were earmarked for specific uses, mostly to fulfill social entitlements.

Figure 72 – Composition of inter-governmental transfers to cities by type, 2013
100%

90%

80%

70%                                                         Subventions

60%
                                                            Additional grants
50%

40%
                                                            Equalization grants
30%

20%                                                         Mutual settlements

 10%

 0%
        A      B     C      D      E     F     No
                                               type

Note:
A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
B: Declining in all aspects;
C: Dimming periphery;
D: Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint;
E: Declining economic activities in the core, growing area with stronger peripheries;
F: Thriving core, shrinking footprint.

96
                              CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



In terms of the composition of inter-governmental revenues, there are no major differences observed among the night
light types of cities (other than a higher share of subventions in total transfers received by sub-types D and E). The high
transfer-dependency previously found for the no-type cities appears to be due to larger allocations of equalization grants.
Similarly, small allocations of equalization grants appear to be behind the lower transfer-dependency exhibited by sub-
types F and D.

Cities with larger population declines were associated with a smaller share of subventions, but a larger share of additional
equalization grants. This is not surprising given that the 2001 Budget Code required oblast governments to take into
account “specific features of depressed and mountainous areas, and areas with low population levels and a widespread
network of government-funded institutions” (Article 97). As the additional grants were more discretionary and ad hoc,
this suggests softer budget constraints for cities with larger population decline. Thus, larger allocations of grants per
capita to cities with population declining more than the national average were more likely to be related to under-utilized
social infrastructure than to a greater presence of a population entitled to social benefits – which would be funded with
subventions from the central government.

Figure 73 – Composition of inter-governmental transfers to cities by population trend, 2013

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%                                                                                                  Subventions

30%                                                                                                  Additional grants
20%
                                                                                                     Equalization grants
 10%
                                                                                                     Mutual settlements
 0%
            Positive growth




                                 Declining but less
                               than urban average




                                                          Declining but less
                                                      than national average




                                                                               Declining more than
                                                                                 national average




                                                                                                                           97
                                 CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



Larger cities received a larger share of inter-governmental grants in the form of subventions and additional grants while
their share of equalization grants was smaller (Figure 74). This reduced allocation of equalization grants to major cities
might reflect both higher yield of locally-derived revenues and smaller estimates of expenditure needs due to better
utilized infrastructure. At the same time, larger per capita allocations of additional grants to bigger cities might reflect
their better bargaining power before the central government.



Figure 74 – Composition of inter-governmental transfers to cities by population size, 2013

100%

90%

80%                                                                      Subventions

70%
                                                                         Additional grants
60%

50%
                                                                         Equalization grants
40%

30%                                                                      Mutual settlements

20%

 10%

 0%

           Small      Mid size      Large   Small    Mid size   Major
           towns      towns         towns   cities    cities    cities




Conceptually, the amount of equalization grants from the national budget to local government budgets (which in reality were
originally derived from local government contributions to the equalization pool) was calculated as the difference between
estimated expenditure need of the given local government and the forecasted (by a uniform formula) amount of revenues to
be collected in the respective territory. The expenditure need for each local government was equal to the product of three
items: a) the basic expenditure norm (per capita, or per student, etc.); b) the population or the number of students, etc.
in the locality; and c) a set of coefficients that worked to adjust the expenditure need up or down for special needs and/
or differential costs of service provision. Among other things, the adjustment coefficients were based on the target ratio
of the number of employees of local self-government bodies in relation to the population level (Budget Code, Article 98).


The dozens of new adjustment factors that had been added to the formula over the years are believed to have undermined the
formula’s predictability while also entrenching inefficiencies. This is because the subsequent adjustments tie financing to
facility network characteristics and staffing levels; thus, they implicitly finance the existing network of service facilities
and staffing as opposed to funding an objective demand for services107.




     107   Id. World Bank. 2008

98
                       CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



In addition to allocating equalization grants for oblast and sub-oblast units, the national government also set minimum per
capita (per client) norms to be used by district governments in allocating equalization grants among constituent units. The
allocation of intra-district equalization transfers had to be approved by the respective oblast government; if the district
budget was not adopted on time, the allocation of intra-district equalization grants was to be decided by the oblast
government.


In 2015, the system of equalization grants was substantially revamped. According to the explanatory note accompanying
amendments to the Budget Code, the new equalization grants (now called “basic grant”) will be of a compensatory
nature and aim at bridging disparities in revenue capacity of local governments related to derivation-based sharing of
the personal income tax and corporate income tax. A new equalization system will be based on the per capita level of
revenues. By contrast, the previous system was based on the gap between per capita expenditure needs and revenue
projections. Now, if the local yield of the shared tax exceeds the national average by 10 percent or more, half of this
surplus revenue is withdrawn into the State budget (a negative grant). In the opposite case of a below-average yield of
the shared tax, the State will only compensate 80% of the shortfall.
Local revenues from other sources are not subject to equalization and shall remain at the complete disposal of local
budgets.


Since education and healthcare expenditure needs are no longer covered by the equalization grants, a new system of earmarked
subventions will be implemented, also based on a formula approach (to be established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine)
At the same time, the amendments to the Budget Code mandate that the purpose of the funds from these new
subventions will be for long-term programs and projects. In addition, funds remaining at the end of the fiscal year will no
longer be withdrawn into the State budget, but can be used for renewal of the material and technological base of relevant
institutions. This dramatic departure from the previous system is expected by the Government, among other goals, to
help improve the efficiency of using budgeted funds since local governments will no longer try to expend subvention
resources “at any price” at the end of the year without regard for whether an expenditure is an efficient one.




                                                                                                                         99
                                     CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




  III. Analysis of Expenditures
  While cities account for over 60 percent of total national population, in 2013 they accounted for 57 percent of sub-
  national expenditures on education and 46 percent of sub-national expenditures on health care, but 77 percent of
  sub-national expenditures on housing and utilities. This suggests that in per capita terms, cities spend on health care
  less than two-thirds of the amount spent on these services provided to the population outside of cities. Similar to the
  consolidated sub-national expenditures shown in Figure 61, in 2013 the three social sectors (education, health care, and
  social welfare) accounted for over 80 percent of city expenditures (Figure 75 below).

  In terms of functional composition of city expenditures, there are no major differences among night light types. The only
  exception is sub-type F (thriving core, shrinking footprint), where a smaller share is allocated to the three social services
  while a larger share is allocated to Housing and Utilities and other non-social services, in particular Economic Affairs.


  Figure 75 – Functional composition of city expenditures by sub-type, 2013

                 10,000
                                                                                           100%

                 8,000
                                                                                            80%
UAH per capita




                 6,000                                                                      60%
                                                                              % of total




                  4,000                                                                      40%

                  2,000                                                                      20%


                         0                                                                    0%




                                                                                                                                     No type
                                                                    No type




                                                                                                                      D




                                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                 C
                                                     D




                                                             F




                                                                                                             B
                                                         E




                                                                                                         A
                                            C
                                    B
                             A




                 Other           Housing and Utilities       Social Welfare                Health Care           Education

  Note:
  A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
  B: Declining in all aspects;
  C: Dimming periphery;
  D: Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint;
  E: Declining economic activities in the core, growing area with stronger peripheries;
  F: Thriving core, shrinking footprint.
   However, there are wide disparities across city sub-types in per capita levels of expenditures on each function. The highest
   per capita expenditures are observed in sub-types B (Declining in all aspects) and E (Growing light intensity in expanding
   periphery). These high per capita expenditures in sub-types B and E are driven by the three social services, in particular
   social protection. The lowest per capita expenditures are observed in sub-types D (growing light intensity in shrinking
   footprint) and F (Thriving core, shrinking footprint). As indicated above, the greatest amount of inter-governmental grants
   were allocated to sub-types B and E, while the least amount was allocated to sub-types D and F. Thus, the disparities
   among city categories appear, if not directly caused, then accommodated with the allocation of inter-governmental
   grants. One possible explanation is the use of the public sector as an employer of last resort in declining cities. At the
   same time, it appears that a shrinking footprint in the presence of some economic growth is associated with smaller
   amounts of per capita expenditures and grants.


  100
                            CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



At least for the intermediate-tier cities, there is a divergence in per capita expenditures on social sectors among night light
categories of cities until 2012 (Figure 76). However, the overall reduction of sub-national expenditures in 2013 had a
greater impact on the expenditures of sub-type B cities and cities without any type. These are the cities showing highest
per capita expenditures in 2009-2012. At the same time sub-types D and F, having the lowest per capita expenditures,
actually saw an increase in expenditures on education and social welfare in 2013. Thus, 2013 might represent the first
year of rationalizing under-utilized social infrastructure in small cities.

Figure 76: Per capita expenditures on social sectors by night light category in sub-oblast cities, in
UAH, 2013
                                 Education                                                                Social Welfare
 1,700                                                                           1,500

1,500                                                                            1,300

1,300                                                                            1,100

1,100                                                                              900


  900                                                                              700


  700                                                                              500
             2009    2010      2011      2012      2013                                  2009     2010      2011       2012    2013

         A             B                C                 D                  E              F                No type


Furthermore, there are 47 outlier cities (or 10 percent of all cities) with levels of per capita current expenditures more than
four times the median level. These outliers represent 468,000 people (1.7%) out of the 27.5 million total city population of
the country, but account for 10% of the total expenditures of cities.


These extremely high levels of per capita expenditures in outlier cities appear to be primarily driven by the small scale of
service provision since their average population is six times smaller than the average city.108 All but three outliers fall into
the categories of small and mid-size towns. In fact, in all types of cities we observe an inverse relationship between
population size and per capita expenditure in all sectors except Housing and Utilities and other non-social sectors (Figure
77). In social sectors, larger cities can enjoy lower unit costs as their large population size allows them to take advantage
of economies of scale. These economies of scale are particularly visible in the Education and Social Welfare sectors.
But large cities also need to spend more on urban infrastructure to deal with urban congestion. For larger cities, higher
per capita expenditures on non-social sectors might reflect either higher costs for the same level of services or more
extensive and/or better quality of services. Indeed, larger municipalities are able to provide a larger scope of services (and
often better quality of services) than very small municipalities; thus, their per capita expenditures capture both lower
costs and better services.




    108 Empirical studies from other countries suggest that economies of scale in the delivery of municipal services are mostly exhausted at an

    average size of 10,000 inhabitants, even though there are some special services, such as urban transportation and solid waste utilization, where
    economies of scale improve up to the size of 100,000 inhabitants (Lago-Peña and Martinez-Vazquez, 2013)
                                                                                                                                                   101

                                                                        17
                                          CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System


  Figure 77 – Average per capita expenditures by function and city population size, 2013

                  5,000


                  4,000
                                                                                                                                              Education
 UAH per capita




                  3,000
                                                                                                                                              Healthcare

                  2,000
                                                                                                                                              Social welfare

                  1,000
                                                                                                                                              Housing and Utilities

                     0
                                                                                                                                              Other

                                    wn
                                      s
                                                         s             wn
                                                                         s                  ies                 ies            ies
                                  to                   wn            to                  cit                 cit            cit
                            all                    e to        rg
                                                                 e                 all                 ize              jor
                          Sm                    siz          La                  Sm                 ids               Ma
                                            d
                                          Mi                                                       M


    Possibly due to their small size, the outlier cities disproportionally fall into the Appear and Missed types. As a result, half
    of the outliers are unclassified in the night light topology. Of those that are classified, over two-thirds are sub-type B
    (Declining in all aspects), which is greater than the proportion for all cities. Earlier we saw that cities in sub-type B and
    those without any type receive the highest per capita amount of inter-governmental grants.

  Figure 78 –Per capita expenditures by function and population trend, 2013

                  3,500

                  3,000

                  2,500                                                                                                              Education
UHA per capita




                  2,000
                                                                                                                                     Healthcare
                  1,500

                  1,000                                                                                                              Social welfare

                   500
                                                                                                                                     Housing and Utilities
                     0
                                        th




                                                          ra n




                                                                                       ra n




                                                                                                               ra n




                                                                                                                                     Other
                                                        ve ha




                                                                                     ve a




                                                                                                             ve a
                                      ow




                                                                                  l a s th




                                                                                                          l a th
                                                            ge




                                                                                         ge




                                                                                                                 ge
                                                      na st
                                    gr




                                                                                                        na ore
                                                    ba les




                                                                                na es
                               ive




                                                                                                    tio m
                                                                             tio t l
                                                  ur ut




                                                                         na g bu
                            sit




                                                                                                  na ning
                                                     gb
                          Po




                                                  nin




                                                                            nin




                                                                                                    cli
                                                                                                  De
                                               cli




                                                                         cli
                                             De




                                                                       De




    Furthermore, the sub-optimal scale of service provision in the 47 outlier cities does not seem to have been caused by
    population decline. In fact, only one-third of outliers have population declining more than the urban average and a quarter
    of them actually experienced population growth. There appears to be a clear U-shape relationship between population
    decline and per capita expenditures in all sectors except Housing and Utilities (Figure 78). Higher rates of population
    decline are associated with lower per capita expenditures in those sectors – except for cities declining more than the
    national average, where per capita expenditures are almost as high as in growing cities. This might be due to an interplay
    between availability of resources and economies of scale. Cities with population decline less than the national average
    might exhibit lower per capita expenditures dues to lower resource availability. However, with higher rates of population
    decline, the lack of economies of scale outweighs low resource availability, which cities offset by obtaining larger inter-
    governmental transfers. This U-shape relationship persisted throughout 2009-2013 (Figure 79).


   102
                              CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System


Figure 79 – Per capita expenditures on social sectors by population decline in sub-oblast cities, in UAH,
2013
                                  Education                                                                          Social Welfare
2,100                                                                          1700

1,900                                                                          1500

1,700
                                                                               1300
1,500
                                                                               1100
1,300
                                                                               900
1,100

                                                                               700
 900

 700                                                                           500
            2009       2010         2011      2012      2013                                2009           2010           2011        2012         2013

         Positive growth                             Declining but less than                   Declining but less than                       Declining more than
                                                     urban average                             national average                              national average


In terms of the economic composition of city expenditures, again there are no major differences among nightlight types. The
exception is a higher share of expenditures on current transfers and capital expenditures in sub-type F (see Figure 80).
One has to note the small share of city budgets allocated to capital expenditures, ranging from just 2.6 percent of total
expenditures in sub-type C cities to 10.9 percent in sub-type F cities. At the same time, the combined share of payroll
and social security expenses exceeds three quarters in all city types except sub-type F.

Figure 80 – Economic composition of city expenditures by city typology, 2013

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%
                                                                                  Capital transfers
50%
                                                                                  Capital assets
40%
                                                                                  Other current outlays
30%

20%                                                                               Social security

 10%                                                                              Current transfers

 0%

        A          B          C         D      E        F        No
                                                                 type
Note:
A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
B: Declining in all aspects;
C: Dimming periphery;
D: Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint;
E: Declining economic activities in the core, growing area with stronger peripheries;
F: Thriving core, shrinking footprint.

                                                                                                                                                          103
                                        CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



There is a clear relationship between the economic composition of city expenditures and a city’s population size (Figure 81).
Larger cities allocated a smaller share of their expenditures to social security and labor, while allocating a larger share
to goods and services and capital investments (as well as larger current transfers, mostly likely related to municipal
enterprises). The higher payroll share in small towns might reflect fixed costs of labor-intensive social services like
education. However, lower expenditures on supplies and capital inputs are likely to lower productivity of these same staff.


Figure 81 – Economic composition of city expenditures by city population size, 2013

100%

 90%

 80%

 70%

                                                                                                           Capital transfers
 60%

                                                                                                           Capital assets
 50%

                                                                                                           Other current outlays
 40%

                                                                                                           Social security
 30%

                                                                                                           Current transfers
 20%

                                                                                                           Interests
 10%

  0%
                ns                 ns               ns            ies                 ies            ies
             tow                tow              tow        ll cit               e cit          r cit
         all               siz
                              e
                                             rg
                                               e           a                  siz             jo
       Sm                                  La            Sm               d                 Ma
                     Mi
                       d                                                Mi




Indeed, the economies of scale are primarily driven by outlays on payroll and social security (Figure 82). Not only that
these two economic categories represent the bulk of city expenditures, in per capita terms they are significantly higher
proportion of expenditures by smaller cities.

There appears to be a clear U-shape relationship between population decline and per capita expenditures on Labor and
Social security (Figure 83). Higher population decline is associated with lower per capita expenditures – except for cities
declining more than the national average, where per capita expenditures are almost as high as in growing cities. As
conjectured earlier, this might be due to an interplay between resource availability and economies of scale. While growing
cities might have resources for a larger and better-paid labor force, the fixed cost of staff might make per capita outlays
increase substantially when the denominator (population) drops significantly.




104
                                           CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



  Figure 82 – Economies of scale by economic item, 2013

                 7,000



                 6,000
                                                                                                                              Labor

                 5,000                                                                                                        Goods and services
UHA per capita




                 4,000                                                                                                        Interest


                                                                                                                              Current transfers
                 3,000

                                                                                                                              Social security
                 2,000
                                                                                                                              Other current outlays

                 1,000
                                                                                                                              Capital assets


                    0                                                                                                         Capital transfers
                                                                                ies




                                                                                                                 ies
                                   s




                                                                   s
                                 wn




                                                                                                  ies
                                                                 wn




                                                                             cit
                                                   s




                                                                                                              cit
                                                 wn




                                                                                               cit
                               to




                                                               to



                                                                         all




                                                                                                          jor
                                               to
                           all




                                                                                           ize
                                                           rge




                                                                       Sm




                                                                                                        Ma
                                           ize
                         Sm




                                                                                         ds
                                                         La
                                         ds




                                                                                       Mi
                                       Mi




  Figure 83 – Economic composition of city expenditures by population trend, 2013



                 4,000

                 3,500                                                                                                        Labor

                 3,000                                                                                                        Goods and services

                 2,500                                                                                                        Interest
UHA per capita




                 2,000                                                                                                        Current transfers

                 1,500                                                                                                        Social security

                 1,000                                                                                                        Other current outlays

                  500                                                                                                         Capital assets

                    0                                                                                                         Capital transfers
                           Positive growth              Declining but less      Declining but less      Declining more than
                                                       than urban average        than national           national average
                                                                                     average




                                                                                                                                                      105
                          CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



In 2013, Ukraine’s sub-national capital investment was quite low at 0.95 percent of GDP. However, this reflected an overall
low level of public investments in the country; the sub-national share of total public sector investment (48%) is roughly
proportional to the sub-national share in the overall sub-national expenditures (44%). However, sub-national governments
typically have a larger share of capital expenditures than recurrent expenditures because municipal services tend to
be more capital-intensive than national functions, which are dominated by social services and income redistribution
programs109. In Ukraine, on average, capital expenditures accounted for about three percent of total city expenditures in
2013. Cities comprised 63% of sub-national capital expenditures, a proportion only slightly higher than their share of the
total national population.



Figure 84 – Composition of capital expenditures by function and city typology, 2013
100%




80%




60%
                                                                                                       Social welfare


                                                                                                       Education
40%

                                                                                                       Physical and intellectual development
                                                                                                       system
20%
                                                                                                       Healthcare

                                                                                                       Housing and municipal
 0%                                                                                                    economy

           A          B          C           D          E          F       No
                                                                           type

Note:
A: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
B: Declining in all aspects;
C: Dimming periphery;
D: Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint;
E: Growing light intensity in expanding periphery;
F: Thriving core, shrinking footprint.




More than half of capital spending by cities is outside the three social sectors (Figure 84). In all types of cities except
sub-type D (Growing light intensity in shrinking footprint), the largest share of capital expenditures goes to Economic
Affairs. Capital expenditures account for less than 15 percent of city expenditures in all sectors except Economic Affairs,
Environmental Protection, and Housing and Utilities, where the share of capital expenditures is 76%, 68%, and 25% of
total city expenditures, respectively.


   109 Martinez-Vazquez, Jorge, and Andrey Timofeev. 2012. “Propensity to Invest and the Additionality of Capital Transfers: A Country Panel
   Perspective” International Studies Program Working Paper 12-16. International Studies Program, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies,
   Georgia State University.
106
                                       CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



   In the Education and Health care sectors, per capita capital expenditures decrease with the size of a city, while in Housing
   and Utilities and other non-social sectors they increase (Figure 85). This is consistent with the patterns found for total per
   capita expenditures in those sectors.


   Per capita capital investments are lower in cities with population declining more than the national average (Figure 86). This
   is mostly driven by city investments in non-social sectors other than Housing and Utilities, in particular Economic Affairs
   and Public Administration.




   Figure 85 – Per capita capital expenditures by function and population size, 2013

                 250
                                                                                                                                 Education


                 200

                                                                                                                                 Healthcare

                 150
UHA per capita




                                                                                                                                 Social welfare
                 100



                 50                                                                                                              Housing and Utilities



                  0
                                                                                                                                 Other sectors
                                                                                      ies
                                 s




                                                                    ns




                                                                                                          ies
                               wn




                                                                                                                           ies
                                                                  ow
                                                   s




                                                                                   cit




                                                                                                       cit
                                                 wn
                             to




                                                                                                                        cit
                                                                et




                                                                               all
                                               to




                                                                                                   ize
                         all




                                                                                                                    jor
                                                              rg




                                                                             Sm
                       Sm




                                           ize




                                                                                                 ds
                                                            La




                                                                                                                  Ma
                                         ds




                                                                                               Mi
                                       Mi




   Figure 86 – Per capita capital expenditures by function and population trend, 2013

                 160
                                                                                                                                 Education
                 140

                 120
                                                                                                                                 Healthcare
UHA per capita




                 100

                 80
                                                                                                                                 Social welfare
                 60

                  40
                                                                                                                                 Housing and Utilities

                  20

                  0
                                                                                                                                 Other sectors
                           Positive growth              Declining but less         Declining but less           Declining more
                                                       than urban average           than national               than national
                                                                                        average                    average


                                                                                                                                                  107
                        CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System




IV. Cities and the Fiscal System
This study examined public finances of all cities at all three tiers of sub-national government. Some of the patterns found
in this chapter reflect the fact that different tiers of sub-national government had – and in the case of Kyiv still have –
different assignments of revenue sources and functional responsibilities. Thus, larger cities tend to depend less on explicit
grants, while relying more on non-tax revenues and locally-retained shares of national taxes. However, this pattern is not
driven by demographic trends, but by the fact that larger cities tend to be at higher tiers in the administrative hierarchy
of sub-national government. Thus, until 2015, a larger share of national tax revenue (e.g., PIT) was allocated to the
budgets of higher-tier cities than to the budgets of bottom-tier cities.

While at 60,000 residents the average size of a Ukrainian city makes it possible for an average city to provide major social
services, including education and health care, almost a quarter of the country’s cities have fewer than 10,000 residents.
While this might be too small to achieve the minimum efficient scale of provision, this challenge is somewhat mitigated
by the fact that most major social services are delegated to the oblast and sub-oblast tiers, leaving sub-district cities
responsible only for pre-school education and cultural/recreational centers. Nevertheless, there is an inverse relationship
between population size and per capita expenditures, particularly concerning the Education and Social Welfare sectors.

In 10 percent of Ukraine’s cities, per capita expenditures are more than four times higher than the median level. Although
just 1.7% of the population of all cities, these outlier cities account for 10% of expenditures of all cities. The extremely high
levels of per capita expenditures appear to be primarily driven by the small scale of service provision since the population
of these cities is six times smaller than in an average city. Across all cities there are increasing economies of scale in all
social sectors except hard municipal services such as Economic Affairs and Housing and Utilities. These economies of
scale are particularly pronounced in the Education and Social Welfare sectors and primarily related to payroll costs and
welfare benefits. As a result, larger cities allocate a smaller share of their expenditures to Social Security while a greater
share is allocated to Goods and Services and Capital Investments. The share of city expenditures allocated to capital
investments ranges from 1.6% in small towns to 9.4% in major cities. Per capita investments are lower in cities where
population is declining more than the urban average.

While cities are housing the bulk of national population and driving the economic growth, until 2015 their fiscal fortunes
had been determined by the overall system of inter-governmental relations in the country. This was particular true for
sub-district cities – which relied on intermediation by district authorities in their financial affairs – as over 80 percent
of city revenues were not locally-derived but came from retained shares of national taxes and other transfers. Despite
attempts to introduce formal criteria for the allocation of inter-governmental financial resources, government transfers
were not based on an objective demand for services but largely financed the existing network of service facilities and
staffing. Such financial disincentives, combined with legal constraints on local government discretion in downsizing the
network of facilities and their staff, impeded fiscal adjustments necessitated by demographic and economic changes.
Not surprisingly, differences in expenditure patterns among different categories of cities had strong associations with
the incidence of grants but little relationship to the amount of locally-derived revenues. By disregarding expenditure
needs altogether, the new general-purpose grants can remove financial disincentives that optimize networks and staff
in hard municipal services. However, by earmarking new subventions separately for Education and Healthcare, the new
system can further entrench under-utilized social infrastructure unless the subvention formulas focus on service needs
as opposed to capacity of existing facilities.

The only area where there is a clear relationship between city finances and a city’s economic base is in the use of own
tax instruments, which produced more revenues in cities thriving in all respects (sub-type A). Similarly, cities with higher
population decline appear to raise less own-source revenues per capita. However, because these own sources of revenue

108
                           CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



account for a tiny fraction of city revenues, they make virtually no difference in their financial condition. However,
when the right incentives are embedded in the system of inter-governmental fiscal relations, even existing local tax
instruments can be utilized more fully by city governments to generate more significant revenue. While for reasons of
efficiency structures should be taxed less than land, the currently negligible levels of collection from this local property
tax (less than 0.01% of GDP) can be significantly increased.

Until 2015, business taxes had been the most utilized out of all tax handles available to city governments in Ukraine. By
far the largest per capita yield is observed for the Single Tax, which is paid by small businesses in lieu of the income tax
and other national taxes. While taxation of businesses might be more expedient from both political and administrative
perspectives, it is not as conducive to accountability and fiscal responsibility as taxing residents. Also, revenues from
taxation of business are likely to be more volatile and thus can exacerbate the impact of urban decline. Revenues from
property taxes, even when based on market values, are known to be less elastic.

As with the reliance on business taxes, derivation-based sharing of revenues from national taxes, such as PIT, can amplify
the revenue impact of urban decline. Derivation-based sharing makes local government revenues more volatile than
formula-based sharing of revenue from national taxes. Pooling the sub-national share of revenues from national taxes in a
redistribution fund and then allocating to each locality on a formula basis would reduce the volatility of revenue streams
for cities by offsetting cyclical fluctuations in tax payments from various businesses located in individual localities.

Furthermore, derivation-based revenue sharing makes it difficult to account for revenue capacity in the allocation of
equalization grants. This is because there are no statistical indicators available that objectively capture differences in
taxable bases at the bottom-tier level. By using lagged collections as a proxy for revenue capacity, equalization grants
discourage mobilization of own revenues. By contrast, revenue sharing entirely based on a per capita formula, combined
with adjustments for objective differences in expenditure needs, would provide each city with a predictable budget
envelope and allow them to keep any gains achieved by rationalizing their expenditures. Formula-based revenue sharing
combined with a hard-budget constraint can provide the right incentives for self-sufficiency.

While being more stable and predictable, formula-based sharing of PIT is not a substitute for a genuine source of own
revenues. While derivation-based sharing has some of the same features of local taxes, only the latter can provide
local revenue autonomy because – unlike revenue sharing – surtaxes allow local governments a certain measure of
discretion over the tax rate, and thus the ability to control their revenue on the margin. Thus, while sharing of PIT can
contribute to the financing of local governments, it does not contribute to achievement of a level of revenue autonomy by
local governments and to their subsequent increased accountability and fiscal responsibility. High dependence on inter-
governmental revenues raises the question of whether cities control their revenues or whether the revenues control the
cities’ policies.

Increased revenue autonomy can lead to greater accountability and creates the basis for local creditworthiness. First, endowing
local governments with a degree of revenue-raising authority allows them to increase or decrease those expenditures over
which they have responsibilities based on the needs of their constituency110. Second, local taxpayers will have a strong
interest in ensuring that local officials use local budget resources wisely. Dependence of local governments on the revenue
decisions of the central government (including decisions concerning sharing revenue from national taxes and most other
forms of transfers) undermines the accountability of local officials to their constituency.




   110Thus revenue autonomy does not require that local governments control (i.e., determine bases and rates) for all their revenue sources. It
   would suffice if they could increase or decrease rates for a few taxes that comprise a meaningful share of their revenues with the rest coming
   from the predictable and stable sharing of national tax revenues. However, there would be little revenue autonomy if any additional revenue
   from higher local taxes were almost entirely offset with a reduction in grants.
                                                                                                                                                109
                       CHAPTER 2 Cities and the Inter-Governmental Fiscal System



Broadening revenue-raising powers of city governments can be achieved through a combination of reforms related to
tax administration and enforcement and tax assignment policy changes. Given that the most expensive local functions
(Education, Health care, and Social Protection) are to be financed with earmarked grants starting from 2015, the
remaining (own) local functions can to a large extent be covered by fully utilizing the ‘tax handles’ that have traditionally
been given to local authorities throughout the world (user fees, property taxes, and betterment levies) as well some
additional taxes, including vehicle and transportation taxes and a PIT surtax (or piggyback). While Ukraine’s cities have
always received a share of revenue from some of these taxes levied by the national government (land tax and vehicle tax),
until 2015 they were passive recipients of these monies and thus could not affect this revenue on the margin.


The recent introduction of earmarked financing of social services, including Education and Health, should allow cities to
focus on their core functions, such as urban infrastructure. However, local governments can also play an important role
in the process of rationalization of the school network. Besides realizing the economies of scale in managing the network
of schools – for example, by sharing specialized staff or custodial services among schools – local governments could also
realize economies of scope in using the same facility for several functions such as education and culture. In these matters
of coordination and rationalization, local governments have an information advantage over the central government. In
addition, local governments can be instrumental in securing community consent for network rationalization by facilitating
bargaining among affected parties (i.e., among winners and losers). For example, it is much harder to justify the closure
of a school to the local community when the savings cannot be shifted to other services, which may be more critical for
the community.

In the short term, the focus of reforms should be on increasing the yield of user fees and property taxes, and perhaps
introducing several new local taxes. Establishing minimum rates for these taxes (as exists for the Single Tax) could be an
effective way to make cities assume to a minimal extent their responsibility to collect own revenues. In the medium term,
the reassignment of those other taxes from national to sub-national levels will bring very desirable improvements to city
finances, including increased horizontal accountability of local officials to their residents and greater fiscal responsibility
in expenditure and debt management at the sub-national level.




110
111
112
CHAPTER 3
Urban Planning
and the Spatial
Development

                  113
                           CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




Key Highlights and Implications for Further Policy
and Analytical Work
Urban planning in Ukraine bears the legacy of a centralized planning system. It is not sufficiently flexible to respond to
market conditions and be an effective tool in developing the urban space. Centralized development of master and zoning
plans is inefficient, costly and distant from realities on the ground. It is also not sufficiently transparent or welcoming
to public input and debate. In addition, the planning framework is not equipped to adequately support strategies that
reflect the reality of population loss and economic decline. Existing urban plans are aligned with national growth policies,
and so propose expansions of housing and economic activity across all cities.

Recent steps orchestrated in the Government’s Action Plan on Decentralization towards a planning reform, if implemented
in full, have the potential to place planning at the local level, which will permit cities to determine their own priorities
along their economic and social needs. It will promote a more transparent system resulting in plans more closely attuned
to the actual conditions of growing and shrinking cities. Such changes will require increased funding and intense capacity
building at the local level.

Going forward, urban planning and spatial development should take note of the continuous demographic changes and
shifts in the country. Current mobility remains low and the high homeownership rate has prevented the widespread
housing abandonment that characterizes typical shrinking cities in Europe and United States. Once mobility increases
and people start migrating to opportunity, declining cities are likely to decline even faster, while the growing centers
and agglomerations may experience peri-urban growth and sprawled development. In both cases, authorities will need
to reassess how infrastructure is planned and maintained to ensure that shrinking cities continue to provide acceptable
levels of service to their population at a reasonable cost, while growing urban centers are supported to further foster
growth.




114
                                 CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




I. Regulatory and Institutional Framework
National Laws and the Reform Process
Urban planning in Ukraine has evolved since independence, but still bears the legacy of a centralized planning system
inherited from the Soviet era, a time when urban development was under state control. The planning system has adopted
international standards such as streamlining building permit procedures; encouraging public participation; and increasing
access to planning information. However, the principal challenge remains: to bring legislation and practice in line with
contemporary standards that allow increased flexibility for local level planners to manage development. As a result,
local governments in Ukraine are yet to capitalize fully on typical urban planning strategies - attracting investment,
revitalizing the housing market, modifying infrastructure, revitalizing city centers aimed at stemming decline, and focusing
on reducing the urban footprint111.

Over the past 20 years, urban planning reform in Ukraine shifted between centralized and decentralized planning models
- and back - which caused disruption in local government’s allocation of land and issuance of permits and stifled potential
market demand for urban land. Three national-level laws were passed in this period to govern urban legal, regulatory,
and institutional processes. Requirements for stakeholder participation and procedural transparency were modernized
through two key national-level urban planning laws. The Law of Urban Development (1992) was Ukraine’s first post-
independence law that maintained the centralized Soviet system and gave primary planning, monitoring and execution
powers to the State Architectural and Construction Inspection Agency (SACI). Under this law, regional and district
councils had secondary planning authority, while local government’s function was to simply monitor implementation of
government programs. The law did, however, give local governments the power to approve planning documentation on
territory located in their jurisdiction. The subsequent Reform Law of Urban Planning (2011) simplified planning procedures.
However, while local government obtained the power to plan and influence land use, spatial development, and zoning
ordinances, they did still not have the power to prepare Master Plans themselves. Instead, these continued to be prepared
by a central planning agency. Furthermore, although the 2011 law mandated cities to have master plans and new zoning
plans within months of the law’s approval, no funding was made available to cities to make these provisions a reality
(See Annex VIII for more detail). In the absence of a mandated plan, many local governments temporarily stopped re-
allocating land plots and issuing local permits in the absence of transitional arrangements; this stifled market-led spatial
and economic development. At the same time, another 2011 law – Law on Regulation of City Construction Activities
and State Construction and Architecture Control – streamlined the planning development process by reducing the time
allowed for government to process and approve permits and certificates from 415 days to 60 days.

A series of so called centralization laws112 approved between 2012 and 2014 further shifted urban planning powers
from regional and local governments back to the executive branch of the central government (See Annex VIII). The
overall effect of these laws with respect to urban planning was the re-centralization of previously local functions to
the national level, including zoning ordinances, building contracts, permits, and communal housing. In doing so, the 2012
laws placed tremendous administrative burden on the Ministry of Regional Development, Construction, Housing and
Communal Services (MinRegion) without providing commensurate increases in human or financial resources, thereby
limiting implementation of the law’s new provisions. The Law increased the authority of the central government in urban
planning, further diminishing the power of regional and local governments.


   111Empirical studies from other countries suggest that economies of scale in the delivery of municipal services are mostly exhausted at an
   average size of 10,000 inhabitants, even though there are some special services, such as urban transportation and solid waste utilization, where
   economies of scale improve up to the size of 100,000 inhabitants (Lago-Peña and Martinez-Vazquez, 2013).
   112In 2012, a series of so-called ‘centralization laws’ enacted by the national government mandated changes to a variety of laws including
   those concerning urban planning.
                                                                                                                                                  115

                                                                       17
                                 CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



However, recent government initiatives, within the context of overall decentralization reforms in Ukraine, support the
delegation of urban planning functions to the local level. The Government’s Action Plan on Decentralization, published
in December 2014, and the 2015 amendments to the Law on Regulation of City Construction Activities and State
Construction and Architecture Control, if implemented in full, would permit cities to determine their own planning
priorities according to their economic and social needs. The reforms would also permit private development actors to
have full access to planning, zoning, and building information in order to facilitate a well-functioning land market. These
recent developments would bring current urban planning practices in line with contemporary international standards that
allow increased flexibility of local level planners in managing development.

Partly due to the fact that it is mostly centralized, Ukraine’s planning framework does not adequately support strategies
that address the reality of population loss and economic decline. The one exception is the Law on Master Scheme of
Territorial Planning of Ukraine (2002), which requires cities and other settlements to develop general city plans and
detailed territorial plans based on demographic forecasts. This should ideally capture cities that are potentially shrinking
or declining in population. However, there is little evidence that this law has been effective in guiding planning for such
declines. In general, existing urban plans are aligned with national growth policies that propose expansions of housing
and economic activity across all types of cities. While these policies are suited for cities that are growing, they do
not correspond with the realities of declining cities. These urban plans do not propose alternative uses for underused
industrial districts, brownfields, or abandoned buildings; such plans lock land from use and represent a lost economic
opportunity. Elsewhere, increased flexibility in urban planning has allowed declining cities such as Dresden in Germany to
undertake alternative development paths and adapt to demographic changes.113

Enforcing new regulations that have decentralized functions to the local level requires systemic changes including
increased funding and capacity building. Today, planning regulations required by law often remain unimplemented due
to insufficient funding or capacity. Many city-level General Plans114 (hereafter referred to as “Master Plans”), as well as
local zoning information, are outdated. Other planning elements, such as the requirement for citizen participation, are
ignored or subverted. Decentralizing urban planning places more responsibilities on local bodies; however, it can only be an
effective local development tool if local governments are enabled with the right set of capacities and financing.




Urban Planning Institutional Framework
The urban planning policy framework in Ukraine is fragmented between the nation’s legislative and executive bodies
and other public stakeholders. Various committees, ministries, agencies, and associations are responsible for elements
of urban planning policies that span physical, economic, and cultural development (See Table 15 and Annex VIII). On
the legislative end, two Verkhovna Rada (Parliament) Committees develop laws independent of other government
institutions. In addition, several central government ministries – the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, the
Ministry of Culture, and MinRegion – make planning decisions within their respective areas of responsibility, i.e., economic
development, culture, and construction. Among them, MinRegion makes the majority of planning decisions. It is responsible
for the development and implementation of national policy on urban planning, architecture, housing construction, and
formulation of regional development policy. MinRegion also monitors the implementation of urban planning legislation
and initiatives. Other public players include the state scientific and research institutes, the most important among which
is the Ukrainian State Scientific Research Institute for Urban Planning (Dipromisto). Dipromisto develops the national
and regional General Plans and the city-level Master Plans as discussed in the next Section.

   113  Dresden experienced a cycle of initial decline and regeneration between 1990 – 2002. In this period, the city went through three different
   phases of planning policy – Phase I Ignoring Shrinkage/Going for Growth (1990-1995); Phase II Urban Restructuring (1996-2001); and Phase
   III Re-urbanization (2002-onwards).
   114 For ease of reference, this chapter will refer to the city level General Plans as Master Plans to avoid confusing them with the national and

   regional level General Plans.
116
                             CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



The division of planning functions between government bodies creates structural challenges, ambiguity, and duplication
of efforts to formulating and implementing planning policy in Ukraine (Table 15). For instance, MinRegion authored
the Reform Urban Planning Law of 2011. Then in 2012, the Verkhovna Rada passed the centralization laws limiting
city governments’ planning powers and contradicting the Reform Urban Planning Law of 2011. Another consequence
of the current institutional set up is that it perpetuates potential conflicts of interest between agencies. For example,
Dipromisto defines the parameters of city-level Master Plans, but it is also the primary generator of such plans.

Table 15 - Urban planning and spatial development institutions

                                                                        Local legislative
          Executive                    Legislative Brunch            Regional and Municipal              Other Public Players
                                                                          Authorities

Ministry of Regional              Verkhovna Rada Committees:       Oblast and raion state            Three state research and
Development, Housing                                               administrations, including        scientific institutes:
Construction, and Communal        1) Committee for Construction,   regional representative offices
Services. Agencies under its      Urban Planning, and Communal     of national agencies and          1) Scientific Research Institute
authority:                        Housing                          ministries                        Dipromisto
1) State Architectural and        2) Committee for State                                             2) Scientific Research Institute
Construction Inspection (SACI)    Construction, Regional Policy,   Oblast and raion councils         of City Construction
2) State Service of Geodesy,      and Local Self-Government                                          3) State Company “Ukrainian
Cartography and Cadastre                                           City councils and their           State Scientific Research
(merged in 2015 with State                                         executive committees              and Planning Institute of Civil
Agency of Land Resources and                                                                         Construction”
Cartography Agency)
3) State Agency of                                                                                   Communal enterprise “Institute
E-government                                                                                         of Master Plan of Kyiv”

Ministry of Ecology and Natural                                                                      Association of Ukrainian Cities
Resources of Ukraine
                                                                                                     Association of Small Cities of
Ministry of Economic                                                                                 Ukraine
Development and Trade
                                                                                                     Eastern Ukrainian Centre of
Ministry of Culture                                                                                  Community Initiatives



Another consequence of the current institutional set-up is that local governments are developing informal Strategic Plans,
which are not connected to the Master Plans, in an effort to wrest some control over their development. Strategic plans,
discussed in the next section, are developed by local government often with support from donor organizations, whereas
Master Plans are developed by Dipromisto and approved by the MinRegion. Ukraine’s centralized planning system requires
Master Plans for every settlement, but accords settlements little latitude in determining the content of those Plans.
Consequently, local governments have often chosen to generate strategic plans that take into account local views but
that have no formal relationship to the Master or General plans.


The overarching consequence of the current system is that it has rendered urban planning inflexible. Ukraine’s planning
system is centralized and often cannot take into account local conditions. The central government generally lacks the
flexibility or mechanisms to consider special conditions or local contexts, presenting particular challenges for smaller
cities that may need sensitive, small-scale planning policies to suit their particular conditions.




                                                                                                                                      117
                                CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




II. Spatial Planning
Ukraine sets a demanding standard by requiring spatial planning at all levels, from the scale of the entire nation to
the level of individual buildings, contrary to international best practice115 and with implications at the local level where
contexts and needs differ from city to city. There are three levels of spatial plans in the country, all of which are referred
to as “General Plans” and are further classified by the administrative territory they cover – national, regional, and local/
city-level. Under the current fiscally-strained condition of the country, planning standards are difficult for officials to
meet. Local General Plans (aka Master Plans) are time-consuming and expensive to produce and to update. National
planning institutes such as Dipromisto lack the staff to create and update local Master Plans, and cities do not have
enough resources to commission them. As a result, many Master Plans are old or outdated. In cases where sufficient
resources exist, as in Kiev, political disputes sometimes derail the effectiveness of the Master Plans and this in turn puts
lower-level planning decisions (e.g., zoning ordinances) on hold as they do not conform to the city’s Master Plan. Further,
zoning standards are predicated on city growth, but most Ukrainian cities are no longer growing. Even when Master
Plans are produced and updated, the task of creating and altering lower-level zoning and building codes is too costly
for fiscally-strained city-level planning departments to meet. A final challenge is that if zoning and building plans (i.e.,
architectural designs) exist, they are most often not made public, so it is impossible for interested private-sector actors
(e.g., developers) to access them.




General Plans
Ukraine has a national hierarchy of plans. At the national level, Dipromisto is responsible for developing the “General
Scheme for Planning of Territory,” or the General Plan of Ukraine, which essentially is a land-use planning and strategic
planning document for the nation (See Box 9). All subsequent spatial plans/general plans for regions, municipalities and
settlements are to conform to the General Plan for Ukraine, making the system inflexible and many times non-responsive
to local situations. Below the General Plan of Ukraine, Dipromisto116 also creates Regional General Plans for cross-
border zones, oblasts, and districts. As with cross-border zones themselves, the plans may spill over the administrative
boundaries of a specific district.




   115 This national plan, or General Plan of Ukraine, is another legacy of Soviet-era planning where Territorial Spatial Plans were prepared for
   the nation. Best practice suggests development of regional plans, city master plans, and local zoning plans and architectural plans /design of
   buildings.
   116Dipromisto’s role in preparing General Schemes for 27 territories in Ukraine was adopted into law on February 7, 2002. Ordinance: No.
   3059-III.
118
                                  CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




   BOX 9: TYPES OF URBAN/SPATIAL PLANS IN UKRAINE


   General Scheme of Territorial Development of Ukraine or General Plan of Ukraine: The purpose of the General Plan of
   Ukraine is to establish a spatial land use plan for the territory of Ukraine; create and maintain elements of the
   plan that ensure Ukrainian citizens have access to adequate housing, environmental protection, healthcare, and
   protected historical and cultural monuments; and determine national priorities for housing, industry, engineering,
   transportation, and social infrastructure. The General Plan includes data about the following national elements:
   Geo-strategic and geo-economic data; land, water, forest, recreational, and medicinal natural resources; the
   demographic, scientific, manufacturing, historical, cultural, and tourist potential of international and state
   significance; networks of settlements; social, engineering, and transport infrastructure; investment policy; and
   the environmental situation.

   General Plans at the regional level (aka Regional Plans): General Plans are created at the regional level for cross-
   border zones and oblasts. These regional plans guide land and industrial uses, conservation areas, and regional
   infrastructure relative to the resources and needs of each district/oblast. Plans for oblasts focus on land-use
   proposals, housing settlements, and evaluations of the area’s urban development potential.

   Local General Plan (aka Master Plan): Local General Plans are city-level plans commonly known as Master Plans
   in many countries. The Local General Plan represents the overall development vision and spatial growth of
   a city, providing an essential legal basis for land-use regulation such as zoning and sub-division control, and
   including plans for schools, housing, green spaces and other civic infrastructure based on population forecasts.
   Per international norms, a modern master plan should present a unified and compelling vision for a community,
   derived from the aspirations of its citizens, and establish the specific actions necessary to fulfill that vision.

   Zoning Plans: Areas of land within a city or municipal limit are divided by appropriate authorities into zones within
   which various uses are permitted. Thus, zoning is a technique of land-use planning used by local government urban
   planners in most developed countries. Zoning ordinances define land uses in a community, whether commercial,
   residential, industrial, or recreational, and they benefit the community by establishing design standards for that
   land use.

   Detailed Plan of Territory: According to Reform Law of Urban Planning (2011), there is a 5th tier of spatial planning.
   Cities with populations exceeding 50,000 should also develop a “Detailed Plan of Territory” for individual micro-
   districts and estates of the city where new construction activities are planned. These plans should be discussed
   with the local community, approved by the local council, and made accessible to the public.



Ukrainian planning legislation requires that all cities of over 50,000 inhabitants produce Local General Plans also known as
Master Plans.117 Master Plans are produced by government-run Planning Institutes, the principal one being ‘Dipromisto.’118
Dipromisto generates Master Plans for most oblast capitals, except for select cities, like Kyiv, that develop their own.
Kyiv has its own planning institute, the “Institute of General Plan of Kyiv.” Master Plans developed in Ukraine for cities,
towns, and villages require detailed zoning plans for housing, schools, green space, and other civic infrastructure. They
are produced on an ongoing basis at the request of cities and are theoretically formulated according to a city’s future
development trends.

   117   Law on Regulation of City Construction Activity #3038-17, 17.02.2011
   118The other two planning institutes are the Scientific Research Institute of City Construction and the Ukrainian State Scientific Research
   and Planning Institute of Civil Construction.
                                                                                                                                             119

                                                                      17
                                  CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



Resource constraints and the monopoly of Master Plan preparation at the central level has resulted in many cities not having
completed or updated their Master Plans, limiting local governments’ ability to manage their land and property resources
efficiently. A review by MinRegion in May 2013 showed that only 62% of all oblast capital cities, 42% of cities of raion
significance (or provincial centers), 21% of urban settlements, and 14% of villages had Master Plans119. In addition, only
33 zoning plans were developed across all of Ukraine and 624 detailed plans of territories. Dipromisto and two other
planning institutes which are developing spatial plans for cities and territories are understaffed, overworked, and often
find difficulty keeping up with demand to complete local plans by the stated deadlines. Also, Dipromisto’s charges tend
to be cost-prohibitive for smaller cities with limited budgets. Further, since in practice, plans produced by Dipromisto
are typically the ones recognized as official, Dipromisto is the preferred agency for cities (See Figure 88); consequently,
it has a backlog of Master Plan development, leaving cities with outdated local plans. International practice holds that
while there may be one regulatory agency at the national, regional, or local level to approve urban plans, the production
of plans itself is open for outsourcing.

However, legislation that requires plan production through state planning institutes has been recently revised to permit
plan production by private enterprises licensed by the state; however, this legislation has yet to come into effect.120
These recent changes effectively eliminate the monopoly of state research institutes in architecture and planning control
and open the possibility for inclusion of the private sector. When implemented, these changes should bring much more
flexibility and local control to urban planning, which could then be used more effectively as a development tool by local
governments. Competition from the private sector should also ‘incentivize’ all plan makers, including planning institutes,
to update their planning procedures.

The great discrepancy between planning laws and actual planning practice in Ukraine reduces public trust in the
planning system. The planning laws in Ukraine dictate the development and publication of planning, zoning, and building
documents; require public participation in development procedures; and outline clearly understandable steps for obtaining
building permissions. In practice, these policies are not always followed. Master Plans are often non-public documents and
often not implemented. Zoning ordinances are irregular and do not conform to Master Plans. Procedures for obtaining
development and building permissions remain overly complicated; this allows for an increased role for intermediaries that
are hired by private developers to facilitate the process, increasing the probability of corruption.

Master Plans are made public only partially, encouraging land development speculation rather than guided private sector
investments, contrary to the objectives of the Master Plans themselves. While Ukrainian cities are required by law to have
Master Plans, and public input and hearings on planning decisions, including the production of drafts, is also required
in practice, the Master Plans themselves are not always public documents in practice. In Kyiv, for example, the official
Master Plan “GenPlan 2020,” is not fully available online. However, Kyiv’s Genplan 2025, which is still under preparation,
is available online in accordance with recent government efforts to increase public access to information. Although
explicitly required to be public by a 2011 law121, Master Plans are yet to be fully public documents in some cities. This
partial secrecy at the local level stands in strict contrast to strategic plans, discussed later, which, by their very nature
are stakeholder-driven and fully public documents that are also generally available online. However, this local-level secrecy
may be changing; in response to laws passed in 2011 with regard to improving public information, MinRegion – as the
responsible agency for planning – is gradually introducing e-governance to improve transparency and public access to
information. A review carried out by MinRegion found that cities are slowly starting to publish their plans online; in
2013, 73 cities published their master plans online, while in 2014 this number grew to 169 (representing 40% of the total
number of Master Plans developed). MinRegion’s aim is to have all updated Master Plans for all types of settlements
online by the end of 2015.




   119   http://www.minregion.gov.ua/attachments/content-attachments/1067/2330.05.13.pdf
   120   Law No. 1546 was approved on 9 April 2015 and signed by the President in June 2015.
   121   Article 14 of 2011 Law No. 3038-17
120
                            CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development


Figure 87– Hierarchy of spatial plans produced by Dipromisto (2013)


                                                          State level
                                   The General Scheme of planning for the territory of Ukraine




                                 Schemes of planning of separate parts of the territory of Ukraine




                                                        Regional level
                             Schemes of planning of the territories of Autonomous Republic of Crimea
                                                           and oblasts




                                         Schemes of planning of the territories of rayons




                                                           Local level
                                                   General plans of settlements




                                                      Territorial zoning plans




                                        Detailed plans of the territory (site/building plans)



Further decentralization of the planning system would give planners additional powers to formulate Master Plans and
zoning plan recommendations responsive to city and stakeholder views at the local level. Decentralization of planning
powers that allowed city-level planners to amend local Master Plans would enable city planners to add zoning incentives
consistent with the public interest to make a property more attractive for a developer. This would promote a well-
functioning and transparent urban planning system as a strong tool used by local governments to take stock of a city’s
growth patterns and economic needs and plan towards a shared economic and spatial development vision. This could
result in plans more closely attuned to the actual conditions of shrinking cities and that more closely reflected the desires
of city-level stakeholders.




                                                                                                                         121
                             CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



Strategic Plans
Strategic Plans emerged in Ukraine as an independent process in line with international standards, and, although not replacing
Master Plans, they have filled a gap in cities lacking updated Master Plans. Strategic Plans focus mainly on socio-economic
development, seeking to enhance city competitiveness and seeking to improve access to and quality of local infrastructure
and services. These plans essentially help guide city leadership in implementing socio-economic policies. The Strategic
Plans are locally-produced documents, existing in parallel to Master Plans that focus on social and economic strategies to
connect physical and spatial planning. They are often funded by and produced with assistance of external donors. Many
cities in the world produce Strategic Plans in addition to Master Plans. Kyiv, for example, developed its City Development
Strategy (CDS) for 2025 with the support of Cities Alliance and other partners such as the Fund of Effective Governance
(see Box 10). The development of Strategic Plans such as CDSs permits municipalities to agree on a vision for future
development in a consultative manner with key stakeholders and the general population. The development vision is
derived by analyzing a city’s economic strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats based on a detailed diagnostic
of its local economic potential, existing infrastructure, and other local and regional advantages compared to neighboring
cities and states. To achieve the development vision, cities agree on strategic action plans and investments that can
guide capital investment plans of the local government or attract donor and private investment in the future.


Strategic Plans are viewed as useful exercises for strategizing on socio-economic issues; however, they are not effective tools
to ensure implementation unless accompanied by funding. It should be noted that these plans should not be used as a
replacement for land use and zoning plans and cannot be used, for example, to determine changes in land use for individual
buildings or plots in ‘brownfield’ areas that may be suitable for redevelopment. Strategic Plans are often perceived by city
stakeholders as having more relevance for the city than formally produced and approved Master Plans simply by the fact
of the Strategic Plan being locally prepared by relevant stakeholders. The introduction of Strategic Plans into the urban
planning process of Ukrainian cities is a welcome development; the Strategic Plans could inform updates to Master Plans
by helping incorporate the latest economic and social projections for a particular city and ensuring that public interests
are at the forefront of the planning process. In contrast, Master Plans are periodically-produced documents with a long-
term horizon of 15-30 years. The shorter planning time horizon of 5-10 years in Strategic Plans make these plans easier
and possibly cheaper to produce. They can, among other benefits, inform regular updates and amendments to the Master
Plans and other spatial planning documents.




Zoning Plans
The 2012 centralization laws mandated centralized development of local zoning plans; this is likely to prove inefficient and
costly since it is distant from realities on the ground and it is also contrary to best practice. Local planners know their city’s
needs better and are in a better position to determine the spatial growth pattern and constraints. It is for this reason
that zoning plans globally are generally prepared by city-level planning organizations. Central government-generated
zoning plans encourage building developments that do not conform to existing and/or projected development scenarios.
Developers are technically required to consult with the city authorities, incorporate the Master Plan, and to hold a public
hearing before moving forward. In fact, approvals are provided based on by the zoning plans produced at the central
level, which may not reflect the views of city officials and residents. The issue is further complicated by weak oversight
and enforcement in investigating unauthorized building construction across the country. The planning laws should place
the development of zoning plans, zoning ordinances, and building permitting functions at the city level as per global
best practice. Such reforms should be accompanied by appropriate capacity-building and training at the city level; local
governments currently lack expertise in zoning issues and this perpetuates dependence on central agencies located in
Kyiv. In addition, zoning plans should be regularly updated, legally enforced, and publicly available online. The current

122
                                   CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development


status of zoning plans as de facto non-public documents is a holdover from the state-driven economy and hampers the
normal functioning of land development based on market demands.



   BOX 10: KYIV 2025 CITY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY (SUPPORTED BY A CITIES ALLIANCE
   GRANT AND OTHER PARTNERS)


   Development Vision:
   By 2025, Kyiv will become an innovation center for the Eastern European region with a strong competitive
   position and clear development priorities. This city has maintained and is developing its unique identity and
   its historical legacy. It constantly improves the standards of living for its residents and its own attractiveness
   for business. Its development will be implemented in close cooperation with businessmen and investors amid
   constant improvement of the system of governance and preservation of the city’s greenery. On an international
   scale, Kyiv will be described as (1) Europe’s greenest capital city; (2) the recognized meeting site of the West and
   the East; and (3) an environmentally-friendly city about which its residents pride themselves.

   Strategic Development Objectives:
   • A two-fold increase in Kyiv’s economic welfare indicators (gross regional product per capita) by 2025
   • A considerable improvement in the major comfort-of-living indicators (a 1.8 percent increase in the comfort-of-
   living index).


                                             What will the city of the future look like?

                                                         Unique, preserving and developing    Livable, improving its standards
         Dynamic. encouraging innovations
                                                                    its identity                          of living

                                                        Clear, having a transparent system
                   Open for business                                                              Green and well-balanced
                                                                   of governance


                                                      Kyiv on an international scale

                                                         The recognized meeting site of the   The city which its residents pride
            Europe’s greenest capital city
                                                                West and the East                      themselves on


There is a lack of agreement between actual spatial trends and spatial trends projected in planning documents. A closer
review of planned projects and actual land use changes for two cities made by the authors of this Chapter – Kyiv, a city
that is growing, and Kherson, a city in decline – found irregularities in zoning and building planning procedures resulting
in developments that contravene zoning laws. Development that was not projected in the planning documents was
built and development that had been projected was not. Despite a detailed legal framework for applying for building
permissions, violations of spatial guidelines were noted, particularly in Kyiv122. Permissions that had been granted for
buildings surpassed zoning limitations sometimes to the detriment of adjacent historic buildings.


Zoning standards to accommodate shrinking cities have not been developed for Ukrainian cities although they are available
and in use internationally. In the United States, for example, declining cities such as Youngstown, Ohio have revised their
zoning ordinances in order to convert industrial and commercial districts to park land, recreational, and natural green
areas. The re-zoning was first proposed in the Youngstown 2010 Plan.


   122   Author’s observations based on a team field research visit to Kyiv in 2014.
                                                                                                                                   123
                                   CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development


Engaging Citizen Participation
Although citizen participation is a required element in Ukraine’s development permitting, such participation is often
limited. In practice, however, the process of involving citizen participation and consultations in planning is often not
followed. Public hearings are required according to Article 13 of Ukraine’s Self-governance Law, but the procedure for
conducting public hearings123 has yet to be fully implemented and local government agencies need to amend their city
charters accordingly. As a result, the process is haphazard and subject to the will of political officials; consequently,
proper public outreach is not ensured, a consistent schedule of public hearings is often not met (they are held as seldom
as once a year), and citizens’ suggestions during public meetings are sometimes subject to approval by national or local
authorities.

An increasing number of cities have started to publicize their city plans, but the public availability of detailed zoning
and building plans remains limited. This makes irregularities in the planning process more likely, since there is no way
to confirm what officials have determined regarding land use or building status for a specific parcel of land. As the vast
majority of cities do not possess GIS-based electronic systems, the lack of digital land and building information also
inhibits an effective planning process.

Violations of planning regulations in Ukrainian cities reflect the lack of knowledge and enforcement of public participation
rights. The government established “State Councils for the Development of Civil Society,” but social accountability remains
weak. There is no formal channel of communication or consultation with national government agencies on urban planning.
Ukrainian residents are largely unaware of their public participation rights or are passive about attending public hearings.
This is slowly starting to change, especially in Kyiv, which has had nearly 20 “bottom up” initiatives related to urban
development policies. One of these initiatives includes opening the Kyiv General Plan, currently unavailable to the public,
to input by the public. Civil society organizations are critical participants in nurturing, advocating, and facilitating public
participation as provided for in the planning regulations. Further investment in information and advocacy campaigns is
required in order to enhance the “demand” side of public participation and to achieve transparency of the information
produced by government agencies. See Box 11 about the case of Detroit’s master plan.



  BOX 11: DETROIT (USA) MASTER PLAN

  Detroit was once the fourth-largest city in the United States, but by the 1990s, it had lost over 800,000 people
  from its 1960 peak. The city had hollowed-out industries, diminishing population, significant poverty, and high
  levels of abandoned housing. Detroit began only around 2008 to attempt to confront most of these challenges
  on a city-wide scale.

  Between 2010 and 2012, a new master plan, known as Detroit Future City, was prepared for Detroit. This was
  the city’s first master plan since the 1960s and one of the first master plans in the United States that openly
  acknowledged shrinkage as a central element of future city planning and policy. The plan’s development was
  funded by the Kresge Foundation, a Michigan philanthropy, and it was authored by a variety of national planning,
  engineering, and urban design consultants. The plan was issued in 2012 following a long public outreach and
  consultation process involving more than 3000 public meetings to gather feedback and ideas for the future of
  the city124. Detroit Future City’s overall vision accepted Detroit’s loss of population, abandonment of housing and
  departure of industry, and the city’s smaller and different future economic structure. Upon its launch, Detroit’s
  plan was widely publicized and acclaimed throughout the United States125.

   123Decree of the Cabinet of Ministers on Ensuring Public Participation in Formulation and Implementation of State Policy #996, 3 November
   2010.
   124   See Detroit Future City website at www.detroitfuturecity.com.
   125   “Detroit Future City” 2012 Detroit City Strategic Framework Plan.
124
                                    CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



III. Housing Market

Consequences of Demographic Changes On Housing
Ukraine’s housing market is characterized by very high homeownership rates, few rental options, and very minimal
mortgage holding. Privatization following independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 generated a homeownership rate
of over 94 percent by 2010 (See Figure 88 and Figure 89). At the same time, the supply of new rental properties – a valid
affordable housing option for the young and for urban migrants – has been very limited. In addition, very few households
are able to obtain mortgages, so must finance a housing acquisition through other means (i.e., savings, family loans –
see Figure 90). In fact, most households with average income in Ukraine cannot afford to buy a dwelling. The price to
income ratio126 stands at 16.8 in Ukraine, which is more than three times higher than Germany (See Figure 91). As a
consequence of these conditions there is a substantial ‘grey market’ of undocumented rental arrangements featuring
insecure landlord/tenancy rights as well as tax evasion.


Figure 88– Dwelling stock by tenure status 2000-2009

100



 95



90



 85



80



 75
            2000         2001           2002          2003            2004          2005         2006           2007            2008         2009

                                                   Private property      State housing     Employee housing       Market rent


Source: State Statistics Service of Ukraine




      126House price to income ratio is the ratio of median house prices to median annual disposable salary (after tax), expressed as years of income.
      Median house price and median salary are taken as average for the set of cities inside the country. For example, Ukraine is assessed on the
      basis of 16 cities, including all major oblast centers. Observations for Russia include 24 cities across the country, Poland 22 cities, and the USA
      around 240. In the case of Ukraine, a person with average income would have to save for 17 years in order to buy a house.
                                                                                                                                                        125

                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                               Az                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Uz




                                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                                                                         10%
                                                                                                                                                                               20%
                                                                                                                                                                                     30%
                                                                                                                                                                                           40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                             70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100%
                                                                                                                                                  er




126
                                                                                                                                                      b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   be
                                                                                                                                                Ta aija                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma kist
                                                                                                                                                   jik n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ce an
                                                                                                                                               Uz ista                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                  be n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ta onia
                                                                                                                                                       kis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               jik
                                                                                                                                                            t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ist
                                                                                                                                                   Uk an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ko an
                                                                                                                                                         ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s




                                                                                 Privatized
                                                                                                                                                Ky ine                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Uk ovo




                                                                   Cooperative
                                                                                                                                                    rg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ra
                                                                                                                                                        yz
                                                                                                                                                            st                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mo ine
                                                                                                                                                      Ru an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ld
                                                                                                                                                           ss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lit ova
                                                                                                                                                    Ge ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hu
                                                                                                                                                          or                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Az an
                                                                                                                                                             g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         er ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                                    Mo ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ky aija
                                                                                                                                                          ldo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rg n




                                                                                              Purchased built with mortgage
                                                                                                                                                 Ka va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yz
                                                                                                                                                     za
                                                                                                                                                          kh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ro tan
                                                                                                                                                                s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                                        La tan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                            tv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ge ia
                                                                                                                                                     Be ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   or
                                                                                                                                                          la                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     gia
                                                                                                                                                 Ar rus                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bo                    Se
                                                                                                                                                     m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sn                       rb
                                                                                                                                                         en                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ia             Bu ia
                                                                                                                                                Ma ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an               lga
                                                                                                                                                    ce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d H Ar ria
                                                                                                                                                         do
                                                                                                                                                             n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er men
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 89 – Dwelling stock by country




                                                                                                                                                    Tu ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ze
                                                                                                                                                         rk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g ia
                                                                                                                                                 Mo ey                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ka ovin
                                                                                                                                                      ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               za a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          kh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 90 – Level of mortgage penetration
                                                                                                                                                Lit olia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      st
                                                                                                                                                    h




      Source: Estimations From Living in Transition Survey, 2010
                                                                                                                                               Mo uan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cr an
                                                                                                                                                  nt ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       oa
                                                                                                                                                      en                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hu tia
                                                                                                                                  Bo                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                                    sn            Ko gro
                                                                                                                                      ia               so
                                                                                                                                                           v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Po y
                                                                                                                                         an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lan
                                                                                                                                           d H Slo o
                                                                                                                                              er         v e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Slo d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                                                ze nia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mo enia
                                                                                                                                                   go
                                                                                                                                                        vin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mo ngo
                                                                                                                                                              a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nt lia
                                                                                                                                                     Se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     en
                                                                                                                                                         rb                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eg
                                                                                                                                                   Po a       i
                                                                                                                                                        lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ru ro




                                                                                 Inherited
                                                                                                                                                              d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ss




                                                                    Not stated
                                                                                                                                                     Es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slo ia
                                                                                                                                                         to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     va
                                                                                                                                                 Ro nia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Be kia
                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lar
                                                                                                                                                 Slo nia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Es us
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rented




                                                                                                                                                       va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                                                           kia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cz                nia
                                                                                                                                          Cz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ec
                                                                                                                                             ec Croa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h R It
                                                                                                                                               h R ti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ep aly
                                                                                                                                                   ep a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ub
                                                                                                                                                       u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           li




                                                                                               Purchased built without mortgage
                                                                                                                                                 Bu blic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     La c
                                                                                                                                                      lga                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tv
                                                                                                                                                            r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fr ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Owned




                                                                                                                                                  Al ia
                                                                                                                                                       ba                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S ce
                                                                                                                                                           nia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gr wed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ea en
                                                                                                                                                 Hu Italy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tB
                                                                                                                                                     ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rit
                                                                                                                                                          a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tu ain
                                                                                                                                                 Ge ry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rk
                                                                                                                                                     rm
                                                                                                                                                           a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tu ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Other




                                                                                                                                                 Sw ny
                                                                                                                                              Gr ede                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ge key
                                                                                                                                                 ea n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rm
                                                                                                                                                    tB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                                          rit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                  Fr ain
                                                                                                                                                      an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: Estimates from Living in Transition survey, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and World Bank, 2010




                                                                                                                                                           ce
                                                               CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



      Figure 91 – House price to income ratio

                                 25
Housing price to income ratio




                                 20

                                  15

                                 10

                                  5

                                  0
                                         Ca es
                                        Ge da

                                Un B ny
                                      d K ium

                                                    m

                                           I a
                                       th nd

                                       De nds



                                          Fin l
                                         Sw d
                                                   en
                                                  ain
                                        Po rk




                                      h R kia

                                           Fr c
                                         Bu ce
                                                   ria

                                                     ia

                                          Es e
                                        Hu ia
                                                      y

                                           Po y
                                         Sl d
                                        Ar ia
                                                     ia

                                         Mo ia
                                        Ro va
                                       za ia

                                         Uk n
                                       Lit ine

                                          Be ia
                                                   us
                                                  ga




                                                    li




                                                    c


                                                  ar

                                                     l
                                                   ri




                                                lan




                                                lan




                                                   a
                                                Ita
                                                 tv



                                                  n




                                                 en
                                                 en

                                                 ss


                                    Ka an




                                                an
                                                do




                                                  a
                                                  t




                                                ub
                                               an




                                                ee




                                               lar
                                              ldo
                                               ed
                                                 a
                                               na




                                    Ne rela




                                                st
                                                st




                                             lga




                                               ra
                                             rtu




                                   ec va
                                             Sp




                                              to
                                              ta




                                             ng
                                           nm
                                              la
                                            rm

                                  ite elg




                                            La




                                           Ru
                                            ov

                                            m




                                            m




                                           hu
                                          ing




                                           Gr




                                           kh
                                           ep
                                          Au
                                        dS




                                 Cz Slo
                                          er
                                     ite
                                  Un




   Source: Numbeo, 2011



   Housing construction in Ukraine reflects the country’s demographic transition and regional urbanization trends –
   discussed in Chapter 1 of this report. There are relatively high levels of new housing construction in Western Ukraine,
   which had Ukraine’s lowest urbanization levels at independence in 1991. In 2010, the Western region’s leader by numbers
   of commissioned apartments was Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast, with 5,540 apartments, which could be a reflection of the very
   high Night Lights growth observed in this oblast. According to a recent housing market and mobility study carried out by
   the World Bank, in the last five years this Oblast was one of the top-5 oblasts in terms of the number of apartments put
   into operation per 1000 residents. Other oblasts of Western Ukraine also showed higher than average levels of housing
   construction per 1000 residents127. Growth in the tourism sector and investments in recent years by Ukrainians working
   abroad spurred the housing construction activity. On the contrary, very low levels of housing construction were observed
   in the oblasts of Eastern Ukraine. In 2010 the number of new apartments built and occupied per 1000 residents was
   less than 0.63 (in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast. Although construction rates in bigger cities such as Donetsk, Kharkiv, and
   Dnipropetrovsk exceeded this average in 2010, they were lower than average in the West and, with the recent conflict are
   expected to drop drastically. Even during the construction boom of 2006-2008, the number of newly built apartments
   in these oblasts rarely was higher than 1 apartment per 1000 residents128. The region’s sharp population decline and its
   existing high urbanization rates are likely the main causes of the low construction levels observed. As discussed in detail
   in Section 2 of Chapter 1, most cities and towns in the Eastern Region have been declining in population over the past
   two decades – a key factor for the substantial drop in housing demand.




                                127   Lviv – 1.77; Chernivtsi – 2.27; Ternopil – 2.23. The same goes for neighboring Khmelnitsky Oblast – 2.47. Bureau of Economic and Social
                                Technologies, Housing Market and Labor Mobility, September 2011 (Research Report Prepared Under Contract for the World Bank).
                                128 Bureau of Economic and Social Technologies, Housing Market and Labor Mobility, September 2011 (Research Report Prepared Under

                                Contract for the World Bank).
                                                                                                                                                                            127
                               CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development


The very high homeownership rate in Ukraine, among other factors, has prevented the widespread housing abandonment
that characterizes typical shrinking cities in Europe and United States. As discussed in Chapter 1, people in Ukraine are
not migrating internally at expected rates; this is due to a combination of factors: very high ownership rates; limited
access to finance, which makes it difficult to finance moving costs; and an underdeveloped housing market. In addition,
in places where economic opportunities have declined, households find it difficult to find suitors to buy their dwellings and
are hesitant to leave; this is particularly true for older residents who are generally less eager to move and more dependent
on pensions. As a result, people in Ukraine have a high tendency to stay behind in shrinking cities, despite declining
economic opportunities. Under improved housing market conditions, households (labor) mobility would be expected to
increase, leading to higher housing abandonment in economically declining cities. This dynamic has been observed in
shrinking cities in other countries (e.g., Cleveland, Detroit, Leipzig).

The quality and quantity of the multi-family housing stock is declining due to deferred maintenance and the cost of
service provision.129 City housing agencies provide collective services (water, heat, and electricity) to the substantial stock
of existing housing constructed prior to 1991130. This housing stock consists of 19.3 million apartments, equivalent to 422
apartments per 1,000 residents. Here Ukraine lags just behind the EU-27 average (446 apartments) and is ahead of such
countries as Poland (349), Slovakia (370), Romania (391), and Slovenia (410). As a result of de-population, the housing
stock per 1,000 residents is likely to rise above the EU average (as discussed in the ‘built-up area’ analysis presented in
Section 4 of Chapter 1). However, the quality of housing stock is much lower than the European norm. Three-quarters of
all homes were built between 1945 and 1990 (See Table 15), and many of these have been poorly maintained. Necessary
repairs on facilities such as roofs and elevators are often delayed or not undertaken; as a result most homeowners
possess low-value properties in poor condition. Upkeep that will improve housing values and quality is often difficult due
to the weak regulatory and enforcement environment relative to that ensured by the home-owners associations that are
typical for multi-family residential buildings in Europe or the US.



Table 15 – Age distribution of housing stock

                       Year          <1919       1919-1945 1946-1970 1971-1980 1981-1990 1991-2000                  >2000

      Ukraine          2010            4.7            11.8           49.2           16.2            10.7   4.4         3

      Estonia          2009            9.4           14.2            30             21.5            19.6    2         3.3

      Latvia           2008           13.8            13.1           22.1           19.4            20.2    7         4.4

      Austria          2009           15.2            8.2            28             15.2            11.5   13.6       8.3

 Netherlands           2009            6.9           13.9             27             17             15.4   12         7.9

      Sweden           2008           12.1            14.7           37             16.8            9.4    5.5        4.6

    Portugal           2008            7.4            10             21.9           16.1            18.8   17.7       8.1

Source: Housing statistics in the EU (2010); state statistics service of Ukraine; calculations131




   129   Ibid.
   130   Ibid, p. 12
   131   Ibid.
128
                                 CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development


Inefficient or non-functioning land registration and title systems in Ukraine hamper development of affordable housing. Land
costs represent a substantial part of overall construction costs and thus affect the availability of affordable housing.
The transaction cost to acquire land through purchase or by having land allocated for housing by local government is
non-transparent and costly. According to the World Bank’s latest Doing Business report (2015), obtaining construction
permits requires eight separate procedures, takes 64 days, and costs 10.2 percent of the warehouse value (one of the
highest values in the region). Completing a property transfer requires seven separate procedures, takes 27 days, and
costs 2 percent of the property value (one of the highest values in the region). Globally, Ukraine ranks 70th of the 189
economies assessed on the ease of dealing with construction permits and 59th on the ease of registering property132.
Out of all 25 million plots of land in the country, only about 12 million plots are in the cadaster. However, the cadaster
does not contain information about plots that were registered before the Land Code came into effect in January 2002.
Registration of titles for land parcels and buildings is done by two separate agencies. Registration of property rights for
apartments, houses and other buildings is done by offices of the Bureau of Technical Inventory that are attached to local
administrations. The register is kept by the Ministry of Justice. Registration of land parcel titles is done by local offices
of the State Service of Geodesy, Cartography, and Cadastre (in 2015, this was merged into the State Agency of Land
Resources and Cartography Agency). As a result, it may happen that a land plot is registered to more than one person,
increasing the risk of legal disputes. Access to municipal land for construction purposes is possible in two ways – land
auctions and non-competitively. Both come with their own specific challenges and costs, and an assessment of risks and
profitability of investment is complicated. Consequently, investors are left uncertain about various characteristics of a
land parcel such as transport access, engineering services and infrastructure, environmental conditions, and restrictions
on land use.

Incomplete urban planning documentation for most Ukrainian cities results in local government being unclear about the
direction of development and the activities allowed on each land parcel.133 The absence of Master Plans and detailed
zoning plans in some cities tends to make urban development more chaotic, increasing the risk of congestion in growing
cities and the risk of vacancy and unsold housing stock in shrinking cities. New construction often takes place at the
expense of preservation of open spaces and parks within cities since the extension of boundaries for growing cities
involves a complicated planning process leading to disputes with cities and the raions. Brownfields re-development
is also problematic as it involves a lengthy and costly process of change in the type of land-use as well as necessary
decontamination measures.




   132World Bank, Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency; Economy Profile 2015: Ukraine (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2014), available at
   http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/~/media/giawb/doing%20business/documents/profiles/country/UKR.pdf?ver=2
   133   Housing Market and Labor Mobility
                                                                                                                                             129
                            CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




IV. Planning as an Instrument for Managing City
Growth And City Decline

Planning for Dynamic Growth
Cities that are experiencing growth in Ukraine are in theory allowed to extend their boundaries according to the mandate of
a Master Plan rather than based on market demands; however, in practice the process is complicated and local authorities
avoid shifting city boundaries, which has the stimulates uncontrolled urban sprawl. In theory, expanding city boundaries
provides access to greenfield land that can be converted into high-density sub-markets under a state-driven planning
structure that guides the type, location, and size of development. In reality, city municipal boundaries are fixed, but urban
sprawl occurs nonetheless, extending development beyond the border of the city and making centralized planning efforts
difficult. For instance, Kyiv’s boundaries were expanded in 1961 and again in 2001, yet they do not reflect the full extent
of the city. City boundaries are a political designation, but growth is more efficiently accommodated when boundaries
are based on transportation, employment, and housing needs. These challenges are present in many countries, especially
former Soviet bloc countries. Some countries address the issue by creating functional or administrative agglomerations
comprised of a city and its surrounding areas where urban sprawl is the densest. This notion of city-regions is growing
in popularity among planners in Europe, but the approach has not reached Ukraine yet.

Zoning is also not flexible or transparent so it is difficult to plan for growth beyond the boundaries of the Master Plan area,
particularly in expanding sub-markets. Planning for growing sub-markets requires zoning that permits construction based
on both current and future projections of demand. In practice, this “upper limit” of construction is often left flexible in
zoning, so that cities can amend or permit variances to zoning that allow additional construction. In New York City, for
instance, a shortage of land for additional construction of office space in mid-town Manhattan led the city to propose
development and additional density there called the “Vanderbilt Corridor.” In the Ukrainian context, there are several
growth corridors, but zoning is inflexible without clear reference to demand.

Without strategic investment in infrastructure or services, growing cities accommodate new development in either existing
areas or expand to the urban fringe. High land values in desirable areas of the existing city footprint drive up costs and
often encourage over-development to recoup costs. On the other hand, lower land values on the periphery are driven up
by the cost of extending services and infrastructure, resulting in sprawl. Further complicating development in Ukraine,
many of the desirable sub-markets are historic areas with tight development controls including height restrictions.

Growing cities, particularly Kyiv, should establish Master Plans that project a growing future city, but that also protects
valued cultural and historic resources such as parkland, green-belts, and historic areas. The land-use pattern of these cities,
particularly in their 20th century housing and commercial districts, is characterized by low density and can easily
accommodate new development without the need to re-develop parkland or historic areas. The recent development
pattern of Kyiv, for example, to favor skyscrapers, ignores the central city’s historic importance. An expanding economy
also places pressure on existing housing by driving prices up, thus increasing the risk of displacement for low-income
homeowners or renters, particularly in high-value, center-city areas. Local governments need to ensure housing strategies
are in place at the local level to encourage private sector involvement in providing affordable housing. At the national level,
planning reforms need to be put in place to promote the supply of affordable rental housing in the market. An expanding
economy also places pressure on the transport system due to increases in jobs and in new commuters. The planning
system must accommodate this increased pressure by constructing new transit lines and roadways.




130
                                   CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




Planning for Shrinking Cities
Many cities in Ukraine have demonstrated declines in many demographic areas yet are operating with Master Plans
based on growth trends (See Box 12 for an example). Declining local economies have led to reduced demand for space
and the abandonment of industrial, retail, and office parcels. Often, these abandoned parcels are extremely large, causing
a large decline in the intensity of economic activity in the city. Gradually, over time, the footprint of the city begins to
shrink or remains stable, creating a vicious cycle of population loss and declines in the quality of life. Unfortunately, a
declining economy does not reduce the amount of infrastructure required for servicing remaining housing, manufacturing,
office, and retail activities in the city.

Ukraine’s planning legislation and strategic framework are based on expectations of growth rather than shrinking and
redistribution. In a handful of growing cities, the processes of sub-division, zoning variances, and development permissions
will continue to be needed. However, in most Ukrainian cities there are very few new residential structures and there
is little demand for new industrial or commercial space. Indeed, in many cases, much of the existing commercial and
residential space in the city lies vacant134. Ukraine’s planning laws mandate a system that is fundamentally miss-aligned
with the actual needs of the nation’s cities, which remain unable to shape their own planning priorities as well as those
of private development actors. Citizens are inhibited from accessing or understanding important planning, zoning, and
building information. Meanwhile, further reforms of the 2011 legislation have been slow to be implemented.

Given these challenges, General Plans and Master Plans could incorporate new tools for managing decline and redistribution
at both the national and city levels. These might include demolition of surplus industrial and dilapidated residential
buildings, brownfield redevelopment, allotment of unused or unneeded land to stakeholders, zoning changes to enhance
economic development of underused properties, and new spatial strategies that reflect the reduced need for housing and
commerce in shrinking cities. Planning legislation should allow for differentiations in planning methodology to account
for the mix of local growth and decline. For instance, in the United States, declining cities such as Youngstown, Ohio
have revised zoning ordinances in order to convert underused industrial and commercial districts to park land, recreation
areas, and natural spaces. This re-zoning was first proposed in the Youngstown 2010 Plan published in 2004135. Such
zoning changes, if they were implemented, would most likely concern the reuse of abandoned industrial areas, rather than
housing due to the relative stability of Ukraine’s housing market.




   BOX 12: DISCONNECT BETWEEN REALITY AND PLAN


   The Master Plan for Kherson projects recreational areas along the Dnipro waterfront. According to some Kherson
   planners interviewed for this study, the plan is “not realistic; it does not depict the city’s actual condition.”
   Overall, Kherson planners regarded both the city’s development condition, and the city’s planning condition,
   as “frozen”. Development was very limited due to the city’s economic decline and Ukraine’s overall political
   problems. At the same time, it was difficult to adjust planning norms such as the General Plan or zoning plans
   to reflect these conditions because of the centralized nature of Ukraine planning.




   134   Author’s interview of officials of the City Administration of Kherson, 17 December 2014.
   135   See http://www.cityofyoungstownoh.com/about_youngstown/youngstown_2010/plan/plan.aspx
                                                                                                                        131
                            CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development



Shrinking cities in Ukraine face numerous spatial planning challenges, such as:
• Urban decline places pressure on the planning system to project new activities for abandoned or underused areas. This
requires entrepreneurial action on the part of planning departments to project and attract new economic activities.
• Abandonment requires the re-tooling of Master Plans to accommodate changed or declining activities.
• Urban decline may also require projecting a shrunken or changed urban footprint. This is an activity that is unfamiliar
to most urban planners and is not part of conventional urban planning practice.
• Maintenance of existing infrastructure is expensive and difficult. Projecting reductions of infrastructure proportionate
to the reduction of both residents and economic activities may be a necessity, placing additional demands on the urban
planning system.

Approaches to address shrinking cities differ internationally. While some cities plan to stem decline through incentives
and investments, others focus on reducing urban footprints and increasing existing efficiencies. Urban planning plays
an important and facilitative role for both approaches towards stabilization or growth. While the World Development
Report (WDR) of 2009 takes a particular development view towards cities that have no hope for resurrecting economic
activity, there is evidence that Local Economic Development efforts – where a city’s economic strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats are first evaluated and then used as a basis to re-invent a city’s economic potential and
development path – have led to the successful comeback of some cities (Dresden being a good example). New master
plans geared for shrinking cities can project alternative land uses for underused industrial or commercial areas, including
recreational or natural spaces. Community participation can help identify “bottom-up” opinions or interest in uses for
underutilized spaces, and these opinions can be incorporated into General Plans. Zoning can be revised to permit a wider
range of uses or to remove restrictions on properties that prevent their being re-purposed for alternative land uses.

Ukrainian policy makers may need to look internationally to find suitable planning models to develop policies for the
country’s shrinking cities. Germany provides an interesting model for future planning in Ukraine (See Box 13). Like Ukraine,
Germany has a tradition of state involvement in urban planning, but it has a much stronger economy and a tradition of
government transparency and citizen participation in planning decisions. Ukraine lacks these three latter factors. The
USA model of urban planning, however, is not necessarily appropriate either. The US has extremely decentralized planning
and a tradition of citizen participation in governance – both of which Ukraine lacks. Ukrainian cities also have large-scale
problems like deindustrialization that are better solved by state policies at the national and regional level than they are
by policies at the local level as in the United States. Ultimately, Ukraine will not be able to “copy” any country’s planning
system wholesale; reform of planning will have to accommodate those qualities of Ukrainian governance that stem from
the country’s history, while also accommodating concepts of governmental transparency and citizen participation that
are less familiar to public officials and citizens of Ukraine.




132
                                CHAPTER 3 Urban Planning and Spatial Development




BOX 13: NATIONAL LEVEL SPATIAL POLICY: STADTUMBAU OST AND WEST (GERMANY)


German reunification in 1990 catalyzed a substantial series of capital projects to reunify and rebuild the country.
To date, the population of the area of the former East Germany has decreased by 12 percent, with nine percent
of that decrease occurring during or after reunification in the 1990s.136

A national policy strategy came in 2001 in the form of Stadtumbau Ost (Urban Renewal/Restructuring East),
a 2.5 billion euro initiative in six former East German states. In effect from 2002 to 2009 (and subsequently
extended by the Länder for a second period to 2016), the initiative had a two-fold mission: 1) stabilizing the housing
market by tearing down abandoned or underutilized buildings, and 2) upgrading inner-city districts, modernizing
living conditions, and improving social infrastructure137. The overall goal of Stadtumbau Ost was to remove
350,000 unoccupied houses in order to stabilize the real estate market as well as attract private investment
through redevelopment based on new housing construction (220,000 homes were demolished by 2007)138. The
global economic crisis of 2008 caused more shrinkage, so Stadtumbau Ost proposed the demolition of nearly
350,000 more homes by 2016, the majority of which (217,000) were demolished after the formal conclusion of
the program in 2009139. The Bund and Länder also spent 320 million euros to upgrade districts in urban centers
through the adaptation of urban infrastructure, modernization or demolition of vacant commercial buildings,
maintenance of historic buildings, and overall efforts to modernize living conditions.

In 2004 the Bund launched Stadtumbau West in areas of the former West Germany as a companion to
Stadtumbau Ost. Between 2004 and 2008, the Bund, Länder, and city/local municipalities each invested one-
third of a total of 738 million euros140 spread across 300 cities141. For both Stadtumbau Ost and West, cities and
regions were required to generate spatial plans in order to project visions for the future of the areas benefiting
from the program. Many of these urban plans were recognized as innovative and attained worldwide visibility as
a result of the involvement of leading architects and urban planners in their formulation142.




136   Pallagst, Karina, Thorsten Wiechmann and Cristina Martinez-Fernandez, eds., Shrinking Cities: International Perspectives and Policy
Implications (New York, NY: Routledge, 2014); Werz 2001, Abwanderung.
137   Shrinking Cities (2014); Urban Regeneration.
138Ibid; Glock, Birgit, and Hartmut Häussermann, “New trends in urban development and public policy in eastern Germany: dealing with the
vacant housing problem at the local level,” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, Volume 28, Issue 4, pp. 919–929, December
2004.
139   Goethe Institut 2009, Making Shrinking Cities.
140   An additional 76 million euros was allocated to the initiative in 2009.
141   Ibid.
142   International Building Exhibition Urban Redevelopment Saxony-Anhalt 2010: Less Is Future (Jovis: 2010).
                                                                                                                                          133
134
CHAPTER 4
Impact of the Current
Conflict on the
Urban System

                        135
                      CHAPTER 4 Impact of the Current Conflict on the Urban System143



The UUR was initiated prior to the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. Even though events related to the conflict are not reflected
in the analysis undertaken for the UUR – due to the limitation of data sets from 1998 to 2013, the unavailability of
recent and reliable data from the conflict areas, and the continuously evolving and changing characteristics of the crisis
– the conflict is expected to impact the urban system in the country. To that end, the following discussion, drawing on
the recent Eastern Ukraine Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment, concerns recent events in Ukraine.




The Current Conflict
Ukraine’s ongoing conflict has had a huge impact on human welfare and social and economic conditions in the East. The
current conflict commenced with a political crisis that started in late 2013, followed by the referenda in Crimea in March
2014144, and an intensifying conflict in Eastern Ukraine focused on the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk. In late 2014, the
European Union, the United Nations, and the World Bank, under the leadership and participation of the Government of
Ukraine, commenced the Eastern Ukraine Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment (RPA). It was finalized in March 2015
and informs this present section.

The conflict has resulted in a significant number of displaced people. The RPA found that, as of February 2015, there
have been 7,000 deaths, some 18,000 wounded, and over 1.6 million people displaced both internally and outside of
Ukraine. Around 1 million persons are registered as internally displaced and another 640,000 have taken refuge in other
countries, many in the Russian Federation. Out of the 5.2 million people that resided in conflict-affected regions prior to
the conflict, at least 3.9 million have been directly affected by the conflict. Initially, the majority of the displaced were
women and children. As the conflict deepened, the demographic profile of internally displaced people (IDPs) broadened to
also include older and disabled residents. Figure 93 shows displacement as of February 2015.

The displacement intensified as a result of a Government of Ukraine resolution to halt services in areas not controlled
by the government. Government decree 875/2014 issued in mid-November 2014 closed all Government offices in areas
outside the Government’s control, halting funding of pensions, social benefits, and other services while also withdrawing
support to schools and hospitals. Offices of Ukraine’s Central Bank also closed, limiting access to cash and banking
services. Pension and social payments are now only available to persons with registered residences in Government-
controlled territory. This withdrawal of financial services and resources to Government-supported institutions deepened
vulnerability and prompted outflows of some of the Donbas region’s most vulnerable residents. There are indications, for
example, of extraordinary numbers of pensioners leaving areas outside of Government control in December 2014-January
2015 and registering as IDPs in Government-controlled areas.

The majority of the displaced population seems to be concentrated in the areas close to the line of conflict. Over 96% of
IDPs originated from the oblasts of Luhansk and Donetsk. Of these, 75% sought refuge in host communities within the
five eastern oblasts. 49% of IDPs stayed within Luhansk and Donetsk, swelling the population of conflict-affected host
communities nearest to the fighting. This is reported to be a typical movement pattern for IDPs, reflecting a desire to
achieve greater physical safety, while remaining within a reasonable distance of home, relatives, property, and former
livelihoods. The result is a concentration of the displaced into host areas that are poorly prepared to receive them; some
cities host IDP populations that exceed by several times their original populations (See Figure 92).




   143 This section is based on and summarizes findings of the Eastern Ukraine Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment (RPA). See World Bank,

   RPA: Analysis of Crisis Impacts and Needs in Eastern Ukraine: Synthesis Report (World Bank Group), March 2015, available at http://www-wds.
   worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/05/14/090224b082e84fea/1_0/Rendered/PDF/Synthesis0report.pdf
   144In March 2014, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol held referenda to join the Russian Federation, which were
   widely criticized and declared as having no validity in the UN General Assembly resolution 63/262
136
                     CHAPTER 4 Impact of the Current Conflict on the Urban System



Figure 92 – Conflict and displacement in Eastern Ukraine (as of February 2015)




Source: Eastern Ukraine Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment (RPA) February 2015

The displaced bear the intense human and personal cost of the conflict; however, IDPs also create a significant strain
on local communities, services, and financing. Among other effects are a downward pressure on wages, and an upward
pressure on food prices. The RPA found that health facilities and classrooms are oversubscribed in many areas and
community services such as elderly care, child care, recreation services, and sanitation services have been affected as
resource-poor authorities redirect their budgets to the immediate needs of IDPs. This fuels social fragmentation in host
areas, further complicating the effects of the conflict.

The majority of the displaced in Ukraine have moved at least twice in the course of their displacement, while one-third
of IDPs have moved three or more times. While repeat movements are typically driven by a search for secure, adequate,
and reasonably priced accommodation, they should be understood as disruptive episodes in the lives of the displaced
as they search for improved circumstances. IDP movements are driven by a variety of factors, such as the depletion of
personal capital; limited access to services and assistance in new and unfamiliar areas; disinclination of landlords to
rent to IDPs; loss of the ability of host families and family members to provide support; and the search for employment
opportunities. However, many of the displaced have worked in the industrialized Eastern regions and have labor skills that
are in less demand in the Central and Eastern regions. Repeated dislocations due to renewed physical safety concerns
are also common as many of the displaced, seeking to remain near home areas, have had to flee repeatedly due to heavy
fighting nearby.




                                                                                                                      137
                         CHAPTER 4 Impact of the Current Conflict on the Urban System


The effect of the conflict on the local regional economy and the economy of Ukraine at large is significant. As the Donbas
region historically contributed approximately 16% to the GDP and 25% to Ukrainian exports, the conflict in the East
has had significant economic implications for the whole country. Trade disputes with Russia have further damaged the
Ukrainian economy. Ukraine’s real GDP is expected to decrease by 8% in 2014 and is forecast to contract by a further
7.5% in 2015,145 while the exchange rate has heavily depreciated since early 2014. Over the same period registered
unemployment has increased from 7.7% to 9.3% while employment opportunities are estimated to have decreased by 2
million. This is due to the fact that nearly 80% of the formal economy in Donetsk and Luhansk regions is not operational,
resulting in decline of industrial production in the regions of 60% and 85%, respectively. However, the economic spillover
of the conflict extends to the entire country.




The Urban System Following the Conflict
At the time of this report, the conflict continues to evolve; its long-term impact on both population movement and the
economy at large remains to be seen. The joint assessment sees the situation in the East as likely to remain volatile and
fluid for some time. To date, the RPA146 assesses total damages to infrastructure and social services estimated at around
USD 463 million. Damages to the transport and energy sectors constitute the bulk of the impact. Further, there are
losses that have been incurred in various sub-sectors, but not fully quantified yet relating to diminished output capacity,
increased production costs, the inability to efficiently transmit and deliver services as a result of infrastructure damage,
and reduced ability of consumers to pay for services already received. Total recovery needs for infrastructure and social
services are estimated by the RPA at around USD 1.3 billion. Needs are greatest in the transport, social welfare, and
health sectors at USD 558m, USD 329m, and USD 184m, respectively. Needs estimates are built upon the damages
reported to infrastructure and the reconstruction of impacted infrastructure to improved standards; the restoration of
service delivery to individuals residing in Donetsk and Luhansk and replacement of facilities; and the provision of social
services to individuals displaced as a result of the conflict (IDPs).


To contain the developmental impacts of displacement and leverage the skills and presence of the displaced for more positive
outcomes for all, the RPA recognizes four key challenges: (i) delivery of services such as security, education, health, and
social payments along with basic infrastructure in equal measure to the displaced and host populations, (ii) the displaced
(re)gaining control of land and property, (iii) reestablishing livelihoods and social bonds that are disrupted by forced
displacement and conflict and (iv) accountable and responsive governance and rule of law at the local level.
These are the barriers to durable solutions for Ukraine’s internally displaced – and they are, at the same time, critical
development challenges for the entire population of Ukraine. This approach is premised on the continuation of the IDP
crisis for the foreseeable future and the associated strains that such population movements place on state finances,
service delivery mechanisms, governance, and social cohesion.


Once conditions allow, the restoration of infrastructure and services in conflict-affected areas should reflect the new
realities of geographic distribution of people and production. Even prior to the conflict, the area had largely obsolete and
inefficient heavy industries, many of which were in decline. The area was a recipient of targeted central fiscal transfers
(subsidies) and there was accumulation of wage arrears. Post-conflict rebuilding of assets should be guided by the
expected numbers of returnees and should focus on restoring institutions, rule of law, and social cohesion as well as basic
services for the population. This will ensure that people who choose to return and remain will have their basic needs met,
and not be pushed out by the lack of schools, health services, and public security. Connectivity to the rest of the country


   145   World Bank estimations
   146Recovery and peace building assessment : analysis of crisis impacts and needs in Eastern Ukraine (Vol. 2): Full component reports (World
   Bank Group), March 2015, available at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/05/24487461/recovery-peace-buiding-assessment-
   analysis-crisis-impacts-needs-eastern-ukraine-vol-2-full-component-reports
138
                     CHAPTER 4 Impact of the Current Conflict on the Urban System


will be especially important to ensure re-integration of the conflict-affected areas.

The UUR suggests that even in areas not affected by the conflict, push factors rather than pull factors seemed to underpin
internal migration. The conflict has further reinforced the push factors. The interplay of push and pull factors in Ukraine
needs to be further analyzed. A first step in this direction would be to carry out a new census since the last census was
taken in 2001. A set of public policies aimed to ease mobility (such as further developing the housing and rental markets)
would benefit economic integration. One consequence of improved mobility could be that shrinking cities will shrink even
faster, but the desired objective would be a set of conditions where people are pulled to cities with emerging economic
opportunities. This will then permit the urban system to achieve its full potential as Ukraine’s engine of growth.

While some of the UUR’s findings related to individual cities may change as a result of population movements wrought by
the ongoing conflict, its findings on trends, challenges, and opportunities for the urban system in Ukraine remain. Most
cities, in the short- and medium-term, will probably continue to loose population. However, several cities in Ukraine – in
particular those close to the largest urban centers – are growing, albeit slowly, and will continue to attract people in
search for opportunities. This presents a dual challenge: city administrators, including planners, need to manage for urban
expansion in the country’s population growth centers while local governments of urban centers affected by population
decline need to adapt their city strategies to reflect new demographic and economic realities associated with shrinking.
Reforms should underpin a realignment of fiscal resources across cities and other local governments, and provide better
incentives to local governments for efficient fiscal management and improved urban services.

In declining cities local authorities will need to re-assess how infrastructure is planned and maintained, and the way
services are financed and delivered. Neighborhoods may need to be consolidated as cities lose density. Public service
plans, designed for a larger population, may have to be re-considered to address lower demand. Many cities around
the globe have successfully transitioned through periods of demographic decline and the main lesson is that, while
challenging, opportunities exist for declining cities. If managed well, cities can “shrink better,” i.e., consolidate their
urban footprint, emerge greener through the conversion of brownfields to green public spaces, and so on. In addition, an
aging urban population has consequences for the demand for and the type of housing (e.g., long-term care facilities), the
demand for public transportation (as elderly tend to commute less), and other basic services. Further, the combination
of an overall aging urban population and declining fertility rates will also likely shift demand from education to health
services. Urban areas will therefore need to adapt their social and physical infrastructure to better serve the changing
needs and demands of their population.

Simultaneously, growing urban centers need to be supported by a set of public policies that further foster economic growth.
The majority of population growth observed in Ukraine is concentrated on the outskirts of main urban centers, such as
Kyiv and Lviv, which are core elements of larger urban agglomerations. As discussed in Chapter 1, one of the key findings
of the UUR is that agglomerations are particularly important engines of economic growth in the country. However, growth
centers, as observed in many countries, can experience setbacks associated with congestion costs; traffic congestion, a
shortage of infrastructure, and environmental pollution can increase as cities become larger and denser if growth is not
properly managed. Making agglomeration economies work in Ukrainian growth centers will require a set of instruments
that span institutional, administrative, and sometimes geographic boundaries. Infrastructure will need to be adapted to
ensure that newcomers are well-absorbed and integrated into the city. This is particularly challenging in the case of public
transport, particularly where the functional urban footprint expands beyond administrative boundaries – as is the case
in most major urban centers in Ukraine. The introduction of metropolitan governance mechanisms might be needed to
effect coordination in urban areas that have expanded into multiple administrative units. In addition, Ukraine’s growing
cities need to better manage their peri-urban growth to avoid sprawled development and facilitate in-fill development
options (e.g., brownfield re-development), while ensuring that sufficient green and public space is available. Finally, despite
growth in their populations, Ukrainian growth centers will also experience aging of their populations, which will require
local governments to reshape their services in order to meet the changing needs of their population.




                                                                                                                           139
140
ANNEXES




          141
                                         ANNEX I Special Economic Zones




Annex I

Special Economic Zones
Special Economic Zones (SEZ) were established in Ukraine in order to overcome the crisis that the country faced during
the post-soviet era in the 1990s. The deep crisis of the coal industry, the country’s hyperinflation in the 1994 and
complications faced during the privatization of public enterprises led to a situation in which a great level of investment
was needed to re-boost economic activity. Two types of SEZ were approved in 1998: (i) Free Economic Zones (FEZ),
defined as SEZ in which companies are taxed very lightly or not at all, and (ii) Territories of priority development (TPD)
which are SEZ designated in distressed regions.

The benefits of the SEZ included the exemption from VAT taxes, subsidies and financial grants for companies installed.
A total of 12 FEZ and 9 TPD were established between 1998 and 2005, when the government eliminated them. During
their existence, SEZ attracted numerous investments, mostly from Ukrainian residents and offshore jurisdictions. Tax
incentives created opportunities for corruption and rent seeking activities, opening the way for oligarchs to establish
and own much of the economic activity in these priority regions and cities. The revenue costs and budget were seldom
transparent, and they proved not to be a good system for promoting foreign investment in new local enterprises. Moreover,
these zones often distorted local and regional competition and led to mechanical relocation of production facilities to
designated areas rather than creation of new companies. Additionally, Ukraine was in the process of entering the WTO,
and it failed at being compelling in this process in at least three aspects: first, import duties were not collected when goods
manufactured in free economic zones were sold outside of them, but inside the Ukrainian territory; second, preference to
investment projects that promised to procure Ukrainian-made goods contradicted the WTO Agreement on Trade Related
Investment Measures (TRIMS); third, direct tax incentives could be interpreted as discriminatory protection against
imports, and deterrence for foreign investment. This led to the cancellation of the SEZ in 2005. Ukraine joined the WTO
shortly after. The total investment attracted during the existence of these incentives was 1.5 billion US$ from Ukraine
residents and 600 million US$ from foreigner investors. Currently, there is debate about the negative consequences
of SEZ discontinuing, especially the impact on the investors in those zones, and their potential reopening with stricter
conditions.




142
                                                                              ANNEX I Special Economic Zones




Figure 1 – Special economic zones Ukraine (1998-2005)



                                                                                                                                                                                           !

                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                               BELARUS
                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                              !
                                        Volyn                                                                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                  !
                                        !                                                                                                                                                                         s
      POLAND                                                                                                             Chernihiv
                                Kovel                       Rivne                          K
                Novovolynsk
                                                                                       !                                                           Sumy                                                          s
                                !  Zhovtneve                                                   olynsky
                                 !                                        !
                                                                                                          Kyiv City
                                                                              Zhytomyr                                                                                                              RUSSIAN FEDERATION

                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                   !                        Kyiv
                            Lviv                            Khmelnytskyi                                                                      Poltava
                                                                                                                                                                                Kharkiv
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Luhansk
          T         s                           Ternopil
                        !                                                                                             Cherkasy
 SLOVAK                                                                                                                                                                                       !
REPUBLIC                                                                      Vinnytsya                                                                                                     !
                             Ivano-Frankivsk                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !     !!
                                                                                                                       Kirovohrad                                                       !    !       !
                                                                                                                                                               Dnipropetrovsk                 !
                   Zakarpat                       Chernivtsi                                                                                                                             !!     !!                !
                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                          !       !!   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !!             !
HUNGARY                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                      ROMANIA
                                                                                                                        Mykolaiv                                                          Donetsk
                                                                                                         Odessa                                                     Zaporizhzhia
                                                                               MOLDOVA
                                 !                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                           !
                        !                                                                                                                 Kherson
                                                                                                                  !
                        !
                                                            P                                                                                     !
                    !                                      !                                                                                      !!
                                        !
                                                                !
                            !
                                K                               !
     !                                                                                                                                                                     K
                                                                               !                                                                   Crimea
                                    !                                              R                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                            !                                                                                                                          !
          ! !                                     Y
                                                 !                                                                                                                 !
               !                                                                                                                                           !
              !                                   ! !                                                                            Sevastopol
                                                                        !                                                                              !
                                                  K                                                                                                        Y
                                        !       ! !        ! !T
                                                                    !
 SERBIA                         !
                   Donetsk
                                                 !             BULGARIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K




Sources:
Violeta Skrypnykova, Channels of Corruption in Establishment of Special Economic Zones in Ukraine
Ondrej Klipa | Ph.D. Candidate, Charles University, the Czech Republic| Issue 2, 2005, Problem Of The Special Economic Zones
Within The Ukrainian Economy And Politics
Mark Davis, The World Bank, The debate on Elimination of Free Enterprise Zones in Ukraine, December 12, 2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         143
ANNEXES
                                            ANNEX II Location Quotient




Annex II

Location Quotient
      Region                                               Sector                                              lq2010 lq2000
                                           Agriculture, hunting and forestry. Fishing                           1.33   1.21

                                                           Industry                                             0.77   0.81

                                                         Construction                                           1.12   1.01

                   Trade; repair of motor vehicles, household goods and personal use. Hotels and restaurants    0.92   0.91

                                           Transport, storage and communication                                 0.84   0.85

  Western region                                            Finance                                             0.72   0.85

                                                          Real Estate                                           0.64   0.64

                                                    Public Administration                                       0.96   0.89

                                                          Education                                             1.15   1.13

                                                         Health care                                            1.06   1.03

                     Other community and personal services; activities in the field of culture and sports       1.17   1.20

                                                            Finance                                             0.79   0.81

                     Other community and personal services; activities in the field of culture and sports       0.90   0.95

                                                    Public Administration                                       0.78   0.86

                                                         Construction                                           1.05   1.00

                                                         Real Estate                                            0.97   1.02

  Eastern region                                         Health care                                            0.91   0.90

                                           Transport, storage and communication                                 1.03   1.03

                                                          Education                                             0.85   0.85

                                           Agriculture, hunting and forestry. Fishing                           0.65   0.60

                                                           Industry                                             1.43   1.40

                   Trade; repair of motor vehicles, household goods and personal use. Hotels and restaurants    1.08   1.15




144
                                            ANNEX II Location Quotient




    Region                                                 Sector                                              lq2010 lq2000
                                                            Finance                                             1.44   1.24

                     Other community and personal services; activities in the field of culture and sports       0.94   0.95

                                                         Construction                                           0.98   1.00

                                                         Health care                                            1.02   1.02

                                           Transport, storage and communication                                 1.02   0.98

  Central region                                          Real Estate                                           1.29   1.19

                                                    Public Administration                                       1.24   1.14

                                                          Education                                             1.03   1.06

                                                           Industry                                             0.86   0.86

                                           Agriculture, hunting and forestry. Fishing                           0.97   1.08

                   Trade; repair of motor vehicles, household goods and personal use. Hotels and restaurants    0.95   0.95

                                                            Finance                                             0.91   1.01

                     Other community and personal services; activities in the field of culture and sports       1.01   0.93

                                                         Construction                                           0.89   0.99

                                                          Real Estate                                           1.00   1.06

                                                    Public Administration                                       0.94   1.05

Southern region                                          Health care                                            1.00   1.04

                                           Transport, storage and communication                                 1.09   1.11

                                                          Education                                             0.96   0.96

                                           Agriculture, hunting and forestry. Fishing                           0.94   0.98

                                                           Industry                                             1.01   0.98

                   Trade; repair of motor vehicles, household goods and personal use. Hotels and restaurants    1.06   1.00




                                                                                                                              145
             ANNEX III Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for Economic Activity




Annex III

Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for
Economic Activity
Night-time lights and economic activity. In a series of articles, Henderson, Soreygard and Weil147 have developed a
methodology based on the finding that there is a strong empirical connection between economic activity and the intensity
level of night lights observed by satellites. This can be an important complement to official GDP data particularly when
countries have poor national income accounts. In some cases it can even be used as a replacement or proxy for GDP data.
For example, data on NLs is often readily available at arbitrary granularity levels, while GDP official data is rarely collected
at a level of disaggregation finer than the first subnational division. In this case, night light information can help draw
conclusions about the behavior of economic activity at these smaller geographical levels such as metropolitan areas or
municipalities. NLs also allow for the estimation of economic activity at supranational levels. Several applications of NLs
have been produce, including those found in the World Bank 2014 SAR Urbanization Flagship report.

Having an interest in regional dynamics in this review, NLs are a particularly useful tool. As a reassurance that Ukraine
follows the same patterns shown in the literature for other countries and regions, this appendix provides regression
analyses of the statistical link between night lights and GDP for Ukraine at the Oblast level in absolute, growth, and per
capita levels. A significant positive relationship is ofund between nightlights and economic activity variables using panel
data from the 24 Oblasts in Ukraine, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Kiev City and Sebastopol for the years 2004-
2008 (2000-2008 when using gross value added instead of gross regional product as a robustness test). Oblast level
consumer price indices were used to express economic activity variables in real terms (in 2002 Hryvnias).

Correlation between night lights intensity and levels of real Gross Value Added (GVA). Regression Table 1 shows a positive
statistically significant relationship with (GVA), with a robust estimated elasticity of GDP with respect to lights of
around 0.8. The R-squared numbers support the validity of the relationship. The model specification in column (2)
introduces electricity production, which has a positive significant effect in economic activity. The significance of night
lights remains, but is reduced by the inclusion of electricity, which suggests that electricity production is an important
part of the transmission mechanism which links lights to economic activity, but is not the only one148. Finally, the results
in column (3) include year dummies. The effect of night lights remains significant, supporting that our results are not
driven by time trends. As a robustness test, results calculated using Gross Value Added (GVA) are included in table 2. As
expected, results are reproduced with slight differences in magnitude. Both tables use robust standard errors to take into
account for possible correlation between observations in the same Oblast.




   147 Henderson et al. (2009) develop a theoretical model that suggests an optimal way to combine night lights data and available GDP. This
   is based on the idea that both pieces of information can present measurement error, but that there is no reason for us to think that these
   errors will be correlated with each other. Henderson et al. (2011) apply this to a sample of 170 countries, while Henderson et al., (2012) further
   develops the intuition by providing additional examples of how night lights readings react to documented economic and social phenomena, and
   estimate a model that focuses on night lights density.
   148 Other studies like the 2014 SAR Urbanization Flagship report and Henderson et al., (2012) show electricity consumption has a much higher
   correlation. Electricity consumption data available at the disaggregation level required for a similar analysis is not available for Ukraine.
146
               ANNEX III Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for Economic Activity



The estimating equations are:

ln(Yit)=β0+β1 ln(NLit)+Ɛit

where i is an index for Oblasts, t is an index for time, ε is the estimation error. β1 is the parameter of interest. Because
our regression is run in logarithms, its estimated value is an estimation of the elasticity. Y is a measurement of economic
performance for Oblast I at time t. In our different regressions specifications gross regional product (GRP), GRP per
capita, and gross value added (GVA) are used as dependent variable Y149.


 Table 1 – Correlations with Log of real GVA


                                                        (1)                                   (2)                                  (3)

           Log (Night lights)                        0.823***                             0.694***                              0.851***

                                                     (0.0496)                             (0.0806)                              (0.0753)

                 2005                                                                                                           -0.0920

                                                                                                                                 (0.149)

                 2006                                                                                                             0.153

                                                                                                                                 (0.149)

                 2007                                                                                                             0.230

                                                                                                                                 (0.149)

                 2008                                                                                                             0.219

                                                                                                                                 (0.149)

     Log(Electricity Output)                                                              0.0800***

                                                                                           (0.0277)

               Constant                               -0.278                                0.591                                -0.691

                                                      (0.586)                               (0.771)                              (0.866)

             Observations                               135                                  135                                   135

              R-squared                               0.473                                 0.507                                 0.501



                                                      Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




   149   In some specifications, which are shown in the results tables, electricity consumption is added to the estimation equation as a control.
                                                                                                                                                    147
           ANNEX III Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for Economic Activity



Correlation between the growth of night-time light intensity, and GVA growth. Additionally, a regression specification
is estimated that uses the growth of the logarithms across time instead of the levels. The regression in those cases is:


Δln(Yit)=β0+β1 Δln(NLit)+Ɛit
The results in columns (1) and (2) in Table 2 show that there is not a statistically significant positive relationship between
the growth in the intensity of a country’s night-time lights and its growth of real GRP. Growth is calculated for 4 years
periods. The same results are obtained when year by year growth rates are used.



Table 2 – Correlation between growth of Log of real GRP and growth of Log of night lights

                                                                                              (1)

                                                                                            0.102

                      Δ log(Night Lights)                                                  (0.0637)

                    Δ log(Electric Output)                                                 0.0373

                                                                                           (0.0546)

                           Constant                                                        0.888***

                                                                                           (0.0165)

                        Observations                                                          54

                          R-squared                                                         0.066

                       Number of code

                                             Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Correlation between “URBAN” night lights intensity and levels of real GDP. Gross Value Added (GVA) data is available by
sector for the years 2001-2002. The sectors can be divided into those are typically urban and sectors that are typically
rural according to the following classification: agriculture, hunting, forestry, fishing, fish farming in the rural production,
and industry, construction, trade, repair of motor vehicles, household goods and personal goods, hotels and restaurants,
transport and communication, financial activities, real estate, lease, and engineering. Using this division, measurements
of aggregate urban and rural GVA can be constructed. It is necessary to separate urban and rural GVA, even if it is
done at an Oblast level, because the relationship between each of these two categories and night lights intensity are
fundamentally different. In particular, urban production is expected to be more strongly linked to night light intensity.
Also, given that the interest here is in using NLs to infer economic activity at the city level, it is more accurate to estimate
the relationship between the average urban production in the Oblast (as opposed to total) and the night lights classified
as urban. The tables below do just that for both levels and growth rates.




148
           ANNEX III Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for Economic Activity



Table 3 - Correlations with Log of real urban GVA and Log of urban night lights

                                            (1)                           (2)                            (3)

             luntl                       0.791***                       0.751***                      0.790***

                                         (0.0564)                       (0.0685)                      (0.0401)

          2003.year                                                                                     0.120

                                                                                                       (0.124)

          2004.year                                                                                    0.240*

                                                                                                       (0.124)

          2005.year                                                                                     0.147

                                                                                                       (0.125)

          2006.year                                                                                    0.235*

                                                                                                       (0.124)

          2007.year                                                                                   0.417***

                                                                                                       (0.124)

          2008.year                                                                                   0.338***

                                                                                                       (0.124)

             lelec                                                      0.0296*

                                                                        (0.0165)

           Constant                        0.593                         0.775                          0.391

                                          (0.547)                       (0.593)                        (0.412)

         Observations                       189                           189                           189

          R-squared                        0.667                         0.670                         0.692



A significant positive relationship is obtained as expected. It is in fact quite similar to what was obtained when the
aggregate night lights for both urban and rural were used, confirming the robustness of the results. Tables 4 show results
for growth rates of the logs. Growth is calculated as the total change between 3 year periods. This reduces the effect
of noise. As opposed to the results that use aggregate GVA and lights, here, the growth of urban lights is positively and
significantly correlated with the growth of urban GVA.




                                                                                                                      149
             ANNEX III Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for Economic Activity



Table 4 - Correlations with growth of Log of real urban GVA and growth of Log of urban night

                                                                           (1)                                                 (2)

               Δ (Night Lights)                                        0.404***                                            0.390***

                                                                        (0.0921)                                           (0.0955)

              Δ( Electric output)                                                                                           0.0182

                                                                                                                           (0.0223)

                   Constant                                            0.192***                                             0.191***

                                                                        (0.0117)                                            (0.0123)




                 Observations                                              54                                                  54

                  R-squared                                              0.260                                               0.266

                                                     Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Heterogeneity in interregional variation between night lights intensity and economic activity. In Bickenbach et al (2013)
data on Brazil, India, United States and some countries in Western Europe are used to show that the relationship
between economic activity and night lights is not stable when looking at subnational or regional units. As a consequence,
conclusions drawn about the differences between cities in different regions based solely on night lights are less reliable
than comparisons for a single city across time. In the following table, results are presented for regressions that use
interactions with a dummy for regions. The elasticity between economic activity and nigh lights is, by this construction,
allowed to be different across regions.
In table 4, Region 1 refers to the Western, region 2 to the Eastern region, region 3 to the Central region, and region 4 to
the Southern region (omitted category). The first two columns show a model that uses total (urban and rural) economic
activity and night lights. The second column shows that the interaction with regional dummies is significant, which
implies a varying elasticity . These regional effects are significant and show that, all else equal, the region where a city is
located affects how much light it emits even at similar economic activity levels. This is also true when considering only
urban economic activity and lights in columns 3 and 4.
The regional effects are significant for the Western region, i.e. for similar levels of night lights, economic activity is lower
in the East (when compared to the missed category (Southern)). The contrast is more important in the regressions that
use urban variables, in which both the Western and the Central regions present this trend. This explains statistically
why the large growth in lights in these two regions is not necessarily accompanied by a large growth in economic. The
economic reason behind this might be more complex, but the differences in the movements from urban to rural as well as
the initial conditions (the East being initially much more urban and industrial in nature while Central region being more
service oriented) are candidate explanations.
Finally, joint tests that compare the elasticities between regions conclude that they are statistically different.



   150 The elasticity in this case is given by the coefficient on the night lights independent variable plus the coefficient on the interaction between

   night lights and the corresponding regional dummy.
150
           ANNEX III Methodological Annex Using NL Data as a Proxy for Economic Activity



Table 5 - Correlation between GVA and night lights changes are significantly different between
regions
                                               (1)                  (2)              (3)          (4)

            VARIABLES                         GVA                  GVA           GVA Urban    GVA Urban
            Log(Night Lights)               0.839***             0.728***

                                             (0.0496)            (0.0620)

       Western X log(Night Lights)                              -0.0283***

                                                                 (0.00632)

       Eastern X log(Night Lights)                                0.0133

                                                                 (0.00888)

       Central X log(Night Lights)                               -0.00235

                                                                  (0.0110)

                  year                      0.0754**             0.0705**         0.0573***

                                             (0.0336)            (0.0326)          (0.0166)

        Log (Urban Night Lights)                                                  0.786***      0.776***

                                                                                  (0.0555)      (0.0615)

   Western X log (Urban Night Lights)                                                          -0.0325***

                                                                                               (0.00605)

    Eastern X log (Urban Night Lights)                                                         -0.00127

                                                                                               (0.00796)

    Central X log (Urban Night Lights)                                                         -0.0343***

                                                                                               (0.00818)

                Constant                     -151.8**             -140.6**        -114.2***      0.958

                                             (67.54)              (65.57)          (33.22)      (0.623)




              Observations                     135                  135              189          189

               R-squared                      0.493                0.528            0.687        0.706

           Joint Test dummies                                      0.000                         0.000

                                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                                                            151
                                          ANNEX IV Robusness of City Typologies




Annex IV

Robustness of City Typologies
The threshold used to define whether an area is part of an urban footprint or is rural has been selected by calibrating
the lights data against higher resolution land use cover maps, in particular, the European Space Agency’s GlobCover 2009
map and the MODIS Collection 5 Land Cover Type. This calibration process uses images to determine which areas are urban
and which are rural and then contrasts it with measurements of emitted light. A model is built with this relationship
to determine urban and rural areas in the rest of the country. The errors of this process allow for the calculation of a
distribution of thresholds. The median threshold is the one used in the section to determine urban areas. For Ukraine, this
threshold was determined to be 20.94 DN. Intensity of night-time light here is measured on a “Digital Number” (DN) scale.

The determination of this threshold is subject to measurement error. This error is transmitted to the determination of the
typologies constructed in the section. Depending on how close to the threshold the light emitted by a city is, a city might
jump between the different categories (Found, Appeared, Disappeared, Missed) if the threshold is perturbed marginally.
Similarly, both area change and intensive growth could pass from negative to positive or vice versa, if numbers are close
to the threshold. To test the robustness of these typologies, they can be calculated using not only the original threshold,
but also the 5th and 95th percentile. This gives a 90 percent confidence interval that a particular area is urban or rural
when determined by NLs thresholds. This error bounds are passed to the typology classification.

When testing the first typology with the 90 percent confidence interval, a total misclassification or classification error
of 15 percent is obtained. This means that performing the classification of the first typology the 5th and 95th percentiles
and comparing it with the current classification (calculated with the median or 50th percentile), only 15 percent of cities
change type. The change comes from cities that were close to the median threshold. For example, one city could have
disappeared by presenting emitted lights just below the urban threshold in the second period. Changing this threshold
can move it from disappeared to found.

Similarly, when testing the second typology with the 90 percent confidence interval, a total misclassification of 35
percent is obtained. The same logic applies as before. The classification error in this case was expected to be higher
because changing the threshold changes the urban footprint, which changes multiple dimensions of the data used to
construct the second typology: it changes the total area of the footprint, which determines the area change; it also
changes the amount of light emitted in the core, as it changes the measurement of the core, as well as its change
overtime. Given that the confidence interval is so wide, this scale of misclassification error is not so large151.




   151 See Denison D., Holmes C., Mallick B., Smith A., Bayesian Methods for Nonlinear Classification and Regression. (2002) for a discussion on

   classification error and applications on the social sciences.
152
153
                                      ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




Annex V

List of Ukrainian Cities (2013)

                             Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City       Oblast                                      Region         Size         Population growth
                                2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                       Mid size cities   Declining but less
Simferopol    Crimea            1     337285     FOUND      Southern                                              A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)     than urban average

                                                                       Mid size cities
Vinnytsia     Vinnytsia         1     371698     FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)

                                                                       Mid size cities
Rivne         Rivne             1     250333     FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)

                                                                       Mid size cities   Declining but less
Ternopil      Ternopil          1     217118     FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)     than urban average

Kamianets-                                                             Mid size cities
              Khmelnytskyi      1     102743     FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
Podilskyi                                                              (100k - 500k)

                                                                       Large towns
Sarny         Rivne             1     28625      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (20k - 50k)

                                                                       Large towns
Kuznetsovsk   Rivne             1     41432      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (20k - 50k)

                                                                       Mid size towns    Declining more than
Kivertsi      Volhynia          1     14611      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                       Small cities      Declining but less
Stryi         Lviv              1     60126      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                       Mid size cities   Declining but less
Chernihiv     Cernihiv          1     296089     FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)     than urban average

                                                                       Small cities      Declining more than
Shepetivka    Khmelnytskyi      1     43375      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                       Small cities
Kovel         Volhynia          1     68912      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (50k - 100k)

                                                                       Mid size towns    Declining but less
Hnivan        Vinnytsia         1     12587      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                       Large towns       Declining but less
Khust         Zakarpattia       1     28643      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                       Mid size cities
Chernivtsi    Cernivcy          1     258842     FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)

154
                                       ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities



                              Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
    City          Oblast                                      Region          Size        Population growth
                                 2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                        Mid size cities   Declining more than
Kerch          Crimea            1     145265     FOUND      Southern                                              A
                                                                        (100k - 500k)     national average

               Ivano-                                                   Small cities      Declining but less
Kalush                           1     67585      FOUND      Western                                               A
               Frankivsk                                                (50k - 100k)      than urban average

Khmel-         Khmel-                                                   Mid size cities
                                 1     264988     FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
nytskyi        nytskyi                                                  (100k - 500k)

                                                                        Large towns
Kostopil       Rivne             1     31590      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                        (20k - 50k)

                                                                        Large towns       Declining more than
Bakhmach       Cernihiv          1     18683      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                        (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                        Major cities (>   Declining but less
Kharkov        Charkiv           1     1451028    FOUND      Eastern                                               A
                                                                        500k)             than urban average

Kamianka-                                                               Mid size towns    Declining more than
               Lviv              1     10900      FOUND      Western                                               A
Buzka                                                                   (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                        Mid size towns    Declining but less
Pyriatyn       Poltava           1     15981      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                        (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                        Large towns       Declining but less
Vynohradiv     Zakarpa-ttia      1     25565      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                        (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                        Large towns
Brody          Lviv              1     23784      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                        (20k - 50k)

                                                                        Mid size cities
Yevpatoria     Crimea            1     106877     FOUND      Southern                     Positive growth          A
                                                                        (100k - 500k)

                                                                        Large towns       Declining but less
Sokal          Lviv              1     21386      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                        (20k - 50k)       than urban average

Volodymyr-                                                              Large towns
               Volhynia          1     38870      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
Volynskyi                                                               (20k - 50k)

                                                                        Small cities      Declining more than
Feodosiya      Crimea            1     69461      FOUND      Southern                                              A
                                                                        (50k - 100k)      national average

Staro-         Khmel                                                    Large towns       Declining but less
                                 1     34945      FOUND      Western                                               A
kostiantyniv   nytskyi                                                  (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                        Mid size towns    Declining more than
Soledar        Donetsk           1     11708      FOUND      Eastern                                               A
                                                                        (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                        Small Town
Rava-Ruska     Lviv              1     8426       FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                        (<10k)

               Ivano-                                                   Small cities      Declining but less
Kolomyia                         1     61428      FOUND      Western                                               A
               Frankivsk                                                (50k - 100k)      than urban average



                                                                                                                       155
                                      ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                             Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
       City      Oblast                                      Region          Size        Population growth
                                2       2013        1                                                             3

              Khmel-                                                   Mid size towns    Declining but less
Dunaivtsi                       1     16219      FOUND      Western                                               A
              nytskyi                                                  (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                       Large towns       Declining but less
Hlukhiv       Sumy              1     34574      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (20k - 50k)       than urban average

Novovo-                                                                Small cities      Declining but less
              Volhynia          1     53199      FOUND      Western                                               A
lynsk                                                                  (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                       Small cities      Declining but less
Nizhyn        Cernihiv          1     73282      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                       Large towns       Declining more than
Berehove      Zakar-pattia      1     24458      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                       Small cities      Declining but less
Yalta         Crimea            1     78115      FOUND      Southern                                              A
                                                                       (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                       Mid size cities
Sevastopol    Sevas-topol       1     342580     FOUND      Southern                     Positive growth          A
                                                                       (100k - 500k)

                                                                       Mid size towns
Zbarazh       Ternopil          1     14004      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                       (10k - 20k)

Chervo-                                                                Small cities      Declining but less
              Lviv              1     68000      FOUND      Western                                               A
nohrad                                                                 (50k - 100k)      than urban average

              Khmel-                                                   Mid size towns    Declining but less
Horodok_K                       1     16761      FOUND      Western                                               A
              nytskyi                                                  (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                       Small cities      Declining more than
Ismail        Odessa            1     73007      FOUND      Southern                                              A
                                                                       (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                       Mid size towns    Declining but less
Kalynivka     Vinnytsia         1     19291      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                       Mid size towns    Declining but less
Mena          Cernihiv          1     12264      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (10k - 20k)       than urban average

Ivano-        Ivano-                                                   Mid size cities
                                1     226018     FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
Frankivsk     Frankivsk                                                (100k - 500k)

                                                                       Mid size towns    Declining more than
Skvyra        Kiev              1     16715      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                       (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                       Major cities (>   Declining but less
Lviv          Lviv              1     730272     FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       500k)             than urban average

                                                                       Large towns       Declining but less
Sambir        Lviv              1     34899      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                       (20k - 50k)       than urban average

Droho-                                                                 Small cities      Declining but less
              Lviv              1     77080      FOUND      Western                                               A
bych                                                                   (50k - 100k)      than urban average



156
                                   ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                          Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
       City      Oblast                                   Region          Size        Population growth
                             2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                    Mid size cities
Lutsk         Volhynia       1     214727     FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                    (100k - 500k)

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining but less
Zhytomyr      Zhytomyr       1     271303     FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     than urban average

                                                                    Large towns
Zolochiv      Lviv           1     24074      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                    (20k - 50k)

                                                                    Major cities (>   Declining but less
Odessa        Odessa         1     1014852    FOUND      Southern                                              A
                                                                    500k)             than urban average

                                                                    Large towns
Hadiach       Poltava        1     24196      FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          A
                                                                    (20k - 50k)

                                                                    Small cities      Declining but less
Uman          Cherkasy       1     87111      FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                    Small Town
Kiev          Kiev           1     2757900    FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          A
                                                                    (<10k)

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Buryn         Sumy           1     9134       FOUND      Central                                               A
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

Zoloto-                                                             Large towns       Declining but less
              Cherkasy       1     28371      FOUND      Central                                               A
nosha                                                               (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Small Town
Radekhiv      Lviv           1     9600       FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          A
                                                                    (<10k)

                                                                    Large towns       Declining but less
Dubno         Rivne          1     38019      FOUND      Western                                               A
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining but less
Kakhovka      Kherson        2     37419      FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Bar           Vinnytsia      2     16442      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Luhansk       Luhansk        2     425848     FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Starobilsk    Luhansk        2     18297      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Mykolaivka    Donetsk        2     15684      FOUND      Eastern                                               D
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Torez         Donetsk        2     57998      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

              Ivano-                                                Mid size towns    Declining but less
Sniatyn                      2     10106      APPEAR     Western                                               B
              Frankivsk                                             (10k - 20k)       than urban average



                                                                                                                   157
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City        Oblast                                    Region         Size         Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Balakliia      Charkiv         2     29499      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Popasna        Luhansk         2     21917      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

               Dnipro-                                                Small cities      Declining but less
Marhanets                      2     48546      FOUND      Southern                                              B
               petrovsk                                               (50k - 100k)      than urban average

               Ivano-                                                 Mid size towns
Bolekhiv                       2     10768      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
               Frankivsk                                              (10k - 20k)

Synelny-       Dnipro-                                                Large towns       Declining but less
                               2     31568      FOUND      Southern                                              B
kove           petrovsk                                               (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Large towns
Khmilnyk       Vinnytsia       2     28209      APPEAR     Central                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Large towns
Chortkiv       Ternopil        2     29640      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Znamianka      Kirovohrad      2     23983      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Buchach        Ternopil        2     12597      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                                        Declining but less
                                                                      Large towns
Krasnohrad     Charkiv         2     21332      FOUND      Eastern                      than national            B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)
                                                                                        average

                                                                      Small cities      Declining but less
Komsomolsk     Poltava         2     51730      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      than urban average

Sievero-                                                              Mid size cities   Declining more than
               Luhansk         2     109466     FOUND      Eastern                                               B
donetsk                                                               (100k - 500k)     national average

Novoia-                                                               Large towns
               Lviv            2     29580      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
vorivske                                                              (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Large towns
Novyj Rozdil   Lviv            2     28797      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

Mohyliv-                                                              Large towns       Declining but less
               Vinnytsia       2     32056      FOUND      Central                                               B
Podilskyi                                                             (20k - 50k)       than urban average

               Khmel-                                                 Large towns       Declining more than
Volochysk                      2     19619      APPEAR     Western                                               B
               nytskyi                                                (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Small cities      Declining but less
Pervomaisk     Mykolaiv        2     66671      FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining but less
Kaniv          Cherkasy        2     25558      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       than urban average


158
                                    ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                           Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
    City         Oblast                                    Region         Size        Population growth
                              2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                     Large towns      Declining more than
Trostianets   Sumy            2     21368      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                     (20k - 50k)      national average

Ordzho-       Dnipro-                                                Large towns      Declining more than
                              2     41374      FOUND      Southern                                             B
nikidze       petrovsk                                               (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                     Small cities     Declining but less
Konotop       Sumy            2     88787      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                     (50k - 100k)     than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns   Declining more than
Zalishchyky   Ternopil        2     9417       APPEAR     Western                                              B
                                                                     (10k - 20k)      national average

Bakhchi                                                              Large towns      Declining but less
              Crimea          2     26482      APPEAR     Southern                                             B
saray                                                                (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns   Declining but less
Horodok_L     Lviv            2     15959      APPEAR     Western                                              B
                                                                     (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                     Large towns      Declining more than
Lebedyn       Sumy            2     26137      FOUND      Central                                              D
                                                                     (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                     Mid size towns   Declining but less
Novyi Buh     Mykolaiv        2     15531      FOUND      Southern                                             B
                                                                     (10k - 20k)      than urban average

Yuzhnou                                                              Large towns
              Mykolaiv        2     40555      FOUND      Southern                    Positive growth          B
krainsk                                                              (20k - 50k)

                                                                     Small cities     Declining more than
Snizhne       Donetsk         2     48485      FOUND      Eastern                                              B
                                                                     (50k - 100k)     national average

                                                                     Small cities     Declining but less
Okhtyrka      Sumy            2     49047      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                     (50k - 100k)     than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns   Declining but less
Nemyriv       Vinnytsia       2     11900      APPEAR     Central                                              B
                                                                     (10k - 20k)      than urban average

Nova                                                                 Small cities     Declining more than
              Kherson         2     47852      FOUND      Southern                                             B
Kakhovka                                                             (50k - 100k)     national average

                                                                     Large towns      Declining but less
Kotovsk       Odessa          2     40692      FOUND      Southern                                             B
                                                                     (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                     Large towns      Declining but less
Enerhodar     Zaporizhia      2     54708      FOUND      Southern                                             B
                                                                     (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns
Slavutych     Kiev            2     24826      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          B
                                                                     (10k - 20k)

Zvenyho                                                              Large towns      Declining more than
              Cherkasy        2     17958      APPEAR     Central                                              B
rodka                                                                (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                     Small cities     Declining more than
Druzhkivka    Donetsk         2     59863      FOUND      Eastern                                              B
                                                                     (50k - 100k)     national average



                                                                                                                   159
                                   ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                          Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City      Oblast                                    Region         Size         Population growth
                             2       2013        1                                                             3

Dnipro       Dnipro                                                 Mid size cities   Declining but less
                             2     241880     FOUND      Southern                                              B
dzerzhynsk   petrovsk                                               (100k - 500k)     than urban average

                                                                    Small Town        Declining more than
Morshyn      Lviv            2     6037       APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                    (<10k)            national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Chasiv Yar   Donetsk         2     13999      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Romny        Sumy            2     42616      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Liuboml      Volhynia        2     10246      APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Lutuhyne     Luhansk         2     17989      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Kherson      Kherson         2     299052     FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining but less
Berdiansk    Zaporizhia      2     116034     FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     than urban average

                                                                                      Declining but less
                                                                    Mid size towns
Hrebinka     Poltava         2     10960      FOUND      Central                      than national            D
                                                                    (10k - 20k)
                                                                                      average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Poltava      Poltava         2     296852     FOUND      Central                                               D
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

             Ivano-                                                 Mid size towns
Burshtyn                     2     15340      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
             Frankivsk                                              (10k - 20k)

             Ivano-                                                 Large towns       Declining but less
Dolyna                       2     20622      FOUND      Western                                               B
             Frankivsk                                              (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Zhydachiv    Lviv            2     11180      APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Myronivka    Kiev            2     11964      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

Nowomos      Dnipro                                                 Small cities      Declining but less
                             2     70787      FOUND      Southern                                              B
kowsk        petrovsk                                               (50k - 100k)      than urban average

             Ivano-                                                 Small Town
Kosiv                        2     8543       APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
             Frankivsk                                              (<10k)

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Zmiiv        Charkiv         2     15211      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                    Small Town
Mostyska     Lviv            2     9193       APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                    (<10k)


160
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
    City          Oblast                                    Region          Size        Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Amvrosiivka    Donetsk         2     18832      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Horodnia       Cernihiv        2     12558      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Major cities (>   Declining but less
Mykolaiv_M     Mykolaiv        2     496188     FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                      500k)             than urban average

Krasnyi                                                               Large towns       Declining more than
               Donetsk         2     22509      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
Lyman                                                                 (20k - 50k)       national average

Kostianty                                                             Mid size cities   Declining more than
               Donetsk         2     77066      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
nivka                                                                 (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Shchors        Cernihiv        2     11471      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining more than
Oleksandriia   Kirovohrad      2     82819      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Khorol         Poltava         2     13593      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

               Dnipro                                                 Large towns       Declining but less
Ternivka                       2     28920      FOUND      Southern                                              B
               petrovsk                                               (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Polohy         Zaporizhia      2     19906      FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Alushta        Crimea          2     28418      APPEAR     Southern                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Khodoriv       Lviv            2     9829       APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

               Dnipro                                                 Major cities (>   Declining but less
Kryvyj Rih                     2     656478     FOUND      Southern                                              B
               petrovsk                                               500k)             than urban average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Koziatyn       Vinnytsia       2     24247      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Pomichna       Kirovohrad      2     9210       FOUND      Central                                               D
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Small Town        Declining more than
Druzhba        Sumy            2     5031       FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                      (<10k)            national average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining more than
Krasnyi Luch   Luhansk         2     82765      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Vovchansk      Charkiv         2     19082      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average



                                                                                                                     161
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City       Oblast                                     Region         Size         Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                      Large towns       Declining but less
Reni          Odessa           2     19480      FOUND      Southern                                              D
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Mykolaiv_L    Lviv             2     14877      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                      Small cities      Declining more than
Dzhankoy      Crimea           2     36086      FOUND      Southern                                              D
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining but less
Svaliava      Zakarpattia      2     17027      FOUND      Western                                               B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       than urban average

Chervono                                                              Mid size towns    Declining but less
              Poltava          2     8612       FOUND      Central                                               B
zavodske                                                              (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Saky          Crimea           2     23655      APPEAR     Southern                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Small Town        Declining more than
Kitsman       Cernivcy         2     6762       APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                      (<10k)            national average

Dokucha                                                               Large towns       Declining but less
              Donetsk          2     23733      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
ievsk                                                                 (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Zuhres        Donetsk          2     18553      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

              Dnipro                                                  Mid size towns    Declining but less
Zelenodolsk                    2     13947      FOUND      Southern                                              B
              petrovsk                                                (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                      Small Town
Chop          Zakarpattia      2     8994       FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (<10k)

                                                                      Small cities      Declining more than
Pryluky       Cernihiv         2     58475      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      national average

              Ivano-                                                  Small Town
Yaremche                       2     8124       APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
              Frankivsk                                               (<10k)

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining but less
Berezan       Kiev             2     16543      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                      Small cities      Declining more than
Swerdlovsk    Luhansk          2     65276      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Rozdilna      Odessa           2     17904      FOUND      Southern                     Positive growth          B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                      Mid size towns
Kaharlyk      Kiev             2     13758      APPEAR     Central                      Positive growth          B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining but less
Melitopol     Zaporizhia       2     156984     FOUND      Southern                                              B
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     than urban average



162
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
     City         Oblast                                    Region         Size        Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                      Small cities     Declining more than
Izium          Charkiv         2     51511      FOUND      Eastern                                              B
                                                                      (50k - 100k)     national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Sudak          Crimea          2     15457      APPEAR     Southern                    Positive growth          B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining but less
Vilniansk      Zaporizhia      2     15682      FOUND      Southern                                             B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      than urban average

Staryi                                                                Small Town
               Lviv            2     6446       APPEAR     Western                     Positive growth          B
Sambir                                                                (<10k)

                                                                      Small cities     Declining more than
Svitlovodsk    Kirovohrad      2     46613      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                      (50k - 100k)     national average

Khrysty                                                               Mid size towns   Declining more than
               Cherkasy        2     10860      FOUND      Central                                              D
nivka                                                                 (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Bilopillia     Sumy            2     16731      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

               Dnipro                                                 Mid size towns   Declining but less
Verkhivtseve                   2     10033      FOUND      Southern                                             B
               petrovsk                                               (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Krolevets      Sumy            2     23574      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining but less
Malyn          Zhytomyr        2     26934      FOUND      Central                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      than urban average

               Dnipro                                                 Large towns      Declining but less
Vilnohirsk                     2     23764      FOUND      Southern                                             B
               petrovsk                                               (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Kirovske       Donetsk         2     28291      FOUND      Eastern                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Dniprorudne    Zaporizhia      2     19479      FOUND      Southern                                             D
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Debaltseve     Donetsk         2     25774      FOUND      Eastern                                              B
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Small Town       Declining more than
Novoselytsia   Cernivcy        2     7774       APPEAR     Western                                              B
                                                                      (<10k)           national average

Novodni                                                               Mid size towns
               Cernivcy        2     10776      APPEAR     Western                     Positive growth          B
strovsk                                                               (10k - 20k)

                                                                      Mid size towns
Zhovkva        Lviv            2     13594      APPEAR     Western                     Positive growth          B
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

               Dnipro                                                 Large towns      Declining more than
Piatykhatky                    2     18944      FOUND      Southern                                             B
               petrovsk                                               (20k - 50k)      national average



                                                                                                                    163
                                   ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                          Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City      Oblast                                    Region          Size        Population growth
                             2       2013        1                                                             3

Kamin-                                                              Small Town
             Volhynia        2     12018      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
Kashyrskyi                                                          (<10k)

             Khmelnyt                                               Large towns       Declining but less
Krasyliv                     2     19743      APPEAR     Western                                               B
             skyi                                                   (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Khotyn       Cernivcy        2     9771       APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Kramatorsk   Donetsk         2     164283     FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Bobrynets    Kirovohrad      2     10991      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Lokhvytsia   Poltava         2     11863      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Small Town
Horokhiv     Volhynia        2     9093       APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                    (<10k)

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Kupiansk     Charkiv         2     29487      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

Dnepro       Dnipro                                                 Major cities (>   Declining more than
                             2     997754     FOUND      Southern                                              D
petrovsk     petrovsk                                               500k)             national average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Horlivka     Donetsk         2     256714     FOUND      Eastern                                               D
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Sokyriany    Cernivcy        2     9462       APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining but less
Smila        Cherkasy        2     68636      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Kurakhove    Donetsk         2     20098      FOUND      Eastern                                               D
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                    Mid size towns
Berezhany    Ternopil        2     18161      APPEAR     Western                      Positive growth          B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Alchevsk     Luhansk         2     111360     FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Shpola       Cherkasy        2     17806      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

Krasno                                                              Large towns       Declining but less
             Crimea          2     29815      FOUND      Southern                                              D
perekopsk                                                           (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Biliaivka    Odessa          2     12052      APPEAR     Southern                                              B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average



164
                                   ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                          Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
    City         Oblast                                   Region         Size         Population growth
                             2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Dzerzhynsk    Donetsk        2     35296      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

              Dnipro                                                Mid size cities   Declining more than
Nikopol                      2     118720     FOUND      Southern                                              B
              petrovsk                                              (100k - 500k)     national average

              Khmelnyt                                              Mid size towns    Declining more than
Iziaslav                     2     17172      APPEAR     Western                                               B
              skyi                                                  (10k - 20k)       national average

Komsomol                                                            Mid size towns    Declining more than
              Donetsk        2     11763      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
ske                                                                 (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Antratsyt     Luhansk        2     54640      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Ilovaisk      Donetsk        2     15949      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

Korsun-
                                                                    Large towns       Declining but less
Shevchenkiv- Cherkasy        2     18655      APPEAR     Central                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       than urban average
skyi

                                                                    Large towns       Declining but less
Zhmerynka     Vinnytsia      2     35390      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       than urban average

              Dnipro-                                               Small cities      Declining more than
Zhovti Vody                  2     47509      FOUND      Southern                                              B
              petrovsk                                              (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Artemivsk     Donetsk        2     77620      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Lubny         Poltava        2     47643      FOUND      Central                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Pochaiv       Ternopil       2     7842       APPEAR     Western                                               B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Krasnodon     Luhansk        2     44283      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                                      Declining but less
                                                                    Mid size towns
Olevsk        Zhytomyr       2     10231      APPEAR     Central                      than national            B
                                                                    (10k - 20k)
                                                                                      average

                                                                    Mid size cities   Declining more than
Stakhanov     Luhansk        2     77593      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Rovenky       Luhansk        2     47852      FOUND      Eastern                                               B
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                              DIS                   Small Town        Declining more than
Vorozhba      Sumy           3     7444                  Central                                               C
                                              APPEAR                (<10k)            national average




                                                                                                                   165
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City        Oblast                                    Region         Size         Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                      Mid size cities
Bila Tserkva   Kiev            3     210919     FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          C
                                                                      (100k - 500k)

                                                                      Large towns
Haisyn         Vinnytsia       3     25855      FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          E
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Large towns       Declining but less
Myrhorod       Poltava         3     41109      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining but less
Yavoriv        Lviv            3     12905      FOUND      Western                                               E
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Siversk        Donetsk         3     12145                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Ladyzhyn       Vinnytsia       3     22961      FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          E
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                                        Declining but less
Krasno-                                                               Small cities
               Donetsk         3     64895      FOUND      Eastern                      than national            E
armiysk                                                               (50k - 100k)
                                                                                        average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining but less
Bobrovytsia    Cernihiv        3     11238                 Central                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Kobeliaky      Poltava         3     10181                 Central                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Bohodukhiv     Charkiv         3     15797      FOUND      Eastern                                               E
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining but less
Haivoron       Kirovohrad      3     15214                 Central                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining but less
Volnovakha     Donetsk         3     23305      FOUND      Eastern                                               E
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       than urban average

               Dnipro                           DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Apostolove                     3     14432                 Southern                                              C
               petrovsk                         APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                DIS                   Large towns       Declining more than
Kreminna       Luhansk         3     20324                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       national average

Verkhniod      Dnipro                           DIS                   Large towns       Declining but less
                               3     16885                 Southern                                              C
niprovsk       petrovsk                         APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining more than
Kirovohrad     Kirovohrad      3     234322     FOUND      Central                                               C
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                DIS                   Large towns       Declining more than
Selydove       Donetsk         3     24145                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                DIS                   Large towns       Declining more than
Karlivka       Poltava         3     15202                 Central                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       national average


166
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
    City          Oblast                                    Region          Size        Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

               Khmelny                                                Large towns
Netishyn                       3     36741      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          C
               tskyi                                                  (20k - 50k)

Pervo                                                                 Small cities      Declining more than
               Luhansk         3     38435      FOUND      Eastern                                               E
maisk L                                                               (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining but less
Kremenchuk     Poltava         3     225892     FOUND      Central                                               C
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     than urban average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Barvinkove     Charkiv         3     9709                  Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining but less
Cherkasy       Cherkasy        3     285605     FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     than urban average

Novohrad-                                                             Small cities      Declining but less
               Zhytomyr        3     55991      FOUND      Central                                               E
Volynskyi                                                             (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                      Small cities      Declining but less
Korosten       Zhytomyr        3     65503      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining more than
Sumy           Sumy            3     269177     FOUND      Central                                               C
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Shchastia      Luhansk         3     12773                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Small cities      Declining more than
Berdychiv      Zhytomyr        3     78523      FOUND      Central                                               C
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Mala Vyska     Kirovohrad      3     11141                 Central                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

               Khmelnyt                                               Large towns
Slavuta                        3     35625      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          E
               skyi                                                   (20k - 50k)

                                                                                        Declining but less
                                                                      Major cities (>
Mariupol       Donetsk         3     461810     FOUND      Eastern                      than national            E
                                                                      500k)
                                                                                        average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining but less
Ovruch         Zhytomyr        3     16614      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Snihurivka     Mykolaiv        3     13131                 Southern                                              C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

Bilhorod-                                                             Small cities      Declining but less
               Odessa          3     50246      FOUND      Southern                                              E
Dnistrovskyi                                                          (50k - 100k)      than urban average

                                                DIS                   Small Town        Declining but less
Khorostkiv     Ternopil        3     7057                  Western                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (<10k)            than urban average

                                                DIS                   Large towns       Declining more than
Orikhiv        Zaporizhia      3     15281                 Southern                                              C
                                                APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       national average


                                                                                                                     167
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City       Oblast                                     Region         Size         Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Andrushivka   Zhytomyr         3     9038                  Central                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

Novo                                                                  Large towns       Declining more than
              Kirovohrad       3     17741      FOUND      Central                                               C
ukrainka                                                              (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining but less
Skadovsk      Kherson          3     18940      FOUND      Southern                                              E
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining but less
Borshchiv     Ternopil         3     11222      FOUND      Western                                               E
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                DIS                   Large towns       Declining more than
Svatove       Luhansk          3     18241                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining but less
Uzhhorod      Zakarpattia      3     116349     FOUND      Western                                               C
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     than urban average

              Ivano-                                                  Large towns
Nadvirna                       3     22209      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          E
              Frankivsk                                               (20k - 50k)

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Petrovske     Luhansk          3     13260                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

Pereiaslav-
                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Khmelnyts     Kiev             3     27945      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average
kyi

Persho        Dnipro                            DIS                   Large towns       Declining but less
                               3     29019                 Southern                                              C
travensk      petrovsk                          APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       than urban average

Novhorod-                                       DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
              Cernihiv         3     13791                 Central                                               C
Siverskyi                                       APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Small cities
Mukachevo     Zakarpattia      3     84992      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          E
                                                                      (50k - 100k)

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Mospyne       Donetsk          3     10806                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Vosnessensk   Mykolaiv         3     36613      FOUND      Southern                                              C
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Zymohiria     Luhansk          3     9949                  Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Hirske        Luhansk          3     10131                 Eastern                                               C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Talne         Cherkasy         3     14216      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Vasylivka     Zaporizhia       3     13996                 Southern                                              C
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average


168
                                    ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                           Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
    City         Oblast                                    Region          Size        Population growth
                              2       2013        1                                                             3

                                               DIS                   Large towns
Tsiurupynsk   Kherson         3     25112                 Southern                     Positive growth          C
                                               APPEAR                (20k - 50k)

                                               DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Svitlodarsk   Donetsk         3     12164                 Eastern                                               C
                                               APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Small cities      Declining more than
Fastiv        Kiev            3     48237      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                     (50k - 100k)      national average

                                               DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining more than
Hirnyk        Donetsk         3     11641                 Eastern                                               C
                                               APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining more than
Yahotyn       Kiev            3     20445      FOUND      Central                                               C
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining more than
Armiansk      Crimea          3     22337      FOUND      Southern                                              E
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       national average

Chervono                                                             Large towns       Declining more than
              Luhansk         3     15659      FOUND      Eastern                                               E
partyzansk                                                           (20k - 50k)       national average

                                               DIS                   Large towns       Declining more than
Tokmak        Zaporizhia      3     32996                 Southern                                              C
                                               APPEAR                (20k - 50k)       national average

                                               DIS                   Mid size towns    Declining but less
Bashtanka     Mykolaiv        3     12680                 Southern                                              C
                                               APPEAR                (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Small cities      Declining more than
Shostka       Sumy            3     79058      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                     (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining more than
Liubotyn      Charkiv         3     21909      FOUND      Eastern                                               E
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining but less
Korostyshiv   Zhytomyr        3     25817      FOUND      Central                                               E
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                                       Declining but less
                                                                     Major cities
Donetsk       Donetsk         4     953217     FOUND      Eastern                      than national            .
                                                                     (> 500k)
                                                                                       average

                                                                                       Declining but less
                                                                     Major cities (>
Zaporizhia    Zaporizhia      4     770672     FOUND      Southern                     than national            .
                                                                     500k)
                                                                                       average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining but less
Yasynuvata    Donetsk               35836      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                     Small Town        Declining but less
Busk          Lviv                  8437       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            than urban average

                                               DIS                   Small Town        Declining more than
Artemove      Donetsk               5598                  Eastern                                               .
                                               APPEAR                (<10k)            national average




                                                                                                                    169
                                  ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                         Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
      City      Oblast                                   Region         Size        Population growth
                            2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                   Large towns      Declining more than
Artsyz       Odessa               15178      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                   (20k - 50k)      national average

Novohro                                                            Mid size towns   Declining more than
             Donetsk              15398      MISSED     Eastern                                              .
divka                                                              (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                   Small Town
Rudky        Lviv                 5434       MISSED     Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                   (<10k)

                                                                   Small cities
Boryspil     Kiev                 59545      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                   (50k - 100k)

Peremy                                                             Small Town       Declining more than
             Lviv                 6874       MISSED     Western                                              .
shliany                                                            (<10k)           national average

                                                                   Small Town       Declining but less
Komarno      Lviv                 3842       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                   (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                   Small Town       Declining but less
Dovbysh      Zhytomyr             4498       MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                   (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                   Mid size towns   Declining more than
Marinka      Donetsk              9913       FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                   (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                   Mid size towns
Vynnyky      Lviv                 16278      FOUND      Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                   (10k - 20k)

                                                                   Mid size towns   Declining but less
Shcholkine   Crimea               11184      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                   (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                   Small cities     Declining more than
Brianka      Luhansk              47512      FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                   (50k - 100k)     national average

                                                                   Small Town       Declining more than
Zastavna     Cernivcy             8063       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                   (<10k)           national average

                                                                   Small Town       Declining more than
Oster        Cernihiv             6339       MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                   (<10k)           national average

                                                                   Small Town       Declining but less
Ustyluh      Volhynia             2214       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                   (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                   Small cities
Illichivsk   Odessa               59718      FOUND      Southern                    Positive growth          .
                                                                   (50k - 100k)

                                                                   Mid size towns   Declining more than
Kamianka     Cherkasy             12652      MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                   (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                   Small Town       Declining more than
Pivdenne     Charkiv              7818       FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                   (<10k)           national average

                                                                   Large towns      Declining but less
Kremenets    Ternopil             21729      MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                   (20k - 50k)      than urban average



170
                                      ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                             Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
    City         Oblast                                      Region         Size        Population growth
                                2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining but less
Baranivka     Zhytomyr                11980      MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                       Large towns      Declining more than
Bilozerske    Donetsk                 16101      MISSED     Eastern                                              .
                                                                       (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                       Small Town       Declining more than
Rzhyshchiv    Kiev                    7532       MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                       (<10k)           national average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining but less
Bilohirsk     Crimea                  18220      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Bolhrad       Odessa                  15631      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                                        Declining but less
                                                                       Large towns
Polonne       Khmelnytskyi            21749      MISSED     Western                     than national            .
                                                                       (20k - 50k)
                                                                                        average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Huliaipole    Zaporizhia              14358      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                       Mid size towns
Inkerman      Sevastopol              11985      FOUND      Southern                    Positive growth          .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)

                                                                                        Declining but less
                                                                       Small Town
Hlyniany      Lviv                    3183       MISSED     Western                     than national            .
                                                                       (<10k)
                                                                                        average

                                                                       Small Town       Declining more than
Zboriv        Ternopil                6923       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                       (<10k)           national average

                                                 DIS                   Mid size towns   Declining more than
Pryvillia     Luhansk                 7747                  Eastern                                              .
                                                 APPEAR                (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                 DIS                   Large towns      Declining more than
Kirovsk       Luhansk                 28529                 Eastern                                              .
                                                 APPEAR                (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                       Small Town       Declining more than
Zorynsk       Luhansk                 7331       MISSED     Eastern                                              .
                                                                       (<10k)           national average

                                                                       Large towns
Obukhiv       Kiev                    33102      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                       (20k - 50k)

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Artemivsk L   Luhansk                 7506       FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                       Small Town
Shumsk        Ternopil                5404       MISSED     Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                       (<10k)

                                                                       Small Town
Teplodar      Odessa                  10204      MISSED     Southern                    Positive growth          .
                                                                       (<10k)




                                                                                                                     171
                                    ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                           Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City        Oblast                                   Region         Size         Population growth
                              2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                     Large towns       Declining more than
Vasylkiv       Kiev                 36672      FOUND      Central                                               .
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining but less
Radomyshl      Zhytomyr             14943      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining but less
Dubrovytsia    Rivne                9414       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Small Town
Lanivtsi       Ternopil             8752       MISSED     Western                      Positive growth          .
                                                                     (<10k)

                                                                     Small Town        Declining more than
Pustomyty      Lviv                 9111       APPEAR     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            national average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining more than
Henichesk      Kherson              20353      MISSED     Southern                                              .
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                     Mid size cities   Declining more than
Lysychansk     Luhansk              104314     FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                     (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                     Small Town        Declining but less
Skalat         Ternopil             4018       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            than urban average

                                                                     Small Town        Declining more than
Vashkivtsi     Cernivcy             5406       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            national average

Krasno                                                               Mid size towns    Declining but less
               Donetsk              15937      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
horivka                                                              (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Small Town
Velyki Mosty   Lviv                 6121       MISSED     Western                      Positive growth          .
                                                                     (<10k)

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining more than
Ochakiv        Mykolaiv             14632      MISSED     Southern                                              .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Small Town        Declining more than
Lypovets       Vinnytsia            8727       MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            national average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining more than
Rodynske       Donetsk              10698      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining more than
Irmino         Luhansk              10044      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining more than
Borzna         Cernihiv             10535      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       national average

Yunokomu                                                             Large towns       Declining more than
               Donetsk              14154      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
narivsk                                                              (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                     Large towns       Declining but less
Boiarka        Kiev                 35320      FOUND      Central                                               .
                                                                     (20k - 50k)       than urban average



172
                                   ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                          Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
       City      Oblast                                   Region         Size        Population growth
                             2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                    Large towns      Declining more than
Sukhodilsk    Luhansk              21061      FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                    (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                    Mid size towns   Declining but less
Sosnivka      Lviv                 11517      MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                    Small Town       Declining more than
Korets        Rivne                7388       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                    (<10k)           national average

                                                                    Small cities
Brovary       Kiev                 98250      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                    (50k - 100k)

                                                                    Small Town       Declining more than
Turka         Lviv                 7173       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                    (<10k)           national average

                                                                    Small cities     Declining more than
Khartsyzk     Donetsk              59315      FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                    (50k - 100k)     national average

                                                                    Mid size towns   Declining but less
Sharhorod     Vinnytsia            6975       MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns
Berezivka     Odessa               9760       MISSED     Southern                    Positive growth          .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)

                                                                    Mid size towns   Declining more than
Uzyn          Kiev                 12122      MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)      national average

Monasty                                                             Small Town       Declining but less
              Ternopil             6089       MISSED     Western                                              .
ryska                                                               (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                    Large towns      Declining but less
Balta         Odessa               19211      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                    (20k - 50k)      than urban average

Storozhy                                                            Mid size towns   Declining but less
              Cernivcy             14473      MISSED     Western                                              .
nets                                                                (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                    Small Town       Declining more than
Skole         Lviv                 6312       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                    (<10k)           national average

                                                                    Large towns
Vyshhorod     Kiev                 26536      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                    (20k - 50k)

                                                                    Mid size towns
Terebovlia    Ternopil             13783      MISSED     Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)

                                                                                     Declining but less
                                                                    Small Town
Stary Krym    Crimea               9512       MISSED     Southern                    than national            .
                                                                    (<10k)
                                                                                     average

                                                                    Small Town       Declining more than
Miusynsk      Luhansk              4830       MISSED     Eastern                                              .
                                                                    (<10k)           national average

                                                                    Small Town       Declining but less
Belz          Lviv                 2343       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                    (<10k)           than urban average


                                                                                                                  173
                                      ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                             Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
      City        Oblast                                     Region         Size        Population growth
                                2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                       Mid size towns
Ostroh         Rivne                  15725      MISSED     Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining but less
Tavriysk       Kherson                11001      FOUND      Southern                                             .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Ulianovka      Kirovohrad             6109       MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

Tysmeny        Ivano-                                                  Small Town       Declining but less
                                      9497       APPEAR     Western                                              .
tsia           Frankivsk                                               (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                       Small Town       Declining more than
Bylbasivka     Donetsk                6310       FOUND      Eastern                                              .
                                                                       (<10k)           national average

                                                                       Mid size towns
Rakhiv         Zakarpattia            15243      MISSED     Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)

                                                                       Large towns      Declining but less
Zdolbuniv      Rivne                  24569      FOUND      Western                                              .
                                                                       (20k - 50k)      than urban average

Pereshche      Dnipro                                                  Small Town
                                      10178      MISSED     Southern                    Positive growth          .
pyne           petrovsk                                                (<10k)

                                                                                        Declining but less
                                                                       Mid size towns
Prymorsk       Zaporizhia             12208      MISSED     Southern                    than national            .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)
                                                                                        average

Monasty                                                                Mid size towns   Declining but less
               Cherkasy               9040       MISSED     Central                                              .
ryshche                                                                (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Vakhrusheve    Luhansk                11878      MISSED     Eastern                                              .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Kodyma         Odessa                 8865       MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Horodysche     Cherkasy               14291      MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                       Large towns      Declining more than
Kiliya         Odessa                 20606      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                       (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                       Mid size towns   Declining more than
Hola Prystan   Kherson                14870      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                                        Declining but less
                                                                       Mid size towns
Zinkiv         Poltava                9953       MISSED     Central                     than national            .
                                                                       (10k - 20k)
                                                                                        average

                                                                       Small Town
Dubliany       Lviv                   10240      FOUND      Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                       (<10k)

Sudova                                                                 Small Town       Declining but less
               Lviv                   6461       MISSED     Western                                              .
Vyshnia                                                                (<10k)           than urban average

174
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                     Typology
    City         Oblast                                     Region         Size        Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                            3

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Nosivka       Cernihiv               14077      MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                                       Declining but less
                                                                      Mid size towns
Putyvl        Sumy                   16317      MISSED     Central                     than national            .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)
                                                                                       average

                                                                      Small Town
Novyi Kalyniv Lviv                   4105       MISSED     Western                     Positive growth          .
                                                                      (<10k)

                                                                      Large towns
Irpin         Kiev                   42924      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining but less
Rozhyshche    Volhynia               13327      MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                      Small Town       Declining more than
Dobromyl      Lviv                   4457       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                      (<10k)           national average

                                                                      Small Town       Declining but less
Perechyn      Zakarpattia            6716       MISSED     Western                                              .
                                                                      (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Zhashkiv      Cherkasy               14234      MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Valky         Charkiv                9410       MISSED     Eastern                                              .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

Pervoma                                                               Large towns      Declining but less
              Charkiv                31061      FOUND      Eastern                                              .
iskyi                                                                 (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Nova Odesa    Mykolaiv               12298      MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

Novo                                                                  Mid size towns   Declining more than
              Luhansk                7749       FOUND      Eastern                                              .
druzhesk                                                              (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Ananiv        Odessa                 8614       MISSED     Southern                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                DIS                   Mid size towns   Declining more than
Hlobyne       Poltava                10043                 Central                                              .
                                                APPEAR                (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Dolynska      Kirovohrad             19420      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

Pohre                                                                 Mid size towns   Declining more than
              Vinnytsia              9898       MISSED     Central                                              .
byshche                                                               (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Small Town       Declining more than
Baturyn       Cernihiv               2716       MISSED     Central                                              .
                                                                      (<10k)           national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Ukrainka      Kiev                   15644      FOUND      Central                     Positive growth          .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)


                                                                                                                    175
                                     ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                            Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
      City       Oblast                                     Region         Size         Population growth
                               2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                      Large towns       Declining more than
Derhachi      Charkiv                18154      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                      Large towns
Vyshneve      Kiev                   37457      FOUND      Central                      Positive growth          .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Semenivka     Cernihiv               8476       MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Bilytske      Donetsk                8691       MISSED     Eastern                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Tarashcha     Kiev                   11410      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Small Town        Declining but less
Irshava       Zakarpattia            9221       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                      (<10k)            than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining but less
Bohuslav      Kiev                   16825      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Ichnia        Cernihiv               11587      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

Seredyna-                                                             Small Town        Declining but less
              Sumy                   7231       MISSED     Central                                               .
Buda                                                                  (<10k)            than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Novoazovsk    Donetsk                11760      MISSED     Eastern                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns    Declining more than
Tetiiv        Kiev                   13329      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                      Mid size towns
Tatarbunary   Odessa                 10992      MISSED     Southern                     Positive growth          .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)

                                                                      Small Town        Declining more than
Vyzhnytsia    Cernivcy               4207       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                      (<10k)            national average

                                                                      Large towns
Stebnyk       Lviv                   20993      FOUND      Western                      Positive growth          .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)

                                                                      Small Town        Declining more than
Berestechko   Volhynia               1752       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                      (<10k)            national average

                                                                      Small cities      Declining more than
Rubizhne      Luhansk                60374      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                      (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                      Small Town        Declining more than
Molochansk    Zaporizhia             6980       MISSED     Southern                                              .
                                                                      (<10k)            national average

                                                                      Mid size cities   Declining more than
Makiivka      Donetsk                353918     FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                      (100k - 500k)     national average



176
                                   ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities




                          Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
     City       Oblast                                    Region         Size         Population growth
                             2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Beryslav     Kherson               13187      MISSED     Southern                                              .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

             Dnipro                                                 Mid size towns
Pidhorodne                         19498      FOUND      Southern                     Positive growth          .
             petrovsk                                               (10k - 20k)

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining but less
Yampil       Vinnytsia             11300      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Ukrainsk     Donetsk               11994      MISSED     Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Dymytrov     Donetsk               49646      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Merefa       Charkiv               22280      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                    Mid size towns    Declining more than
Vuhlehirsk   Donetsk               7868       FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining more than
Perevalsk    Luhansk               25941      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       national average

                                                                    Large towns       Declining but less
Bucha        Kiev                  28483      FOUND      Central                                               .
                                                                    (20k - 50k)       than urban average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Shakhtarsk   Donetsk               51007      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                    Small Town        Declining more than
Almazna      Luhansk               4325       FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (<10k)            national average

             Dnipro                                                 Mid size cities   Declining more than
Pavlohrad                          110070     FOUND      Southern                                              .
             petrovsk                                               (100k - 500k)     national average

Novomyr                                                             Mid size towns    Declining more than
             Kirovohrad            11569      MISSED     Central                                               .
horod                                                               (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                    Small Town        Declining but less
Uhniv        Lviv                  1007       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                    (<10k)            than urban average

                                                                    Small cities      Declining more than
Lozova       Charkiv               58307      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                    (50k - 100k)      national average

                                                                                      Declining but less
                                                                    Mid size cities
Sloviansk    Donetsk               117445     FOUND      Eastern                      than national            .
                                                                    (100k - 500k)
                                                                                      average

                                                                                      Declining but less
             Ivano-                                                 Small Town
Rohatyn                            8077       MISSED     Western                      than national            .
             Frankivsk                                              (<10k)
                                                                                      average

                                                                    Mid size towns
Illintsi     Vinnytsia             11366      MISSED     Central                      Positive growth          .
                                                                    (10k - 20k)

                                                                                                                   177
                                      ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities



                             Typology Population Typology                                                    Typology
      City       Oblast                                      Region        Size        Population growth
                                2       2013        1                                                           3

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Vatutine      Cherkasy                17563      FOUND      Central                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining but less
Truskavets    Lviv                    29516      FOUND      Western                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Chuhuiv       Charkiv                 32279      FOUND      Eastern                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining but less
Awdijivka     Donetsk                 35128      FOUND      Eastern                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      than urban average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Boryslav      Lviv                    34938      FOUND      Western                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Zolote        Luhansk                 14572      MISSED     Eastern                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average

              Ivano-                                                  Mid size towns   Declining but less
Horodenka                             9386       MISSED     Western                                             .
              Frankivsk                                               (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Tiachiv       Zakarpattia             9162       MISSED     Western                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

              Ivano-                                                  Small Town       Declining but less
Halych                                6290       MISSED     Western                                             .
              Frankivsk                                               (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining but less
Bershad       Vinnytsia               13160      MISSED     Central                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      than urban average

Molodo                                           DIS                  Large towns      Declining more than
              Luhansk                 23332                 Eastern                                             .
hvardiysk                                        APPEAR               (20k - 50k)      national average

                                                                      Small Town       Declining more than
Pidhaitsi     Ternopil                2866       MISSED     Western                                             .
                                                                      (<10k)           national average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Koriukivka    Cernihiv                13161      MISSED     Central                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

              Ivano-                                                  Small Town       Declining but less
Tlumach                               8829       MISSED     Western                                             .
              Frankivsk                                               (<10k)           than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Zhdanivka     Donetsk                 12352      FOUND      Eastern                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining but less
Derazhnia     Khmelnytskyi            10317      MISSED     Western                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      than urban average

                                                                      Mid size towns   Declining more than
Vuhledar      Donetsk                 15357      MISSED     Eastern                                             .
                                                                      (10k - 20k)      national average

                                                                      Large towns      Declining more than
Dobropillia   Donetsk                 31196      MISSED     Eastern                                             .
                                                                      (20k - 50k)      national average



178
                                    ANNEX V List of Ukrainian Cities



                           Typology Population Typology                                                      Typology
    City         Oblast                                    Region         Size         Population growth
                              2       2013        1                                                             3

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining but less
Berezne       Rivne                 13444      MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining but less
Alupka        Crimea                8520       MISSED     Southern                                              .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Small Town
Hertsa        Cernivcy              2122       MISSED     Western                      Positive growth          .
                                                                     (<10k)

                                                                     Small Town        Declining but less
Bibrka        Lviv                  3829       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            than urban average

Kamianka-                                                            Mid size towns    Declining more than
              Zaporizhia            13495      MISSED     Southern                                              .
Dniprovska                                                           (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Mid size cities   Declining more than
Yenakiieve    Donetsk               82629      FOUND      Eastern                                               .
                                                                     (100k - 500k)     national average

                                                                                       Declining but less
Oleksan                                                              Small Town
              Luhansk               6635       FOUND      Eastern                      than national            .
drivsk                                                               (<10k)
                                                                                       average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining but less
Tulchyn       Vinnytsia             15849      MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       than urban average

                                                                     Mid size towns
Radyvyliv     Rivne                 10508      MISSED     Western                      Positive growth          .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)

                                                                     Small Town        Declining but less
Kopychyntsi   Ternopil              6890       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            than urban average

                                               DIS                   Small Town        Declining more than
Sviatohirsk   Donetsk               4654                  Eastern                                               .
                                               APPEAR                (<10k)            national average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining more than
Chyhyryn      Cherkasy              9371       MISSED     Central                                               .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Mid size towns    Declining more than
Vylkove       Odessa                8480       MISSED     Southern                                              .
                                                                     (10k - 20k)       national average

                                                                     Small Town        Declining more than
Khyriv        Lviv                  4088       MISSED     Western                                               .
                                                                     (<10k)            national average




                                                                                                                    179
                                          ANNEX VI Extensive Growth




Annex VI

Extensive Growth
Extensive change refers to the change in brightness in the urban periphery. The periphery is usually defined as the area
surrounding the urban core that was not considered as urban by NL standards in the initial period but becomes “urban”
in T1. However, the periphery takes another interpretation when urban footprints are shrinking. In this case extensive
change is interpreted as the change in NLs in the disappearing footprint. The interpretation in this case, which is the
most common case in Ukraine, is not as straightforward as the interpretation of the other indicators used in the section,
and hence the analysis of extensive change was moved to this appendix. The following figure and equations explain the
way this indicator is calculated.
Figure 1 – Urban footprint, intensive and extensive change using NLs (1996-2010)

                                                              CITY FOOTPRINT (1996 - 2010)

                                                                                       T0NTL            T1NTL

                                                                    T0footprint            A              Y

                                                                    T1footprint            Z              B

                                                                 The columns represent the summed
                                                                 nighttime lights values for the
                                                                 identified footprint

                                                             •   Intensive change = Y – A
                                                             •   Extensive change = (B – Y) – (Z – A)
                                                             •   Area Change = B – A
                                                             •   Area Change % = (B – A) / A




180
                                       ANNEX VI Extensive Growth




The following figure compare intensive versus extensive change over the 1996-2010 period and using the same color
coding as the group types mentioned before (Group 1, 2 & 3).

Figure 2 – Intensive vs extensive change (without outliers)




                                                                                                             181
                                                   ANNEX VI Extensive Growth



The following table extends the analysis in the text by dividing cities further based on whether they present positive or
negative extensive growth.


Table 1 - Description of the different types that uses extensive growth

                                         Growing urban footprint                                 Shrinking urban footprint

                             - Extensive growth          + Extensive growth           - Extensive growth          + Extensive growth
                             Dimming periphery           Growing light intensity in   Dimming shrinking           Growing light intensity in
                                                         periphery                    footprint                   shrinking footprint

                             Type 1:
                                                                                      Thriving urban core, shrinking urban footprint
                             Thriving urban core, expanding urban footprint

                             Growing economic            A. Growing economic          Examples: no examples in F. Examples:
                             activity focused in         activity in the core and     Ukraine found            Donetsk,Zaporizhia
                             the core: increased         periphery: the urban
                             economic activity in        footprint has expanded
+ Intensive growth
                             the urban center. The       and economic activity as
Growing light intensity in
                             new periphery, despite      captured by night lights
the urban core
                             increasing in area,         has increased both in
                             experienced a decline       the urban core and the
                             in economic activity as     expanding periphery.
                             captured by night lights.
                                                      Examples: Odessa, Lutsk,
                             Examples: no examples in Kiev, Kharkov, Lviv.
                             Ukraine found

                             Type 3: Dimming core, expanding area                     Type 2: Dimming core, shrinking area

                             C. Declining economic       E. Declining economic        B. Declining in all         D. Activity shifted to
                             activities in the core      activities in the core,      aspects: these cities       the periphery: activity
                             and periphery while         growing area with            have decreased their        in the core has declined
                             increasing urban            stronger peripheries:        economic activity both in   but economic growth
                             footprints: despite         activity has been            the core in the shrinking   has occurred in shrinking
- Intensive growth
                             a spreading out of          transferred from the         footprint.                  footprint.
Declining light intensity
                             the urban footprint,        core to the periphery.
in the urban core
                             economic activity is                                     Examples:                   Examples: Donetsk,
                             declining in the core                                    Dnepropetrovsk, Hirnyk,     Balta, Vuhledar.
                             and in the new larger       Examples: Torez,             Kramatorsk.
                             periphery.                  Borshchiv, Ostroh.

                             Examples: Mykolaiv,
                             Sumy, Kirovohrad.




182
                                                 ANNEX VI Extensive Growth



Table 2 – Typology of cities based on NL observations over 1996 & 2010: selected statistics

                                                Growing area                                       Shrinking area

                                 - Extensive growth         + Extensive growth       - Extensive growth          + Extensive growth

                             Type 1: Thriving core, expanding area               Thriving core, shrinking area
                             Mean (Std dev)                                      Mean (Std dev)
   + Intensive growth
                                                        A                                                    F

Population 2013 (000s)                                  124.8 (363.2)                                        861 (129)

Average annual                                          124.8                                                -0.59%
Population growth                                       (363.2)                                              (0.041)
(‘89-’13)

Total NLs value                                         9.40                                                 69.11
(000s of NLs units) in                                  (32.40)                                              (44.80)
2010. 148

Total NLs value                                         0.067                                                0.077
(000s of NLs units) per                                 (.032)                                               (0.048)
cap (2010).

NLs growth                                              587%                                                 142.6%
(% Growth of NLs units)                                 (22.46)                                              (1.23)
(1996-2010)

                             Type 3: Dimming core, expanding area                Type 2: Dimming core, shrinking area
                             Mean (Std dev)                                      Mean (Std dev)
   - Intensive growth
                             C                          E                        B

Population 2013 (000s)       76.3                       50.8                     79.2                        152.3
                             (88.3)                     (94.4)                   (181.2)                     (399.8)

Average annual               -0.57%                     -0.44%                   -0.70%                      -0.69%
Population growth            (.454)                     (.566                    (.614)                      (.256)
(‘89-’13)

Total NLs value              6.16                       3.23                     4.50                        10.41
(000s of NLs units) in       (5.49)                     (7.40)                   (12.95)                     (27.25)
2010.

Total NLs value              0.017                      0.053                    0.044                       0.055
(000s of NLs units) per      (.012)                     (.030)                   (.03)                       (.065)
cap (2010).

NLs growth                   -7.7%                      39.4%                    -61.5 %                     -30.4%
(% Growth of NLs units)      (.056)                     (.624)                   (.24)                       (.20)
(1996-2010)




  152   Defined by urban NL measurements per capita.
                                                                                                                                  183
                                                    ANNEX VI Extensive Growth



By adding extensive growth to the previously used intensive growth and area change, the following five city typologies
emerge when

(A) THRIVING AND SPRAWLING153 CITIES, Growing economic activity in the core and periphery: the urban footprint
has expanded and economic activity as captured by night lights has increased both in the urban core and the expanding
periphery. These are mainly large cities (average population is 124.8k) and although – on average – they are still
experiencing demographic decline, their decline is the lowest compared to the other types. They present also the highest
levels of economic activity per capita suggesting that these cities are more productive. In addition, these cities have a
higher average total economic growth (587 percent) than the rest suggesting that these are true growth engines in the
country. However, the growth of the urban footprint accompanied by the observed demographic decline suggests that
these cities are sprawling. Examples of TYPE A are: Odessa, Lutsk, Kiev, Kharkov and Lviv. Around 24 percent of cities
in Ukraine fall under this type.

On the other side of the spectrum cities that are declining economically are found;

(B) ABSOLUTE DECLINE – COMPACT, These are cities declining in all aspects with a decreasing economic activity in
the core and periphery and shrinking footprint: These cities are smaller than thriving cities - the average population is
79.2k. In addition to experiencing a decline in economic activity, these cities have the fastest declining population – with
-0.70 percent annual decline on average and have lowers levels of productivity than thriving cities measured by NL per
capita. Examples of TYPE B are: Dnepropetrovsk, Hirnyk and Kramatorsk. Around 33 percent of cities in Ukraine fall
under this type.

(C) ABSOLUTE DECLINE AND SPRAWLING, These cities have experienced economic decline in the urban core and
periphery despite a growth of the urban footprint. These cities also present the lowest level of productivity and have
fast declining population – with -0.57 percent annual decline on average. The growth of the urban footprint accompanied
by the observed demographic decline suggests that these cities are sprawling. Examples of TYPE C are: Mykolaiv, Sumy,
Kirovohrad. Around 5.47 percent of cities in Ukraine fall under this type.

A third set of cities are those whose urban core has experienced economic decline that was partly compensated through
growth in expanding or shrinking areas;

(D) DECLINING CENTERS but INCREASED ACTIVITY IN SHRINKING AREA, These cities are experiencing a declining
in economic activity in the initial urban core and a shrinking urban footprint but increased economic activity in
shrinking footprint. These cities, although rare, have dying centers but economic activity has been catching up in the
shrinking footprint. Demographic decline is similar to the one observed in absolute declining cities but productivity –
measured as NL per capita – is higher. Examples of TYPE D are: Donetsk, Balta, Vuhledar. Around 2.84 cities in Ukraine
fall under this type.

(E) DECLINING CENTERS but INCREASED ACTIVITY IN GROWING URBAN FOOTPRINT, These cities have experienced
economic decline in the urban core but increased economic activity in the growing urban footprint. These cities,
although rare, have dying centers but growing economic activity in the periphery and present overall a positive economic
growth – on average. These cities are small – having on average 50.8k population – and have productivity levels similar to
those in TYPE D. Examples of TYPE E are: Torez, Borshchiv, Ostroh. Around 6.13 percent of cities in Ukraine fall under
this type.



   153 Sprawling is a hypothesis based on the growth of the urban footprint and population decline. However the NL footprints do not correspond
   to the city’s boundaries and therefore population data might not correspond to the population living inside the urban footprint defined through
   NLs.
184
                                                       ANNEX VI Extensive Growth



(F)	     GROWING LIGHT INTENSITY IN SHRINKING FOOTPRINT. These cities have experienced economic growth
despite dimishing areas, which in both examples found also imply declining population. The only two cities found
in this category are Donetsk and Zaporizhia, which are an agglomeration in the Eastern region and a single city in the
Southern respectively.

In the same way most of the Thriving cities (A – in BLUE) are located in the Western and Central regions while most
of the absolute declining (B and C) settlements are located in the Southern and Eastern Region.



Figure 3 - Distribution of city typologies across economic regions


100%

 90%

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%

 10%

  0%

                Western                                       Central               Southern                                      Eastern


                 A - Thriving and sprawling                                      B - Absolute decline/compact

                 C - Absolute decline - sprawling                                D - Declining centers increased activity in shrinking area

                 E - Declining centers increased activity in growing footprint




                                                                                                                                              185
                   ANNEX VII Assignment of Expenditure Responsibilities in The Budget Code




Annex VII

Assignment of Expenditure Responsibilities
in The Budget Code

                                   Oblast                                District                      Sub-district                   Voluntary

Public administration    Own staff                       Own staff                                     Own staff               Local debt

Defense                  none                            none                                          none                    mobilization training of
                                                                                                                               local significance

Public order, safety     none                            none                                          none                    none
and judicial authority

Economic affairs         none                            none                                          none                    local-significance roads;
                                                                                                                               transportation and road
                                                                                                                               infrastructure; regulation
                                                                                                                               of passenger fares; land
                                                                                                                               use regulation

Environmental            none                            none                                          none                    environmental protection
protection activity                                                                                                            events of local
                                                                                                                               significance

Housing and              none                            none                                          none                    local housing and utilities
municipal economy                                                                                                              development, populated
                                                                                                                               area improvement

Healthcare               specialized care,               Out-patients’ clinics, ambulance              none                    none
                         sanatoriums medical             departments, ambulance and first aid
                         and sanitary education          stations; primary care, medical and
                         programs; other activity        sanitary education programs
                         in the health protection
                         system

Physical and             sports schools for children     sports schools for children and youth         palaces and houses        community-owned zoos
intellectual             and young people, physical      of all types, physical culture and sports     of culture, clubs,
development system       culture and sports-based        events and organizations; cultural/           entertainment centers,
                         rehabilitation of the           education and theatrical/show                 other clubs and libraries
                         disabled people, culture        programs (theatres, rayon (city), libraries
                         and sports events, libraries,   or centralized libraries of the centralized
                         museums and exhibitions,        rayon (city) library system, museums,
                         philharmonic societies,         exhibitions, culture palaces and houses,
                         musical ensembles, theatres,    aesthetic education schools for children;
                         culture palaces and houses      zoos




186
                 ANNEX VII Assignment of Expenditure Responsibilities in The Budget Code




                                Oblast                              District                      Sub-district                  Voluntary

Education             General secondary              Pre-school education system; General         Pre-school education   extracurricular education
                      education system for           secondary education system; continuing       system
                      individuals with special       education; Out-of-school education
                      needs; Vocational training     system and establishments for non-
                      system; Higher education;      school activity of children; Other
                      Postgraduate education         establishments and initiatives in the
                      system; Out-of-school          national education system
                      education system and
                      establishments for non-
                      school activity of children;
                      Other establishments and
                      initiatives in the national
                      education system

Social protection     fulfillment of allowances      disabled children social rehabilitation      none                   social protection for
and social security   and other entitlements         centers; disabled people professional                               poor students of
system                for disabled; fulfillment      rehabilitation centers, shelters for                                vocational education
                      of allowances and other        children, the centers of the socio-                                 establishments; social
                      entitlements for orphans       psychological rehabilitation of children                            protection establishments
                                                     and social dormitories for orphan                                   for homeless individuals;
                                                     children and children deprived of                                   utility rates subsidized
                                                     parental care; implementation of the                                through local council
                                                     state policy in respect of children, young                          decision; centers of the
                                                     people, women and families assistance                               social adaptation of
                                                     to families with children, poor families,                           individuals released from
                                                     people disabled since childhood, disabled                           penitentiary institutions;
                                                     children, temporary state assistance                                reduced fares granted
                                                     to children; additional payments to                                 to certain categories of
                                                     the population for the coverage of the                              individuals
                                                     utilities expenses (housing subsidies
                                                     for the population), support to the
                                                     housing construction (rehabilitation)
                                                     for certain categories of individuals;
                                                     compensations to individuals rendering
                                                     social services to senior citizens, the
                                                     disabled, disabled children, outpatients
                                                     unable to take care of themselves and
                                                     requiring outside assistance: benefits for
                                                     special categories of individuals




                                                                                                                                                187
                      ANNEX VIII Summary of Urban & Spatial Planning Legislation




Annex VIII

Summary of Urban & Spatial Planning Legislation

 Law/Act with access
                                                                                   Elements relevant to urban planning
  address and date of                  Core objectives
                                                                                           and spatial policy
       approval

                                                  Fundamental legislation

                        Regulates personal property and non-property        › Stipulates rights of private ownership, including
                        ownership rights and relationships among            property, and measures to protect these rights.
                        different stakeholders on the basis of principles   › Provides legal basis for concluding and implementing
Civil Code #435-15,     of judicial equality, freedom of action and         civil agreements (contracts), their enforcement and
16.01.2003              independence of ownership. It does not cover        procedures for restoring abused rights of ownership.
                        the aspects of ownership rights emerging
                        as a result of administrative subordination,
                        execution of power and budgetary relationships.

                        Regulates issues of land property and relations     › Stipulates rights and responsibilities of central,
                        among various stakeholders in managing,             regional and local authorities in managing land
                        transferring and owning the land resources of       resources.
                        Ukraine.                                            › In particular determines that the right to change
                                                                            the borders of rayons and cities, as well as change the
                                                                            status of the most valuable land resources belongs to
                                                                            the parliament of Ukraine.
Land Code #2768-14,
                                                                            › Stipulates separately the rights and responsibilities of
25.10.2001
                                                                            each tier of territorial government in land management,
                                                                            appropriation, sale, purchase and rent of state,
                                                                            communal and private land plots.
                                                                            › Stipulates nine different types of land plots depending
                                                                            on the core use, including housing and communal
                                                                            building, as well as the procedures for change of main
                                                                            use.

                        Stipulates the system of self-government in         › Defines the authorities and responsibilities of self-
                        Ukraine, basic principles and guarantees of         government bodies, among others, in the sphere of
                        self-government, its organisation and activities,   managing communal property, land ownership, land use
                        legal status and responsibilities of local self-    and management (including the right to setup the level
                        government institutions and personalities           of land use tax), urban planning, construction, housing.
                                                                            › Stipulates what territorial community is in the
Law on Local
                                                                            territorial-administrative arrangement, what are its
Self‑Government
                                                                            rights, including land and property ownership, principles
280/97-вр, 21.05.1997
                                                                            of functioning of representative elected bodies and
                                                                            individuals (councils and mayors), executive bodies of
                                                                            the councils.
                                                                            › Defines the rights to unite with other territorial
                                                                            communities, create self-organised bodies by
                                                                            community members, organise public hearings.



188
                          ANNEX VIII Summary of Urban & Spatial Planning Legislation




Law/Act with access
                                                                                        Elements relevant to urban planning
 address and date of                        Core objectives
                                                                                                and spatial policy
      approval

                            Stipulates legal, economic, social, environmental,   › Defines the principles of regional development,
                            humanitarian and organisational fundamentals         which among other includes subsidiarity – transfer of
Law on the
                            of state regional policy as an integral element of   responsibilities to the lowest possible territorial level of
Fundamentals of State
                            Ukraine’s domestic policy.                           governance.
Regional Policy #156-19,
                                                                                 › Defines the role of local and regional self-government
05.02.2015
                                                                                 bodies in formulation and implementation of regional
                                                                                 policy on their respective territories.

                                                     Sector-specific legislation

                            Stipulates framework for decentralising              › Envisages transfer of responsibilities for (1) issuing
                            the authorities in the sphere of building,           construction permits and land use permits; (2)
Law on Amendments to
                            architectural and construction activities, their     architectural and construction control; and (3) approval
Certain Laws of Ukraine
                            monitoring, control over compliance.                 of complete construction objects from oblast state
on Regulation of City
                                                                                 administrations to executive bodies of city, rayon and
Building Activities and
                                                                                 village councils where respective land plots and buildings
State Construction and
                                                                                 are located (with some exceptions).
Architectural Control
                                                                                 › Stipulates reduction of the number of days for
#1546, approved on
                                                                                 obtaining necessary technical documentation for
9.04.2015 but is still
                                                                                 construction works.
awaiting President’s
                                                                                 › Removes the limitation to use only specialists
signature (as of 10 April
                                                                                 of scientific research and engineering institutions
2015)
                                                                                 accredited by the MinRegion for architecture and
                                                                                 construction control.

                            Stipulates the terms and conditions of               › Outlines priorities and conceptual decisions about
                            use of the territory of Ukraine, responsible         planning and use of territory of Ukraine, including
                            authorities for developing General Scheme, its       improving the settlement system, development
Law on Master Scheme
                            implementation, monitoring and control.              of industrial, social, engineering and transport
of Territorial Planning
                            Includes maps and text, which explains current       infrastructure, creation of national environmental
of Ukraine #3059-14,
                            spatial organisation of economic, social and         network etc.
07.07.2002
                            environmental systems and presents priorities        › Defines four types of territories in Ukraine, including
                            for development until 2020.                          urbanisation zones, which require (strict) regulation of
                                                                                 construction and zoning.




                                                                                                                                          189
                       ANNEX VIII Summary of Urban & Spatial Planning Legislation




 Law/Act with access
                                                                                  Elements relevant to urban planning
  address and date of                   Core objectives
                                                                                          and spatial policy
       approval

                         Stipulates legal and organisational               › Defines terminology of city construction activities,
                         fundamentals of city construction activities.     including master plan, detailed plans of territories,
                         Ensures that these are congruent with the         zoning, suburban territories etc. Regulates procedures
                         objectives of sustainable development of          for preparation of project documentation, ensuring
                         territories; with state, communal and private     continuous oversight and control over construction
                         interests.                                        activities according to technical, architectural and land
                                                                           use standards defined for each individual city by its self-
                                                                           governing bodies.
                                                                           › Stipulates that city planning and construction should
                                                                           be aimed at creating rational system of settlement,
Law on Regulation                                                          balanced use of territory that combines housing and
of City Construction                                                       communal buildings, industrial, recreational, cultural,
Activity #3038-17,                                                         and environmentally important and protected areas.
17.02.2011
                                                                           › Divides responsibilities among different tiers and
                                                                           branches of power (see the most recent Law #1546
                                                                           above).
                                                                           › Requires obligatory publication of all planning
                                                                           documentation, including online (with the exceptions of
                                                                           secret and restricted information).
                                                                           › Requires obligatory preparation of master plans for
                                                                           ALL cities, settlements and villages of Ukraine, which
                                                                           is the condition for taking any decisions in the area of
                                                                           land ownership transfer and management.

                         Stipulates legal and organisational               › Defines standards and principles of architectural
                         fundamentals of architectural activities and      activities towards all objects, including buildings and
                         aimed at creating beneficial life environment,    constructions of all purposes and ownership types,
                         achieving aesthetical distinctiveness, economic   landscapes, specific areas and territorial-administrative
                         expediency, reliability of buildings and          units.
Law on Architectural
                         constructions.                                    › Defines standards and principles for preparing
Activity #687-14,
                                                                           necessary documentations and drawings, maintaining
20.05.1999
                                                                           high standards of technical, architectural and
                                                                           engineering expertise, actual construction of the objects,
                                                                           their acceptance, monitoring compliance with technical
                                                                           and other standards, activities of self-regulated
                                                                           professional organisations in the sphere etc.




190
                       ANNEX VIII Summary of Urban & Spatial Planning Legislation




Law/Act with access
                                                                                  Elements relevant to urban planning
 address and date of                    Core objectives
                                                                                          and spatial policy
      approval

                         Stipulates legal, economic, social and            › Determines the notion of dilapidated residential
                         organisational aspects of complex                 housing – with the amortisation level above 60%.
                         reconstruction of outdated housing estates        › Determines the procedures for guaranteeing property
                         (neighbourhoods) with the substitution of         rights in the process of complex reconstruction of
                         dilapidated residential and non-residential       outdated and dilapidated housing stock requiring
Law on Complex
                         housing stock.                                    resettlement of residents to temporary and/or
Reconstruction
                                                                           permanent new housing.
of Outdated
                                                                           › Defines responsibilities of central government
Housing Estates
                                                                           institutions and local self-governments. The latter,
(Neighbourhoods) #526-
                                                                           among others, is responsible for preparing complex
16, 22.12.2006
                                                                           master plans of reconstruction of estates with
                                                                           outdated housing, conduction competitive tenders
                                                                           for selection of investor and construction company,
                                                                           managing all relations with the residents of estates due
                                                                           for reconstruction, including dispute resolution.

                         Stipulates legal and organisational               › Defines priorities for land use and stipulates
                         fundamentals of land management and               responsibilities for central government and regional/
                         regulates relationships among state government    local self-governments to adhere to those, especially in
Law on Land Planning     institutions, self-government, physical and       terms of prioritisation of protection of agrarian lands,
#858-15, 22.05.2003      judicial persons aimed at achieving the           setting and monitoring environmental standards;
                         standards of sustainable land use.                › Defines responsibilities for actual management of
                                                                           land allocation for all types of owners across all types
                                                                           of settlements, including cities.

                         Establishes State Land Cadastre as Ukraine’s      › Defines the principles and procedures for registering
                         single GIS system that contains information       land plots of different types of ownership and land use;
                         about all land plots regardless their ownership   as well as requirements for information for each land
Law on State Land        and type of use.                                  plot that should be gathered, classified, presented in GIS
Cadastre #3613-17,                                                         form and published with open access.
07.07.2011                                                                 › Stipulates free public access to information in
                                                                           Land Cadastre. It includes online access to the entire
                                                                           database, which was launched in 2013 at the address
                                                                           http://map.land.gov.ua/




                                                                                                                                  191
                         ANNEX VIII Summary of Urban & Spatial Planning Legislation




 Law/Act with access
                                                                                       Elements relevant to urban planning
  address and date of                      Core objectives
                                                                                               and spatial policy
       approval

                                            Relevant legislation in adjacent spheres

                           Regulates relationships for creating, collecting,    › Stipulates universal right on free access to
                           obtaining, storing, using, sharing, protecting and   information, its use, sharing, storing, protecting and
                           securing information; stipulates core principles     securing, except when information is classified as
                           and mechanisms of state information policy.          confidential, secret or for internal use only;
Law On Information,
                                                                                › Defines the obligation for all government agencies to
#2657-XII, 02.10.1992
                                                                                inform public and mass media about its activities and
                                                                                decisions;
                                                                                › Obliges government agencies to create special units
                                                                                responsible for ensuring access to the information.

                           Introduces procedures for ensuring the               › Stipulates obligations of state authorities to publish
                           universal right for public access to information     information – proactively or reactively; as well as
                           produced by authorities at different tiers, as       mechanisms, timeframe and costs related to disclosure;
Law on Public Access to    well as by other providers of publicly significant   › Sets up clear limitations when information cannot
Information #2939-VI,      information.                                         be disclosed and procedures for communicating these
13.01.2011                                                                      limitations to the public;
                                                                                › Defines procedure for substantiating the refusal to
                                                                                release information in the public domain (three-stage
                                                                                test).

Presidential Decree        Regulates public access to information produced › Stipulates forms and procedures, timeframe for
on Provision of Public     and administered by the executive power         disclosing information in the public domain;
Access to Information      authorities                                     › Standards of dealing with information requests and
by the Executive                                                           appeals for all executive power agencies.
Power agencies #547,
05.05.2011

                           Established mechanisms for public participation      › Sets up typical procedure for establishing and
Decree of the Cabinet
                           in developing, implementing and monitoring           functioning of Public Councils, their responsibilities and
of Ministers on Ensuring
                           state policies.                                      rights;
Public Participation
                                                                                › Defines mechanisms for public consultations,
in Formulation and
                                                                                survey of public opinions, submitting proposals,
Implementation of State
                                                                                recommendations and complaints;
Policy #996, 03.11.2010
                                                                                › Stipulates mechanisms for organising public hearings.




192
193
                                      ANNEX IX Summary of Planning Stakeholders




Annex IX

Summary of Planning Stakeholders
Legislative
Parliament has authority to develop and approve legislation governing all spheres.154 It has to vote on any decisions
with regard to local elections, status and responsibilities of different tiers of public administration and self-government,
changes in the borders of administrative units, including cities, budgetary allocation etc. Two committees of Verkhovna
Rada are responsible for developing and submitting legislation in the sphere of urban planning, spatial development and
housing. These are:
1. Committee for Construction, Urban Planning, and Communal Housing
2. Committee for State Construction, Regional Policy, and Local Self-Government


Executive – central level
Ministry of Regional Development, Construction and Housing (MinRegion) is responsible for developing and implementing
policies and regulations in the spheres of territorial-administrative organization and self-government, construction,
spatial planning, housing and communal services. It is led by the Minister who is at the same time Vice Prime Minister
of the Cabinet, with the responsibility of introducing e-government and development of territories of Ukraine affected
by the security crisis. MinRegion has a range of state agencies/services under its jurisdiction, among which the most
crucial are:
• State Architectural and Construction Inspection (SACI) which is responsible for implementing policy of state
architectural and construction control and oversight; issues permits for various types of planning and construction
works; issues licenses for professional market operators. Has 25 regional offices.
• State Service of Geodesy, Cartography and Cadastre (created as a result of merger of State Agency of Land
Resources and Cartography Agency in 2015) which is responsible for land management functions, evaluation of value
and technical characteristics of land plots, expertise and environmental protection, managing State Land Cadastre and
database of valid expert organisations and individuals with technical skills in land survey and management. It has 557
regional departments across all regions of Ukraine. Currently the State Service is in the process of changing all heads of
oblast and rayon offices as one of the steps aimed at reducing large-scale corruption.

Ministry of Economic Development and Trade is responsible for state regional policy and overall economic policy,
performs monitoring of the development of Ukrainian regions, as well as development of deprived territories (that include
monofunctional cities), provides administrative, organizational support and expertise in preparation of socio-economic
strategies for oblasts, ARC and cities of state significance. The Ministry is responsible for implementation of the State
Strategy for Regional Development 2020 (approved by the Cabinet in August 2014), which recognizes the importance of
the network of large cities for enhancing the competitiveness of national economy. It is also responsible, together with
MinRegion, for implementation of the Law on Fundamentals of State Regional Policy (February 2015).

Ministry of Culture is responsible, among other things, for developing and implementing policy in the area of protecting
national cultural heritage.
It includes Department for Protection of Cultural Architectural Heritage, that is crucial agency for agreeing and issuing



   154 According to Ukrainian legislation, initiators/authors of the law could be both MPs and executive power – Cabinet of Ministers. All draft
   legislator acts developed by executive agencies, for example MinRegion, have to be approved by the Cabinet of Ministers before submission to
   the Verkhovna Rada.
194
                                 ANNEX IX Summary of Planning Stakeholders



permits for construction and development activities in the areas with special cultural and historical status (e.g. UNESCO
site, architectural national reserve etc) and in adjacent areas.

Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of Ukraine is responsible, among other things, for developing and implementing
policy in the area of protecting environment, air, water, land resources including designating the land use and establishing
restriction in use of land and other resources.

Ministry of Infrastructure of Ukraine is responsible, among other things, for developing and implementing policy in the
area of development and maintenance of infrastructure, use of land and construction of buildings on land that belongs
to road and other infrastructural objects.


Legislative and executive power agencies – regional and local level
Oblast and rayon state administrations, including regional representative offices of national agencies and ministries,
such as Territorial Architectural and Construction Inspections (property, construction, planning), as well as oblast, city and
rayon departments of State Service of Geodesy, Cartography and Cadastre (land allocation, planning and management);
oblast departments of economic development. They are responsible for implementing national legislation and regulations
at oblast and rayon level, for ensuring oversight and monitoring over execution, providing a range of administrative
services in the areas of urban development, architecture, planning, land management etc.

Oblast and rayon councils are self-government bodies elected every 5 years. They are responsible for developing policies
at oblast and rayon tiers according to the authorities granted to them by the Constitution and the Law on Local Self-
Government, approving budgets, special programs and project of development, managing assets belonging to the oblast
and rayon community. They do not have their own executive committees and delegate ALL executive functions to state
administrations at oblast and rayon levels (see above).

City councils and their executive committees are legislative bodies at city level with their own executive bodies elected
every 5 years. City mayors are directly elected local politicians (with 5 years term of service) who are leading executive
committees of the councils. These bodies are responsible for developing and implementing local socio-economic and other
policies in the boundaries of their respective cities.


Other Organizations
Three state scientific and research institutes in the area of urban planning are responsible for preparing master plans
for oblasts, rayons and cities of Ukraine, zoning plans and detailed territory plans; providing expertise for monitoring and
oversight of their implementation as stipulated by specific national and local level regulations. These are:
1. Scientific Research Institute Dipromisto
2. Scientific Research Institute of City Construction
3. State Company “Ukrainian State Scientific Research and Planning Institute of Civil Construction”
City of Kyiv has its own communal enterprise Institute of Master Plan of Kyiv. It is responsible for development,
implementation and monitoring of execution of Kyiv Master Plan, as well as zoning plans and detailed plans of territories,
other urban planning documentation, planning of engineering infrastructure.

Association of Ukrainian Cities (AUC) is one of the most influential lobbying platforms in Ukraine that brings together
mayors of all major and medium-sized cities of Ukraine. It has special section for small cities and towns. AUC is traditionally
one of the strongest protagonists of functional and fiscal decentralization, strengthening the role and capacities of city
councils in developing and implementing effective policies.

Association of small cities of Ukraine is another lobbying platform that evolved from original Association of the heads
of villages and settlements. It unites mayors of cities of rayon significance with the headquarters in the city of Ukrainka
(Kyvska o blast).

                                                                                                                           195
                               ANNEX IX Summary of Planning Stakeholders




Eastern Ukrainian Centre of Community Initiatives is one of very few Ukrainian NGOs, which is specifically dealing with
the issues of transparency and public participation in the area of urban planning and spatial development. In particular
it is a very active lobbyist of the question of making 100% of master plans open for public.




196
