Report No: ACS10329



Kingdom of Bhutan
Green Growth Opportunities for Bhutan (Policy Note)


August 2014




GENDR
SOUTH ASIA




                                               0
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                                      1
2
                                                         Table of Contents

Introduction: What is the role for “green growth” in Bhutan? ....................................................... 7
Hydropower .................................................................................................................................. 11
Forestry ......................................................................................................................................... 16
Agriculture .................................................................................................................................... 20
Mining and Manufacturing ........................................................................................................... 24
Tourism ......................................................................................................................................... 29
Urbanization, Transportation and Environmental Challenges ...................................................... 31
Conclusions ................................................................................................................................... 34
Bibliography ................................................................................................................................. 37
Annex 1 –Funding for Climate Change and Environment .............................................................. i

                                                              List of Boxes
Box 1: Bhutan’s Macroeconomic Background ............................................................................... 9
Box 2: Promoting Environmentally and Social Responsible Hydropower Development in
Himachal Pradesh ......................................................................................................................... 13
Box 3: Forest Accounts: Why should countries compile these?................................................... 18
Box 4: Forest accounts Guatemala ............................................................................................... 19
Box 5: Kegg Farms – A Better Backyard Chicken in India: innovation is key to green growth
outcomes ....................................................................................................................................... 22
Box 6: Conservation Agriculture .................................................................................................. 22
Box 7: China’s Sloping Lands Conversion Program .................................................................... 23
Box 8: Calculating Adjusted Net Savings .................................................................................... 26
Box 9: Nature-based Tourism at Addo Elephant National Park in Eastern Cape Province of South
Africa ............................................................................................................................................ 30
Box 10: Greener Way – waste management and recycling company in Bhutan. ......................... 33
Box 11: Gross National Happiness ............................................................................................... 36


                                                             List of Figures
Figure 1: GDP by Sector ............................................................................................................... 10
Figure 2: Contribution of Electricity & Water Supply in Total GDP ........................................... 11
Figure 3: Share of Hydropower in Total Export Earnings ............................................................ 11
Figure 4: Adjusted Net Savings: Resource-rich Countries by Income Group .............................. 25
Figure 5: Adjusted Net Savings: Bhutan and Other Lower Middle Income Countries ................ 26
                                                                                                                                                    3
Figure 6: Calculating Adjusted Net Savings ................................................................................. 26
Figure 7: Mean Happiness by Dzongkhag .................................................................................... 36




                                                                                                                             4
                                Glossary


ANS    Adjusted net savings
BRT    Bus-Rapid-Transit
CPS    Country partnership strategy
DOA    Department of Agriculture
DPL    Development policy loans
FAO    Food and agriculture organization
FDI    Foreign investment
FYP    Five Year Plan
GHG    Greenhouse gas
GLOF   Glacier lake outburst floods
GoI    Government of India
HP     Himachal Pradesh
MICE   Meeting, incentive, convention and event
RGoB   Royal Government of Bhutan
RNR    Renewable Natural Resources
RSTA   Road Safety and Transport Authority of Bhutan
SLCP   Sloping Land Conversion Program
SYB    Statistical Yearbook




                                                       5
                                     Acknowledgements



This report was written by a lead team comprising of Urvashi Narain, Michael Toman, and
Zhiyun Jiang, with sectoral inputs from Winston Dawes (Agriculture), William B. Magrath
(Forestry), Martin Lokanc (Mining), Rohit Mittal and Pyush Dogra (Hydropower), Shenhua
Wang (Urban), Poonam Pillai, Abedalrazq Khalil, and Pravin Karki (climate change). Herbert
Acquay and Marinela Dado provided strategic guidance and the report builds on an earlier Note
on Green Growth in Bhutan by Aziz Bouzaher. The report also benefitted from comments from
Genevieve Boyreau and stakeholders at a consultation workshop held in Thimphu on May 26,
2014, and from three peer reviewers – Richard Damania, Christian Peters, and Cary Anne
Cadman.




                                                                                                6
                     Introduction: What is the role for “green growth” in Bhutan?

        Bhutan has recently made significant progress in sustaining economic growth and
reducing poverty. In 2012, average per capita household income was somewhat under USD
2,400/year (Living Standards Measurement Surveys 2012). Growth has averaged around 9% per
annum over the past decade and is expected to be on the order of 8% per annum over the next
five years. According to the 2012 Bhutan Poverty Analysis, 12% of the population are what is
known as “consumption poor”, half the number as compared to 2007. Furthermore, extreme
poverty – defined as less than $1.25/day in PPP terms – has fallen to only 2% of the total
population. Bhutan has virtually eliminated extreme poverty within the living memory of one
generation.
        Bhutan’s population remains rural to a significant extent. According to a 2005
population census, 69% of the population lived in rural areas. And there remain significant
income differences between urban and rural areas; average per capita household income in rural
areas is estimated to be 28,000 Nu against 80,000 Nu in urban areas. There is, though, significant
ongoing migration to population centers in search of increased opportunities. The 2005 urban
population share of 31% of total population represents a substantial increase from only 5% in
1995.
         Natural resource-dependent sectors play an important role in Bhutan’s GDP. Agriculture,
livestock & forestry1 account for 13.4% of GDP. The importance of agriculture in GDP is
consistent with the continued high level of rural population, and it continues to be the sector that
employs the majority of Bhutanese. However, annual growth in agricultural net output has been
fairly low. It has been estimated that activity in hydropower directly contributes 12.5% of GDP,
and up to 30% if one includes indirect impacts including construction. The contribution of
hydropower to the economy is expected to grow over time as Bhutan faces increasing demands
for hydropower exports to other countries in the region, and Bhutan still has significant uptapped
potential. However, employment generation in the hydropower sector inherently is low. Bhutan
also has valuable deposits of primary materials including dolomite, lime stone, gypsum,
quartzite, stone, and marble, which are useful for fabrication of other materials. However, its
manufacturing sector is very small, consisting mainly of ferro-silicon processing using
inexpensive energy. Finally, the tourism sector, much of the demand for which comes from
Bhutan’s pristine natural environment, is becoming a more important contributor to export
revenues in recent years. Thus, a significant part of Bhutan’s current and prospective economic
gains come from use of natural resources – that is to say, “green” sectors.
        Moreover, it can be said that green growth is at the heart of Bhutan’s development
philosophy. Under its Constitution, at least 60% of the land area of the country must remain
forested. In 2010, about 70.5% of the land was defined as under forest cover. The country’s
Constitution (Article 5) and development plans over the years, including the recent 11th Five
Year Plan, for example, also commit the Government to “… secure ecologically-balanced
sustainable development.” Moreover, the country’s current Economic Development Policy
incorporates several aspects of a green growth agenda, including:


1
    Together these sectors are called the Renewable Natural Resources sector.

                                                                                                  7
       A continued focus on hydroelectricity, forestry, high-end/low-impact tourism, and
        agriculture as strategic sectors.

       A move towards banning agro-chemicals, and promoting export-oriented organic
        agricultural products.

       The promotion of environmentally friendly businesses and foreign investment (FDI)
        through green incentives (e.g., rebates in taxes and custom duties), and support for
        services in the areas of health, education, financial services, and tourism.

       A decision to make Bhutan carbon neutral, whereby the country’s total emissions would
        not exceed the sink capacity provided by the policy-mandated 60% forest cover.

        However, Bhutan also faces several ongoing development challenges. These include:

       Large macroeconomic imbalances created by hydro-power-led development as well as
        risks from dependence on a single buyer, India.

       Raising youth unemployment in part because the hydropower sector does not generate
        jobs commensurate to its revenue generating potential, but also other constraints to
        diversifying the economy, including limited transport and other infrastructure,
        complications in maintaining supply chains given its topography, skilled labor shortage,
        lack of financial capital, institutional barriers to new business development and small
        market scale.

       Fragmentation of agricultural land and stagnant or declining productivity.

       Increasing vulnerability to climate change particularly in the hydropower sector, the
        sector that is driving and will continue to drive economic growth.

       Persistence of human-wildlife conflicts, but also increasing tensions between siting
        infrastructure while maintaining Bhutan’s forest cover.

       Rapid urbanization, which is straining municipal service provision and resulting in
        increased pollution with negative impacts on health, and raising concerns with the
        environmental performance of the mining sector.
       The basic message in this Note is that Bhutan starts from a solid base in terms of green
growth, with additional opportunities for meeting its development goals and overcoming the
abovementioned challenges on the basis of its natural resource endowment. 2 However, realizing
those opportunities and meeting those challenges will require focusing on the economic
contribution from sustainable use of those natural resources, in addition to conservation of the
environment. It will also require complementary measures, using the economic surplus (or as


2
 Note that we are not claiming that green growth, as we have sketched it here, is necessarily “optimal” in a
conventional sense of maximizing the present value of physical consumption. It is however an important point of
departure for discussing how Bhutan can make good use of its resource endowments within the framework set by its
development philosophy.

                                                                                                               8
economists refer to it, “rent”) from sustainable natural resource use to help diversify economic
activity and address institutional and other constraints.
        A traditional macroeconomic growth narrative sees green growth as a general call for
increasing productivity, based on comparative advantages in natural resource use, and expanding
different forms of capital investment to support economic growth, while maintaining safeguards
to manage and reduce risks to the natural environment. A more comprehensive view of green
growth emphasizes sustainable use of “natural capital,”3 along with managing environmental
risks cost-effectively and in an institutionally sound manner to limit risks to human health and of
irreversible degradation of the natural environment. In this context, green growth needs to
balance conservation with sustainable economic use of all resources to meet the needs of the
present, and maintain opportunities for the future. The need is to balance economic growth
opportunities with quality of life goals, including environmental norms.
        Building on these general observations regarding green growth, the Note takes stock of
potential green growth opportunities in several sectors in the economy of Bhutan, as well as
some cross-cutting environmental issues. Our discussions of the various sectors do not reflect
detailed sector diagnostics, which are beyond our scope; nor do they provide specific prescriptive
statements on policies Bhutan should adopt. Nor does the content of the Note reflect an in-depth
analysis of how particular green growth possibilities would contribute to inclusive growth and
poverty reduction; such a macro-level is also beyond our scope. The note touches upon issues of
inclusion where possible but not in a systematic and comprehensive manner. Instead, the
purpose of the Note is to provide food for thought in ongoing discussion of growth strategies for
Bhutan, and how green growth ideas may contribute to that discussion. The sector discussions
include examples of successful efforts in other places for sustainably increasing the economic
return from natural capital and efficient management of environmental risks, as experiences from
other countries for Bhutan to consider in its deliberations of options and challenges. At the end
of each section we provide suggestions for next steps, drawing on the discussions at the
stakeholder consultations in Thimphu in May 2014, to inform the on-going dialogue between the
Royal Government of Bhutan and the World Bank on these issues.



    Box 1: Bhutan’s Macroeconomic Background

    The figure below shows the breakdown of GDP growth rate by sector over the past five years and the same
    breakdown projected into the near-term future. Agriculture, manufacturing and mining sectors have grown at
    consistent rates over time: agriculture at a low 2 percent, manufacturing and mining maintained growth close to
    12 percent.

    With 75 percent of Bhutan’s imports coming from India and an exchange rate at par with the Indian rupee,
    Bhutan’s consumer inflation is intimately linked to India’s inflation. Food and beverages have the heaviest
    weighting in Bhutan's consumer price index, at 36.9 percentage points, and since most are imported from India,
    they will continue to have the strongest impact on overall inflation.




3
  Natural capital refers to the stock of natural resources that provide flows of valuable goods and services. Major
types of natural capital include agricultural lands; subsoil assets (oil, gas, coal, and minerals); forests; water;
fisheries; and the atmosphere.

                                                                                                                      9
                                Figure 1: Real GDP Growth Rate by Sector
        Real GDP Growth Rate




                                                 Year


Bhutan’s current account deficit stands at about 25 percent of GDP, of which 10 percent are imports related to
the hydro sector. Exports of minerals and mineral-based products account for more than half of total exports,
with hydropower exports comprising a further 45 percent, and manufactured products a tiny 5 percent. India
purchases almost 90 percent of Bhutanese electricity production. The tourism sector is becoming a more
important contributor to export revenues in recent years. Tourism revenues are 20 percent of non-hydro
exports.

International reserves amounted US$920.8 million by end-November 2013, 88 percent of which was in
convertible foreign exchange, with the rest in Indian rupees (or 13 months of merchandise imports). External
debt is denominated in Indian rupees and is related to hydropower sector debt, which accounts for 61 percent
of total external debt, with convertible currency debt accounting for 29 percent of GDP.

Donor grants and loans finance about 40% of the annual budget. Bhutan’s public and publicly guaranteed
external debt was 85 percent of GDP by end-FY12/13, up from 71 percent of GDP the previous year. The rise
in the external public debt was driven in large part by hydro sector-related external borrowing (52 percent of
GDP).

While total unemployment remains low at 2.9% (2013), youth unemployment was 9.6% in 2013 and is on the
rise. In addition, there is evidence that underemployment is large, especially in rural areas. Hydropower
directly contributes to 2 percent of total employment, whereas the majority of the population is still in
agriculture, mostly subsistence, and the rest in services.

Source: Bhutan National Statistical Bureau




                                                                                                                 10
                                                                             Hydropower

        Hydropower is one of the most important economic sectors in Bhutan, both as the main
supplier of electricity4 and as a major contributor to GDP (see figure 1). In 2012, the electricity
& water supply sector contributed 17.1% of total GDP. Moreover, due to the commissioning of
the Tala hydropower plant in 2006-07, the biggest in the country with an installed capacity of
1020 MW, real GDP growth increased to 21.4% in 2007 from 8.5% in 2006, with 17.2% of the
21.4% coming from the electricity sub-sector alone (Economic Development Policy, 2010). The
sector is also an important foreign exchange earner for the country (see figure 2). In 2012,
Bhutan exported 4924 MU of electricity to India and imported 36.75 MU (SYB, 2013).5
                                        Figure 2: Contribution of Electricity & Water Supply in Total GDP
                                        30.0%
          Percentage of Electricity &




                                        25.0%
                Water Supply




                                        20.0%
                                        15.0%
                                        10.0%
                                            5.0%
                                            0.0%
                                                2008                2009          2010         2011             2012
                                                                                  Year
         Source: Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan, 2013
         Note: GDP is expressed in constant prices.

                                                       Figure 3: Share of Hydropower in Total Export Earnings
                                                      60.0%
                           Percentage of Hydropower




                                                      50.0%
                                                      40.0%
                                    Export




                                                      30.0%
                                                      20.0%
                                                      10.0%
                                                      0.0%
                                                          2008        2009         2010        2011         2012
                                                                                   Year
         Source: Statistical Year Book of Bhutan, 2013
         Note: The share is likely underestimated as the hydropower export only includes Chhukha, Tala and Kurichu
         hydropower facilities.




4
 Diesel is also used to generate electricity but its share in the total is negligible.
5
 Hydropower facilities are run-of-the-river and therefore subject to high seasonal variability. This gives rise to the
need for Bhutan to import power from India in the dry season.

                                                                                                                       11
        In 2012, the installed hydropower capacity in the country was 1,488 MW, about 5% of
the total potential (11th FYP) of 23,760 MW. Bhutan plans to increase hydropower capacity to
4,546 MW and small hydropower plants capacity from 8,000 kw to 20,000 kw under the 11th
FYP, and to reach 10,000 MW hydropower capacity by 2020.
        Expansion of the hydropower sector will help contribute to revenue generation and
economic growth. Expansion of this sector also promotes green growth in its broader sense as it
allows Bhutan to increase the economic contribution of natural capital, in this case water and
forests, sustainably while helping to displace dirtier forms of energy.
        To realize its potential though the sector will have to overcome the challenges it faces.
Because of high upfront investment costs, it is a challenge to raise financing for these projects.
The Umbrella Agreement of 2006 and Protocol to the 2006 agreement with the Government of
India helps to reduce this challenge. Meeting growing demand by households and industries,
balancing domestic consumption and export earnings, and electricity cost and tariff levels are
also other challenges, which will be relieved when new hydropower projects are commissioned.
Large macroeconomic imbalances created by the sector also call for strong fiscal policy
measures.
        Furthermore, though the sector has reduced its environmental footprint and social
disruptions with run-of-the-river facilities, further efforts to address the social and environmental
challenges of large-scale hydropower expansion will help increase the efficacy of the
hydropower facilities, as well as making growth in this sector greener and more inclusive.
Managing watersheds in the catchment of hydropower facilities to maximize soil retention and
water regulation services of forests, for example, will help increase the productivity of the
hydropower facilities.
        The hydropower sector also faces challenges due to climate change that are likely to be
exacerbated in the future. Climate change assessments suggest that there is an increasing trend
of precipitation-related climatic extremes in the region and Bhutan is projected to receive higher
monsoon and post-monsoon precipitation. Between 1990 and 2009, glacial lakes in the
Bhutanese Himalayas grew at 25-45 Ha/yr (Gardelle et al, 2010) and are likely to grow further
due to temperature increases caused by climate change, leading to a threat of glacial lake
outburst floods (GLOF). These findings lay risk to the hydropower sector. The projected increase
in monsoon rainfall and rainfall extremes is expected to lead to additional sediment flow in
already high-sediment rivers and thus to reduce live storage and turbine life of hydropower
plants. GLOFs could damage or wash away small hydropower plants, and affect long-term
viability of hydropower projects that are on rivers fed by glacial lakes.
       Countries with similar potential for hydropower generation, but that face the threat of
climate change, are starting to realize it through a combination of innovative policies and tools,
including (also see Box 2: Promoting Environmentally and Socially Responsible Hydropower
Development in Himachal Pradesh).

      Basin-wide scientific studies (also known as sectoral environmental assessments) to
       assess the cumulative impact of the development of hydropower projects in a cascade
       along the same river basin, to assess the efficacy of the different projects, the need for
       environmental flows downstream of the diversion structure to sustain ecosystem services

                                                                                                  12
    particularly during the lean season, and to assess environmental impacts to prepare and
    implement catchment area treatment plans at the basin level to manage soil erosion and
    ensure water regulation.

   Tools to assess the value of soil retention and water regulation services of forests in the
    catchment of hydropower facilities, to enable more efficient watershed conservation
    investment design to improve sediment management and design of payment for
    ecosystem service schemes. Implementation of new planning processes and incentive
    schemes based on these assessments.

   Adoption and implementation of national policies on environmental flow to ensure
    adequate river flows, based on the basin-wide assessments.

   Strengthening the capacity of the regulatory agencies to assess and monitor the
    environmental impacts (including monitoring e-flows) of hydropower projects and to
    ensure compliance of the rules and regulations by the developers. The regulatory
    agencies also need to be able to look at whether suitable planning and monitoring
    mechanism are available to ensure safe disposal of construction debris (i.e. muck).

   Development and adoption of benefit sharing mechanisms (such as annuity benefit
    sharing, making power available in the project zone) to ensure that communities
    negatively impacted by the hydropower facilities are adequately compensated, but also to
    ensure that the revenues generated support shared prosperity goals, economic
    diversification, and sustainable growth.

   Assessments of the potential impact of climate change on the hydropower sector and
    based on these, adjustments to the design of hydropower facilities to make them more
    climate resilient.

Box 2: Promoting Environmentally and Social Responsible Hydropower Development in Himachal
Pradesh


Background: Himachal Pradesh (HP) is richly endowed with natural resources that provide economically
valuable environmental services for much of the country. The state is home to three major river basins,
and serves as a watershed that is critical to the livelihoods of more than 200 million people in Haryana,
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, and Rajasthan. It has one of the main sources of clean energy – hydropower - for
the country that can help address both the energy and peak shortages of the Northern Region.

Government of India (GoI) sought a program of two DPLs to implement enabling policies, institutional
actions and piloting of innovative practices to achieve inclusive green growth in the state of Himachal
Pradesh:
 Adoption of environmentally sustainable and socially responsible hydropower development in the
     ongoing hydro development program;
 Integration of climate change adaptation and mitigation actions in policies and programs;
 Empowering local communities to promote watershed management;
 Promotion of an environmentally sustainable industrial development;
 Implement an environmentally sustainable tourism program;
 Instituting mechanisms for integration of spatial GIS based information in informed decision making.

Hydro Power Development Goal of DPL: In one of the pillar of the DPL operation, efforts have been

                                                                                                            13
   made to increase adoption of environmental and social parameters in hydropower development. Various
   important initiatives adopted in hydro sector are:
    GoHP has designed, adopted and implemented a web-based real-time monitoring system for project
       milestones, including those relating to environment and social parameters and environmental flows.
    GoHP has (i) carried out a cumulative environmental impact assessment study of the Satluj river
       basin; and (ii) developed a concurrent action plan. It has also initiated cumulative impact assessments
       across all rivers of the state.
    A basin –wide catchment area plan has been developed for Satluj basin and similar plans are in
       progress along all river basins.
    GoHP has adopted and implemented a benefit sharing scheme to complement the Local Area
       Development Fund, by initiating the payment of cash transfers to eligible beneficiaries.
    A communication strategy to disseminate hydro power development road map amongst the
       stakeholders has been developed.
    Technical studies on (a) institutional management of in stream flow, (b) InVEST Model to monitor
       performance management of catchments are also in progress to support the decision making and
       planning policy reforms.

   Source: World Bank Staff

        Given the low population density in Bhutan, and the migration out of rural areas, areas
where hydropower plants are likely to be located, expansion of the hydropower sector is not
likely to result in as large social or environmental impacts as would be felt in areas with higher
population densities. Nonetheless, silt management in the upper catchment and ensuring
sufficient e-flows downstream of the facility will still be important concerns, as will be concerns
about the efficacy of individual projects. Furthermore, silt management will become more and
more important as the country addresses its infrastructure deficit and builds roads to improve
connectivity, given that road construction is one of the major contributors to increased sediment
flow in rivers. A portion of the hydropower payments that Bhutan receives are earmarked for
ecosystem protection, but recently those funds have been diverted to use for increasing “lifeline”
electricity subsidies. This shift has implications for the environment. There may also be other
environmental and social concerns, but identifying these would require further analysis.
       Additionally, sector-specific policies may also be needed to make the hydropower sector
more climate-resilient. To ensure reliable supply of water, there is likely be a need to increase
reservoir storage to combat increased hydrologic variability from climate change. Shifting to
reservoir based facilities rather than run-of-the-river will however increase the potential
environmental impacts and these will then have to be managed. Sedimentation management
technologies will also need to be implemented, both in the catchment of the hydropower facility
and within the facility to manage the impacts of climate change. These efforts will ensure that
the hydropower sector contributes to economic growth today and in the future.
         Given that Bhutan will continue to receive substantial and even growing revenues from
hydropower in the future, it is important to consider how the country will manage these
revenues, particularly to promote shared prosperity, and long-term development. Bhutan needs to
carefully consider how far to go with “lifeline” electricity subsidies, since these leave less
available for investments in growth-enhancing activities (or, as noted above, to reduction in
expenditures for ecosystem protection). More generally, Bhutan needs to consider how to use its
hydropower revenues for advancing economic diversification and employment enhancement
activities. The more that is spent on privately or publicly provided (nontradable) services, or
                                                                                                                 14
imported goods, the lower is the volume of savings for increasing various forms of durable
capital (and the costlier is labor in other potential export-oriented sectors). There is thus a degree
of tradeoff in how Bhutan wants to see its economy further develop in terms of growth in labor-
absorbing services and other sectors like manufacturing. While further hydro development will
generate resource rents, the extent to which these rents stimulate further growth will depend on
the policies for their use.
         To summarize, the hydropower sector is and will continue to be one of the most
important economic sectors in Bhutan. To support this sector and deal with the challenges it
faces, there is a need to articulate and adopt a policy on hydropower revenue use and revenue
sharing to ensure that revenues are used to promote growth and shared prosperity in a manner
that is sustainable. Furthermore, development of capacity to use tools to manage watersheds to
maximize the flow of ecosystem services, in particular soil retention and water regulation
services, such as ecosystem accounting, watershed investment prioritization tools, etc., will also
be important. This will help manage the current issues with silt as well as potential issues that
will arise due to infrastructure development and climate change. Finally, it will be useful to
examine the potential role of payment for ecosystem schemes to meet both revenue sharing
objectives and to deliver ecosystem services.




                                                                                                   15
                                            Forestry

        Forests are an important natural resource in Bhutan. The Constitution of Bhutan
stipulates that the country maintain a “minimum of 60% of the total land under forest cover for
all times to come”. In 2010, in fact, forests accounted for 70.5% of the total land area, and an
additional 10.4% was under shrubs (SYB, 2013). Broadleaf and mixed conifer forests are the
major forest types. However, only about 14% the forest lands are economically accessible and
available for production of commercial timber (National Forest Policy of Bhutan, 2010).
        As a share of GDP the forestry and logging sector accounted for only 3.1% in 2012,
however. This figure though does not represent the importance of the sector in the livelihoods of
the poor: rural people strongly rely on forests for subsistence goods, including fuel wood, non-
wood forest products (NWFP), construction timber, etc. In Bhutan, firewood constitutes about
57% of total energy consumption. Households account for 95 % of total fuelwood consumption,
while the government, commercial sector and industry consume the balance (Uddin et al. 2006).
Between July 2008 and June 2011, about 160,000 cubic meters of firewood have been supplied
at subsidized rate to rural communities. During the same period, the entire commercial firewood
production of the country stood at about 100,000 cubic meters. Apart from firewood, data from
2007/08 show that stones and sand are the most important NWFPs followed woodchips, bamboo,
resin, and cordycep. And many of these uses of the forests are often not fully reflected in the
national account estimates.
        Though deforestation is not considered to be a major problem in Bhutan, urban expansion
and the establishment of new infrastructures such as roads and hydropower projects have had an
effect on forests. Over 8,900 ha of Government Reserve Forests (GRFs) land was allotted for
such activities by the Department of Forest and Park Services (DoFPS) between FY 08/09 and
FY 10/11, with an increasing trend. Forest fires also contribute to deforestation. Records show
about 62 forest fire incidences annually in the last 15 years, leading to damage of approximately
18,188.23 acres of forest lands per year. Another potential challenge, and one that is particularly
relevant for promoting green growth in this sector, is low productivity. Surprisingly, wood
charcoal was one of the top ten commodities imported into the country from 2008 to 2012,
despite the large areas under forests in the country. Aside from productivity differences, this
appears in part to reflect reluctance to accept the nearby presence of charcoal kilns.
        Under the 11th FYP, Bhutan hopes to overcome some of these challenges and manage its
forest resources for supplying economic goods and services through the establishment of Forest
Management Units (FMU), Working Schemes (WS), Community Forests (CF), plantations and
NWFP user groups. The numbers of CFs in particular are to be increased to help empower rural
communities to manage forests sustainably and achieve poverty reduction (Royal Government of
Bhutan, 2010a). The 11th FYP also emphasizes biodiversity conservation and the maintenance of
ecosystem services through protected area management, watershed management and wildlife
management. Bhutan is also conducting REDD+ readiness activities, and hopes to be ready for
implementing REDD+ activities by the end of the 11th FYP by which time it is hoped that there
will be clarity on the availability of global funds to support these activities.

        As with other sectors, these policies will help make growth green and inclusive. Another
crucial element of promoting green growth in renewable resource sectors such as forests is to

                                                                                                   16
ensure that the resource is managed to enhance productivity and prevent resource rent
dissipation, given its common property nature. A package of measures is often needed to realize
green growth outcomes: to reap higher and sustainable economic returns from natural forests, for
example, requires aligning policies, incentives, capacity, and governance. Enforcing access
rights to avoid over-exploitation given the open access nature of forests, for example, will be as
important as developing markets for forest products.

        Another issue to consider is access to and pricing of extracted wood. As noted above,
substantial quantities of firewood are provided with subsidies. Firewood is regulated by Forest
and Nature Conservation Rules of Bhutan 2006. The Rule specifies that households are allowed
16 m3 of fuelwood per year if they lack electricity or 8 m3/year if they have electricity,
irrespective of household size, need, forest type, availability. Households also have entitlements
to certain amount of timber for construction. The free provision of wood to individuals arguably
holds back the development of more specialized and efficient sources of building materials.

        At the same time there is strong need for more accurate economic valuation of the
services provided by forests (such as water regulation, soil retention) to improve decision
making. For instance, market prices do not accurately reflect the value of ecosystem services
because of their public good characteristic: they are often one or both of the “non-excludable and
non-rival” pair. Market prices are often missing for many services because these services are
invisible. Improving the understanding of the economic value of ecosystem services, particularly
non-provisioning services, and making these values explicit in measures of economic growth can
inform policies to increase the economic contribution of forests to economic growth sustainably.

        Countries rich in forest resources are relying on a number of policies and tools to achieve
inclusive green growth in this sector, including,

      To support sustainable forest management, a number of countries are strengthening their
       capacity to collect, compile, and analyze forest-related data, including forest inventories,
       forest cover maps, and forest accounts. Forest accounts (see Box: Forest Accounts: Why
       should countries compile these?) in particular allow policymakers to understand the
       current contribution that forests are making to the economy, accounting for the full range
       of goods and services generated by forests, and how this contribution can be increased
       sustainably.

      Countries are also strengthening capacity for management, developing working plans,
       and for governance by strengthening the role of local communities to ensure that access
       to forest resources is regulated.

      Finally, countries are increasing sustainable value added from a range of goods and
       services from the sector, not only timber, by supporting value chains for important
       NWFPs, designing and implementing payment for ecosystem services schemes to
       monetize what are otherwise non-marketed regulating services and providing an incentive
       for their provision, etc. Moving up the value chain, shifting from extraction alone to
       downstream processing, can help provide additional, more productive jobs, though such
       “industrial” policies may not always be in the country’s comparative advantage and
       would need to be justified on a case by case basis.

                                                                                                 17
 Box 3: Forest Accounts: Why should countries compile these?

 Forests are an important natural asset for a number of countries, and provide a range of critical goods and services
 that are important to the economy. Goods and services range from provisioning services such as timber, firewood,
 and a variety of non-timber forest products, to cultural services such as recreation and tourism, to regulating services
 such as water regulation, soil protection, biodiversity protection, and carbon storage. These goods and services
 benefit the economy directly but also by supporting other economic sectors such as hydropower (through water
 regulating and soil retention services), and tourism (by supporting eco-tourism).

 Yet, policymakers do not have the information they need to manage this important economic asset. This includes
 information not only about the extent of forest resources and how it is changing, but equally importantly information
 about the economic contribution of forests and impacts of non-forestry policies on forest resources and services.

 Countries rely on the System of National Accounts (SNA) to provide detailed information about the economy to
 help policymakers assess economic performance, support policy analysis, and inform decision-making. The SNA,
 however, has a number of shortcomings when it comes to the environment in general and forest in particular,
 limiting its usefulness as a source of information for forest management. For one, the SNA treats cultivated and
 natural forests differently. For cultivated forests it records production and changes in the stock while for natural
 forests it only records production. The value of forest degradation and depletion is not recorded as a cost against the
 income earned by enterprises (be it state or private) extracting forest resources. More importantly, a number of non-
 market goods and services provided by both cultivated and natural forests are often not included in national
 accounts. Or many non-market services are wrongly attributed to other sectors of the economy.


 Because existing state accounts do not fully capture the economic contribution of forests, total benefits from
 sustainable forestry are underestimated and other sectors are not fully aware of their dependence on healthy forests.
 These factors are likely to bias decisions away from sustainable management of forests and prevent policymakers
 from fully leveraging forest resources to realize their contribution to economic growth.

 Forest Accounting, that is compilation of detailed statistics (using a framework like the System of National
 Accounts) to help monitor the interactions between the state of forest resources and the state of the economy, can
 help fill this information gap. Applications of these accounts can help inform policies on how the economic
 contribution of forests to the state economy can be maximized. Forest accounts linked with tourism accounts, for
 example, can help inform government policy on nature-based tourism, and ecosystem accounts for watersheds can
 help design payment for ecosystem services schemes.

 Source: World Bank Staff


 Source: World Bank Staff
         To summarize, given the extent of forests in Bhutan, it is important to understand how
this natural asset can contribute to the country’s economic growth without compromising
Bhutan’s commitment to maintaining 60% of its land permanently under forest cover. Forest
accounts can help make clear the contribution that forests make to the economy, including the
contribution to the hydropower power sector through the provision of ecosystem services such as
water regulation and soil retention, the contribution to the tourism sector, and to rural
livelihoods. Building on data provided by forest accounts, but based on in-depth assessment of
institutions, policies, regulations, etc., targeted analytical studies can help assess how the
contribution of the forestry sector to the economy can be increased in a sustainable manner. This
should include an analysis of issues such as (i) the economics of wood charcoal: Should a

                                                                                                                    18
country as rich in forest cover as Bhutan import wood charcoal? What trade-offs are inherent in
such a policy? Can this policy be justified on economic grounds within the current policy
framework? (ii) the potential impacts of the current timber allocation policy on development of a
furniture industry in Bhutan: Under the prevailing forest management practices, households in
rural areas are allocated a certain amount of timber for house construction at subsidized rates.
Does this allocation system lead to market fragmentation and through it to a lack of development
of the furniture industry in the country?

 Box 4: Forest accounts Guatemala

 Guatemala is a small, culturally-rich Central American country that houses a tremendous quantity of biodiversity
 and abundant forest resources. Like many resource-rich developing countries, Guatemala is faced with the challenge
 of managing its resources in a sustainable manner. A crucial step in managing resources and designing effective
 policies has been to accurately measure assets particularly forests.

 Prior to the compilation of the forest accounts, the National Forest Policy of Guatemala incentivized the
 development of a plantation silviculture industry and attempted to protect strategic forest ecosystems. As a result of
 the development of forest accounts, researchers have been able to model the impacts of the national incentive
 program, PINFOR, and have concluded that large-scale timber industries does not provide the most value-added to
 the Guatemalan economy. As such, the accounts have informed the policy dialogue of how to continue PINFOR in a
 sustainable way after it is scheduled to end in 2016.

 In addition, data from the accounts allowed researchers to conduct a study on fuel wood consumption. As a result of
 the study, a strategy for the production and efficient use of fuel wood is currently being developed. Although this
 strategy is in the initial phases, the accounts have informed the debate and are being used to develop initial drafts of
 the strategy. The development of strategies to efficiently use fuel wood and stop illegal logging will help Guatemala
 manage forest resources to contribute to the economic growth of the country while maintaining forest productivity
 and other environmental and community services that forests provide.

 Source: World Bank Staff




                                                                                                                     19
                                           Agriculture

        Agriculture is an important economic sector in Bhutan, particularly as a source of
livelihood for the rural poor. Even though only 2.9% of the land area in Bhutan is classified as
agricultural (SYB 2013), the share of the sector in GDP stood at 6.4% in 2012 and it provided
employment to over 60% of the total population (NLFS, 2011). Paddy, maize, apple, oranges,
and potatoes are the major crops and cattle and poultry the major livestock. Moreover,
agricultural commodities --- cardamom, potatoes, orange, apple and wheat/barley --- accounted
for 4.3% of exports (RNR Sector 11th Plan) in 2011. Given the limited availability of land for
cultivation but also predominance of subsistence farming, 60% of cereal, vegetables and animal
products and 95% of fruits and nuts are domestically produced while 97% of fish, 80% of beef,
77% of pork, and 90% of oils and fats demands are met from imports (Labor Force Survey,
2012). Meeting a greater share of the demand through local production, increasing self-
sufficiency in food production, is an important goal for the country under the 11th FYP.
        The sector grew from 2009 to 2012, though slowly, and faces a number of challenges.
Studies indicate that yield per hectare has been on the decline at a compound annual rate of
1.84% over the last 27 years (11th Five Year Plan). Inadequate farmer labor is considered a
constraint because of out-migration in rural areas. This is compounded by inadequate access to
markets due to limited number of farm road linkages. Lack of irrigation is another constraint:
agriculture is still dominated by rain-fed dryland farming. With 31% of the agricultural land
located on slopes more than 50°, soil erosion rate is high and estimated to be approximately 3.5
t/acres (DOA, 2011). Moreover, there are various pest and diseases and it is estimated that
annually crop loss to wild animal invasion accounts from 0.3 to 18% of total household income
(RNR Sector 11th Plan).
         The RGoB is developing strategies to meet a number of these challenges, especially
through the 11th Five Year Plan. Bhutan aims to shift from subsistence to commercial farming,
and develop agri-business enterprises to increase rural livelihoods and facilitate economic
growth. Mechanization will be promoted to help address labor shortages, and large scale
irrigation schemes will be developed and watershed management plans implemented to make
water resource available. A comprehensive strategy to address human-wildlife conflict is also
being developed and the country hopes to work towards ensuring sustainability when improving
productivity, through soil and water conservation, natural resources restoration and appropriate
farming systems.
        These policies will support inclusive green growth in the sector, that is, help to increase
productivity across land holdings of different sizes while addressing concerns of land
degradation. Global experience on inclusive green growth in this sector though shows frequent
tradeoffs between increases in productivity and greener outcomes (be it cleaner air, cleaner
water, less solid waste, and more biodiversity), and often between increases in productivity and
more equitable growth (with larger farms or production facilities sometimes seen as necessary
for productivity increases). However, these tradeoffs are often not inevitable and can also be
minimized: innovation, which can in part be supported through smart subsidies, can for example
help to overcome these tradeoffs. A good understanding of the tradeoffs at play is essential.
       Some examples of green growth strategies in the agricultural sector are as follows:

                                                                                                20
   Watershed management programs have been implemented in a number of countries in
    rainfed areas to increase agricultural productivity by controlling soil erosion, preventing
    siltation of water bodies, and improving the reliability of water resources. In effect,
    therefore, increasing agricultural productivity while promoting greener outcomes.
    Experience from these programs shows the need for increasing efficiency in targeting
    investments and overcoming challenges such as weak delivery systems and capacities
    and inadequate monitoring systems. These challenges require strengthening institutions
    and human resources for more effective planning, implementation, monitoring and
    evaluation, and reporting of watershed management programs. The challenges also
    require the application of innovative, science-based knowledge, tools, and approaches to
    underpin improvements around watershed planning and implementation, agricultural
    intensification, rural livelihoods, and hydrology.

   Promoting sustainable intensification of agriculture through increased use of fertilizers
    and pesticides and management of potential environmental impacts through regulations,
    have similarly allowed countries to increase productivity while managing tradeoffs with
    environmental outcomes. Intensification (with complementary policies to prevent
    extensification) can protect biodiversity, reduce deforestation, save water and reduce
    GHG emissions through “producing more with less”. Rice yields world over increased
    from 1.8 tons per ha to nearly 4.5 tons per ha from 1960 to 2010 for example, while the
    area planted with rice increased from 125 million ha to 150 million ha. To attain the same
    production increase with no growth in yields, the area planted with rice would have
    needed to increase to 300 million ha. However, intensification also contributes to both
    water and air pollution, including from runoff from excess nitrates and agrochemicals
    leading to the pollution of water bodies and soils. These impacts need to be managed.

   Technological innovation plays a key role in green growth strategies for agriculture
    including development of varieties which include many improved characteristics, are
    drought resistant, require less fertilizer and are resistant to common pests and diseases,
    reducing requirements for pesticides. Technological innovation also allows for increasing
    productivity in the livestock sector, without trading-off equity or environmental outcomes
    (see Box on Kegg Farms – A Better Backyard Chicken in India: innovation is key to
    green growth outcomes).

   Implementing payment for ecosystem services schemes to provide households the
    incentive to switch from crops to trees on sloping lands as was done in China under its
    Sloping Land Conversion Program (see Box on China’s Sloping Land Conversion
    Program) can help to reduce soil erosion. PES may not always achieve additionality, that
    is, result in environmental outcomes that would not otherwise have been achieved
    without the scheme, and this will require careful design. Schemes that provide payments
    to all landowners that are providing environmental services irrespective of whether these
    are additional are likely to have greater poverty reduction impacts and lower
    environmental outcomes, for example.




                                                                                            21
        Conservation agriculture6 is another example of a green growth strategy applied to
         agricultural production. This agricultural practice simultaneously (i) yields environmental
         benefits (decreased nutrients pollution of waterways, increased carbon sequestration in
         soils), (ii) increases the efficiency of production (through a lower use of energy inputs) as
         well as its byproducts (such as biogas), (iii) increases resilience (through frequent
         rotations between crops), and (iv) increases agricultural productivity in the long run
         (through decreased erosion and enhanced soil structure). Hence, agricultural productivity
         and environmental quality appear to have a high degree of complementarity in
         conservation agriculture.7

 Box 5: Kegg Farms – A Better Backyard Chicken in India: innovation is key to green growth outcomes

 Kegg Farms in India have bred a robust and improved dual purpose backyard chicken, called a Kuroiler, which
 lays 100 – 150 eggs per year (as opposed to around 40 for a Desi Chicken) and grows to 2 1/2 kilos in about half
 the time for a Desi chicken to reach one kilo. The company produces around 16 million day-old chicks. These are
 sold to 1,500 mother units who grow on the chicks for about two weeks before inoculating them and selling them
 to approximately 6,500 bicycle salesmen (pheriwallas) who on sell them to individual villagers mainly to women.
 Sales are made to some 800,000 farmers, often located in some of the remotest part of the country. The turnover
 in sales of chicks is some $5 million a year with another $5 million turnover for the thousands of small rurally
                                                    8
 based businesses that grow on and sell the chicks.

 Independent assessment indicates that the average output generated per Kuroiler chick is $3.1 both as eggs and as
 meat, of which the cash generated amounts to about $2/chick. At some 16 million chicks distributed this would be
 an aggregate output of about $50 million, some $30 million cash generated and a cash profit of about $10 million.
 Profits are significantly higher than raising desi bird. The Kuroiler birds bring more market orientation, contribute
 to significantly household cash flow, and as the enterprise has become more commercial, women have maintained
 control over the enterprises. Additionally, Kegg chickens typically obtain a premium over the typical broiler
 chickens as the meat is darker and more flavorsome (i.e. about Rs 60/kg). Kegg farms birds are spurring the
 development of a second small-scale poultry based business. About 25% of the birds are being sold to Peri-Urban
 farms concentrating on meat production. This proportion of the market is likely to increases.

 The success of the system is built on the package of the superior performing birds – which are both robust and
 better able to scavenge food and have improved food conversion ratios coupled with the company’s business
 mode, with its devolved, rural based distribution system with in-built incentives.

 Source: D. Isenberg. “Kegg farms: which came first? The Kegg or the Broiler?” Harvard Business Review Harvard
 Business Review 2006, and updated from World Poultry news 2008
 Box 6: Conservation Agriculture

  Southern Province, Zambia: Conservation Agriculture (CA) approaches foster natural ecological processes to
  increase agricultural yields and sustainability. In Zambia, these involves six basic conservation farming
  technologies: retaining crop residues, concentrating tillage and fertilizer application in a permanent grid of
  planting basins or series of planting rows, completing land preparation in the dry season, weeding aggressively to
  reduce plant competition, and inter-cropping or rotating nitrogen fixing legumes on up to 30% of the cultivated
  area. Many farmers also incorporate nitrogen-fixing trees that also provide fodder and fuelwood. The area
  restored to date is 300,000 ha with over 160,000 participating households. Yields on farms using CA practices
6
  doubled in maize plots and were 60% higher for cotton, as compared to conventional plowing systems. An FAO
  The three
  (2010)      main
         budget      principles
                  analysis       underpinning
                            in Zambia  found thatconservation
                                                   returns underagriculture  are: (i) continuous
                                                                   CA are significantly            minimum
                                                                                         higher than          mechanical soil
                                                                                                      under conventional
disturbance;  (ii) permanent
  systems: US$104/ha     underorganic
                                 CA and soil cover; under
                                         US$19/ha    and (iii) diversification
                                                           conventional         of crop species grown in sequences and/or
                                                                          tillage.
associations (Food and Agriculture Organization).
7
         discussion
  For a has
  Brazil              on the
             also adopted      implications
                             the              of the
                                 approach, with      degree ofadapted
                                                  technologies           to differentbetween
                                                                  complementarity      regions. agricultural
                                                                                                One approach productivity
                                                                                                                supports a and
environmental    quality in production  and  consumption,   see  Lichtenberg,  2002.
  mixed livestock and crop system, rotating pastures with crops. The zero tillage system supplies residual nutrients
8
  forIsenberg.
  D.            “Kegg
      cheap pasture  andfarms:
                          the pasture phase first?
                                which came          The
                                              reduces   Kegg
                                                      pests,   or theand
                                                             weeds    Broiler?”     . The Business
                                                                                 Harvard
                                                                         diseases.                   Review
                                                                                           most common        Harvard
                                                                                                           rotations are a
Business  Review    2006,  and updated  from   World  Poultry  news  2008
  combination of soybeans, cotton and maize followed by one to three years of pasture. These practices have
  enabled higher pasture stocking rates and reduction of soil degradation and water runoff
                                                                                                                          22
 Source: Scherr et al., (2011).
  Box 7: China’s Sloping Lands Conversion Program

  In China, 2-4 billion tons of silt is estimated to go to Yangtze and middle and upper reaches of the Yellow
  River every year and 65% of this was estimated to come from sloping croplands. China’s Sloping Land
  Conversion Program (SLCP) was developed to deal with this challenge. Its environmental goal is to reduce
  water and soil erosion as well as increase forest cover through retiring steeply sloping and marginal lands in
  agriculture production. The program also aims for poverty alleviation and helping farmers to transfer to
  sustainable production. The program was budget of RMB 337 billion (over US$40 billion). It set a target of
  converting 14.67 million hectares of cropland to forests by 2010, among which, 4.4 million are steep land with
  more than 25 degrees of slope. Afforesting an equal area of wastelands was an additional “soft” goal. The
  program was expected to increase forest area by 10-20% helping to increase domestic timber supply.

  The basic approach of the program was to provide compensation to farmers who transferred degraded and
  highly sloping cropland to timber-producing forests, which are considered as “ecological forests”, or
  plantations including trees with medical value, or orchards, which are considered as economic forests. The
  subsidies took three forms, annual in-kind subsidy of grain, subsidy in cash and providing farmers free
  seedlings. The subsidies varied based on different regions. The grain subsidy was between 2250 kg/ha – 1500
  kg/ha and the cash subsidy RMB 300/ha/yr (USD 36/ha/yr). Both were provided for 8 years based on meeting
  the requirement of planting forests for 5 years or grass for 2 years. Furthermore, income from forests and
  grasslands was to be exempt from tax.

  The SLCP has helped increase carbon sequestration, ecosystem services and timber supply. More than 7.2
  million hectares of cropland had been retired by the end of 2003 under spending of RMB 50 billion.

  Source: Michael, T.B. and Xu, J. “China’s Sloping Land Conversion Program:
  Institutional Innovation or Business as Usual?”, Workshop on “Payments for Environmental Services (PES) –
  Methods and Design in Developing and Developed Countries.”




        To summarize, to support Bhutan’s goal of increasing food security and to also help
increase rural livelihoods, it will be important to reverse the trend of declining agricultural
productivity. For this, in turn, a first step would be to support targeted analytical studies to
understand how the productivity of the agricultural sector can be increased while promoting
shared prosperity and green outcomes. This will include understanding the role of farm
consolidation and contract farming as well as commodity exchange markets, but also better
understanding the potential trade-offs between higher productivity and more equitable and
greener outcomes and how these tradeoffs can best be managed. Given the topography, impact
on land quality (erosion, pollution, etc.) of a transition from subsistence to commercial
agriculture would be important to understand.




                                                                                                                   23
                                         Mining and Manufacturing

         Bhutan has large deposits of a number of industrial minerals and is a prospective source
for base and possibly precious metals. The main types of mineral currently being developed in
the country include dolomite, limestone, gypsum, coal, quartzite, and marble. In 2012, though
the mining and quarrying sector in Bhutan contributed only 1.9% of GDP, it was the second
largest foreign exchange earner, second only to energy, and the sector thus plays an important
role in the balance of payments. Dolomite, gypsum, coal, cement, copper wire, ferrosilicon, and
manganese are the main exports (The Mineral Industries of Bhutan and Nepal, 2013).
       In the 11th Five Year Plan, the mining sector has been highlighted as a key sector to
support economic development and enhanced exports. Only about 39% of the country has been
geologically mapped and further discovery of mineral deposits is expected in the rest of the
country. Currently most activity is in the western part of the country, where infrastructure also is
concentrated.
        Bhutan’s mining sector faces a number of challenges of management, allocation, and
monitoring, in part due to the absence of a clear mineral development policy.9 The sector is also
constrained by lack of human resource capacity in the public and private sector. Moreover,
although Bhutan has been cautious of the environmental consequences of mining, limiting the
land area accessible to the sector, in 2013 about 42% of the commercial extraction operations
were found not to comply with environmental requirements. The concern especially is with the
impacts on communities near the mining sites.
        Bhutan aims to promote environmentally and socially responsible mineral development
by increasing number of mines revegetated, promoting value addition of minerals10 to limit the
area mined and support quality mines, and ensuring that mineral royalties benefit local
communities through sub-national mineral revenue allocation mechanisms such as the proposed
community development fund. Technical and human capacity of the government and private
sector also is to be strengthened. A potentially useful complement to these measures could be
fines for pollution damages caused by lack of diligence in following environmentally sound
mining practices, and for failure to adequately restore sites.
        Improving the environmental performance of the sector will make growth greener, and
the proposed allocation of royalties towards a community development fund will also make
growth in the sector more inclusive. But because minerals are an exhaustible natural resource,
promoting inclusive green growth also involves how the economic rents from mineral extraction
are managed. To ensure that the potential of these natural assets to contribute to growth in the
future is not lost, (given that national income is a return on national assets), it is critical that a
share of resource rents from mineral extraction are reinvested in other assets that can continue to
produce an economic return long after the mineral resources have been exhausted. Such

9
  The Mineral Development Policy has been drafted and is expected to be approved within the first year of the
Eleventh Plan.
10
   Due to the abundance of hydro power and cheap energy, Bhutan has an advantage in energy intensive mineral
beneficiation industries. However, this benefit may be eroded over time if the value added from use of electricity in
domestic beneficiation is less than what it could obtain from power sales to India.


                                                                                                                   24
reinvestment can include “soft” assets such as additional financing for enhancing worker skills in
other sectors, and for improvement of institutional capacities to promote manufacturing
expansion in other sectors (e.g., food and forest products processing).
        The World Bank’s comprehensive wealth accounts (World Bank, 2006 and 2011), and in
particular its Adjusted Net Savings (ANS) indicator, provide an assessment of whether countries
rich in sub-soil assets are using this natural capital to support sustainable development through
rent capture and reinvestment. Because national accounts measure gross savings and
depreciation of produced capital, but do not record changes in the stocks of human and natural
capital, the World Bank developed the ANS as a more complete measure of savings. ANS
measures the change in a country’s national wealth: a negative ANS suggests that the country is
running down its capital stocks and a positive ANS that the country is adding to its wealth (see
Box on Calculating Adjusted Net Savings). As shown in the figure below, ANS for low-income
resource-rich countries was negative for a number of years and relatively low even when
positive, suggesting that these countries are failing to leverage their natural assets for broader
development gains and may be running down their total wealth. Surprisingly, so too are the
high-income non-OECD countries.

        Figure 4: Adjusted Net Savings: Resource-rich Countries by Income Group

           15.0

           10.0

            5.0

            0.0
                  2000     2001     2002   2003   2004    2005    2006    2007    2008
           -5.0                                                  Low income
                                                                 Lower middle income
          -10.0                                                  Upper middle income
                                                                 High income: nonOECD
          -15.0                                                  High income: OECD

       Source: World Bank, (2011)
       The lack of readily available data on national gross savings for Bhutan has limited the
construction of a time series on ANS for Bhutan. Data available for 2006 to 2011 though shows
that ANS is positive for this period and Bhutan is on a sustainable path. These data, however, do
not provide an indication of the extent of rent recovery – how much of the resource rent
generated by the sector is recovered by the state and available for public finance. Construction
of mineral accounts as part of the System of Environmental and Economic Accounts would
provide Bhutan better indicators and detail statistics to manage this sector, and help to inform a
broader policy on public revenue management.




                                                                                                25
Figure 5: Adjusted Net Savings: Bhutan and Other Lower Middle Income Countries
                 35
                 30
                 25
      % of GNI




                 20
                 15
                 10
                                                                Bhutan
                 5                                              Lower middle income
                 0
                      1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

    Source: World Bank, (2014). World Development Indicators




Box 8: Calculating Adjusted Net Savings

                                Figure 6: Calculating Adjusted Net Savings




Savings lay the basis for building wealth and future growth. Adjusted Net Saving (ANS) measures the
real difference between production and consumption, taking into account depreciation of fixed capital,
investments in human capital, depletion of natural resources, and damages caused by pollution.

Adjusted Net Saving is derived from the standard national accounting measure of Gross Saving by



                                                                                                         26
   making four adjustments, illustrated in the figure above:

       1.   Consumption of Fixed Capital is deducted from Gross Saving to obtain Net National Saving;
       2.   Educational Expenditures is added to account for investment in human capital;
       3.   Estimates of the Depletion of Natural Resources (which include forests, energy, and minerals) are
            deducted to reflect the decline in asset values associated with extraction and depletion; and
       4.   Deductions are made for damages from carbon dioxide and particulate emissions, to arrive at
            Adjusted Net Saving.




       We turn next to the manufacturing sector, which remains relatively underdeveloped in
Bhutan. This sector contributed about 10% of GDP for the past five years. Among the 2,240
manufacturing establishments, 14.5% are agro-based, 42.6% are forest-based, 10.5% are mineral
based and others accounts for 32.4%.

        While Bhutan aims to achieve economic growth in part by developing its manufacturing,
this sector faces various challenges. According to 11th FYP, manufacturing in Bhutan is
constrained by inadequate access to capital, finance, labor and skilled human resources.
Manufacturing also faces a small domestic market, high transportation costs, difficult terrain,
low productivity, and little or no technological advancement. These constraints have led to low
volume, high cost in production and poor quality of products.

        Bhutan plans to focus on three programs in the manufacturing sector during the 11th FYP
to overcome some of these challenges. The first is to promote sustainable and environmentally
friendly development by establishing, enhancing and managing industrial parks and special
economic zones and by strengthening infrastructure in industrial estates. The second program is
to strengthen the policy environment and institutional capacity for manufacturing growth through
improving public service delivery, accelerating FDI promotional activities, and establishing
promotional strategies for priority sectors. The third program is to enhance development of
cottage and small industries (CSIs) and employment by CSIs through promoting access to
finance and market, promoting competitiveness and innovation, enhancing human capital and
developing a culture of entrepreneurship.

        Bhutan has ambitious plans for developing new sectors and product lines to capitalize on
its natural resources and its reputation as a “clean and green” environment. The Economic
Development Policy has, for example, identified areas of economic growth in the manufacturing
sector, including agro and forest based production (including biotechnology like pharmaceutical,
nutraceuticals, traditional and herbal medicines, etc.); and further development of products
derived from other natural resources (select mineral-based products and water-based products).
The Economic Development Policy calls for government incentives to promote green
technology. (More generally, the Policy advocates for other sectors such as high quality green
services (tourism, R&D consultancy services, high-end health services and traditional
medicines); and information and cultural industry (handicrafts and textiles, etc.).)

        While promoting green manufacturing could be a part of Bhutan’s green growth strategy,
there is a need to further study where comparative advantages for significant growth potential
among these options might lie. Green growth also requires that health risks from manufacturing-

                                                                                                                27
based pollution be managed cost effectively. The main environmental problems in this sector are
air and water pollution, hazardous waste generation, and land degradation. Little data are
available on these problems, however, particularly industrial solid waste and industrial effluent
discharge.




                                                                                              28
                                                 Tourism

       Tourism is an important sector in Bhutan, and has the potential for further growth. The
industry began in 1974 and was privatized in 1991. Since tourism is not a sector in national
income accounts, it is hard to assess its full contribution to GDP. There were 105,407 tourists in
2012 including international (57% of arrivals) and regional business visitors, 65% higher than
2011 (SYB, 2013). Culture and nature have been the two main attractions for tourists (SYB,
2013), making this an important sector for green growth. About 22,045 employment
opportunities were created in 2011 through this sector (11th FYP). The sector is considered an
important source of foreign exchange earnings. Gross earnings from international leisure tourism
were 63 million USD in 2012, 32% more than 2011 (SYB, 2013).
       The tourism sector is governed by the policy of “high value-low impact”, which raises
environmental awareness. High value is adopted by implementing high tariff and strict
operational regulations. $200/day each person is required (Scheyvens, 1999). Tourists must come
on a package tour with access permitted only to some areas.
        The 11th FYP lists the challenges faced by the tourism sector which include accessibility,
seasonality, and product diversification. The capacity of air transport services puts constraints
on visitors, and there is also a shortage of trained guides and skilled workers in the hospitality
sector. Product development and destination marketing are also required.
        During the 11th FYP, Bhutan plans to increase tourist arrivals to more than 200,000,11 the
sector’s contribution to GDP by almost four times, and employment to 40,000. Bhutan aims to
improve product diversification so that regional and seasonal variations are smoothed out and
standards of services are improved. New product development is planned in categories including
wellness, cultural tourism, sports, adventure, ecotourism, and “MICE” (meeting, incentive,
convention and event). Based on concerns that large portions of the benefits of ecotourism are
being received by the government and urban elites (Bhutan’s Success in Conservation 2011),
efforts are to be made to ensure that local communities also benefit from tourism.
       Tourism sector in Bhutan is inherently green as nature and Bhutan’s green image is a
major draw for tourists. As Bhutan though pushes for further growth in this sector, it is
important that its policies be informed by better evidence. For this, in turn, there is an urgent
need to improve tourism-related statistics.




        11
           It is worth noting that the tourism strategy ought to focus on tourism revenue and not tourist
numbers. If demand for tourism is inelastic, (i.e. high-end niche tourists) then increased tourist numbers
will necessitate a reduction in price and revenue. Global experience suggests that niche tourism is
considerably more profitable than highly competitive high-volume – low cost variety.


                                                                                                         29
Box 9: Nature-based Tourism at Addo Elephant National Park in Eastern Cape Province of South Africa

The Addo Elephant National Park (AENP) is a protected area with enormous amount of biodiversity in Eastern
Cape Province in South Africa. The province is least developed with 51% households under poverty and 25%
unemployed. Pastoralism is important to local communities but began to threat biodiversity through
desertification. The AENP also faced the challenge of an increasing elephant population. The Global
Environment Facility funded AENP to develop an integrated conservation and development project (ICDP) in
order to expand the boundaries of AENP and facilitate sustainable development through direct employment in
nature conservation and nature-based tourism for local communities.

The project succeeded in achieving park expansion, generating local economic benefits and conserving nature.
The strategy of the project was to provide training to local communities to facilitate tourism employment
opportunities, granting contracts to small, medium, and micro-enterprises for infrastructure expansion,
promoting marketing of the park and attracting private investors to initiate nature-based tourism ventures. The
project also relied on the implementation agency, South African National Park, to channel private investment,
monitor ecological impact and infrastructure investments and mediate stakeholders to generate census. 514
training days per year and 32 internships were provided related for tourism guidance, conservation
guardianship, and hospitality reception. 540 more people were employed inside AENP while outside
employment reaches 1842 people. The local employment included activities such as road construction, alien
vegetation removal, support for accommodations, etc. The employment opportunities bring direct economic
benefits to local communities. Furthermore, the nature-based tourism drives land and labor away from
consumptive land uses to tourism activates.

Source: U. Narain & A. Orfei, (2012). Biodiversity, Nature-Based Tourism, and Jobs.




                                                                                                                  30
                Urbanization, Transportation and Environmental Challenges

        Bhutan has been experiencing rapid urbanization. As noted, the 2005 population census
figures indicated that urban population stood at 31% of total population, a rapid increase from
only 5% in 1995. The trend has continued: the urban population in Bhutan has been growing at
6.7% annually. The capital, Thimphu, is also the largest city with 15% of total population in
2005. Phuentsholing and Paro are other significant urban areas.
        Rapid urbanization, if not well managed, can lead to a number of environmental
concerns. Rapid urbanization is accompanied by increased waste volumes from households,
commercial and industrial enterprises, and construction, which increase pressures on landfills.
Cities such as Thimphu also face growing challenges to meet increasing demands for safe water
supply and for environmentally sound wastewater management. In addition, urbanization creates
air pollution issues due to spatially concentrated use of polluting transport and household fuels,
as well as dust from construction and road work. Finally, forestlands near population centers can
become degraded, due to the increased demand for firewood and construction timber. The
general absence of flat land near population centers can similarly result in settlement on steeper
slopes, thus potentially leading to higher risk of erosion, disruption of waterways, and possible
floods and landslides.
        From 2003 to 2005, solid waste generation increased at the rate over 33% in Thimphu.
Such a rapid increase has caused waste to exceed the capacity of the existing landfill. There is no
waste segregation, and all types of waste go to landfills. Other than municipal wastes, healthcare,
industrial and electronic wastes also are of concern. Although there is some form of solid waste
management in 12 urban centers (see Box on Greener Way – waste management and recycling
company in Bhutan), waste management is not adequate.
        Regarding water pollution, domestic sewage is the main source. Only 20-30% of
households in Thimphu are connected to a sewer system, though this number increases to 60% in
the city of Phuentsholing. Domestic sullage and seepage from septic tanks and pipes flow into
water lead to water contamination, which in turn causes diseases such as diarrhea and dysentery.
        Vehicle-based air pollution is caused by poor fuel quality, inefficient combustion of fuel,
and increased traffic around Thimphu Valley. In 2000, road transport also accounted for about
19% of the total national CO2 emissions (Bhutan Environment Outlook 2008). Road
construction and repair, coarse particles from re-suspension of road dust, wind-blown dust from
road construction during winter dry season (especially Mar-Apr) and smoke from roadside
wood-fired heating of bitumen for road paving all contribute to transport related air pollution
(Strategy for Air Quality Assessment and Management in Bhutan, 2010).
        Industrial emissions have been identified as another source of air pollution. The
industries that contribute the most to air pollution are cement production, chemical processing,
and mining (Bhutan Environment Outlook 2008). Emissions are not well dispersed due to the
low height of the emission stacks and thus polluting the surrounding valley (Country Synthesis
Report on Urban Air Quality Management, Bhutan, 2006). One other environmental challenges
is associated with construction – stones and other materials used for construction are often



                                                                                                 31
dumped down forested slopes and these go into the river and sometimes cause damage to
hydropower facilities located downstream. (Dam building spoils Bhutan’s green image, 2013).
        Bhutan has taken a number of steps to address pollution problems in urban areas, as well
as industrial pollution. To respond to water pollution related issues, Bhutan has been increasing
access to better water sources and aims to improve connection to the sewerage system.
Regulations have been put in place for the procurement and use of chemical pesticides since
2000. Standards have also been set to regulate industrial discharges to water (Bhutan
Environment Outlook, 2008). Key for avoidance of risk to human health (especially for
children), however, is availability of clean drinking water – whether piped or otherwise
distributed. National drinking water standards need to be formulated, modeled on the WHO
drinking water quality standard. In addition, improved enforcement of regulations through use of
innovative instruments and strengthening capacity of regulating agencies also will be important.
       Green growth policies also need to emphasize conservation of water, especially treated
water. The absence of realistic pricing policies encourages high water use and waste. Demand
based pricing policies would promote conservation of water.
        Various measures have been promoted for reducing waste generation and increasing
recycling, e.g. efforts to separate out organic materials for composting. There is also room for
consideration of economic instruments in this context. Refundable deposits for larger and
potentially hazardous products like vehicle batteries have worked well in other areas. Buyback
programs for refrigerants are another option. Reduction of trash generation might be fostered by
charging for plastic bags and providing convenient collection centers for higher-value recyclable
materials, notably aluminum. Municipal finance management is another important issue.
Extremely low property taxes and limited autonomous right of local government have limited
revenue capture by cities. Policy reform on municipal finance management is essential for
sustainable green growth.
        The 11th FYP aims to revise Ambient Air Quality Standards and promote access to
public transportation both through mass public transport (such as bus rapid transit - BRT) and
ropeway and waterways. Households in Bhutan are also increasingly using cleaner sources of
energy instead of fuel wood (Bhutan Environment Outlook, 2008). This can be taken further:
public education and increased enforcement can be used to enforce bans on open burning
(especially of trash), avoid use of fuel wood for heating road surface treatments, and improve
environmental performance of industry through instruments such as public information
disclosure schemes. Progress on vehicular pollution can be made with more vigorous inspection
and maintenance programs, including the possibility of bans on the oldest and highest-emitting
vehicles, as well as a switch to low-emitting vehicles, especially for public transit.12

        As noted, management of greenhouse gas emissions is another government priority, with
the aim to be carbon-neutral. Figures from Bhutan’s Second National Communication to the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change indicate that Bhutan’s emissions of CO2 from energy
use in 2000 were 260-315 thousand tons – very small numbers in the global context. Figures for

12
  Vehicle ownership also can be taxed based on emissions performance, with the funds used to promote improved
inspection and enforcement measures. A green tax on motor vehicles started from 2012-13. In that FY, Nu 35,937
million were collected, which amounts to 0.2% of the total internal revenue.

                                                                                                             32
2010 from the US Energy Information Administration are larger, at about 480 thousand tons,
reflecting an increase in energy use over the decade. Beyond energy-related emissions, Bhutan
also has emissions related to industrial processes, agricultural activities, and waste
decomposition. The Second National Communication reports the total of these at about 1.3
million tons – mainly from agriculture. Against this, sequestration of emissions from Bhutan’s
forests is estimated to be slightly over 6.3 million tons. On balance, then, Bhutan’s net GHG
emissions in 2000 are significantly negative. There is no reason to think that this is no longer
true more recently, given Bhutan’s forest management and the ability of those forests to continue
to sequester carbon.

        One could then conclude that Bhutan already is well beyond achieving carbon neutrality.
The policy issue is the extent to which one wants to include forest carbon sequestration, versus
wanting to move closer to carbon-neutrality with respect to net sources, like energy use. This
sort of approach necessarily would be costly if pursued on a large scale, diverting resources away
from other growth-enhancing activities while giving too little credit to a key ecosystem service
being provided by the forests.


 Box 10: Greener Way – waste management and recycling company in Bhutan.

 Greener Way, established in 2010, is the first waste management and recycling company in Bhutan. The
 company aims to work towards clean and environmentally rich Bhutan and also address climate change
 issues. The company has developed an integrated solid waste management system that is environmentally
 sound, technically feasible, cost effective and public acceptable. Greener Way recycle traditional items
 including newspaper, magazines, brochures, metal food & beverage cans, and glass bottles & plastic
 containers as well as yard wastes including electronics, tires, and they hold annual household hazardous waste
 event. The wastes are collected at a fixed rate. For example, Nu.18/kg per bottles, Nu.6/kg paper wastes, etc.
 Then, recyclables collected are sent to a recycling plant in Malda, India, where Greener Way generates
 income and recyclables are processed. As of October 2013, Greener Way has employed 31 people, generates
 income for over 150 “raga pickers, and reaches annual turnover of $140,000.

 Greener Way is committed to saving the environment. Being left untreated in the landfill, wastes may
 generate methane gases and lead to pollution. Greener Way’s reuse and re cycling programs help reduce
 landfills and incineration and thus conserve environment. 11 months after establishment of Greener Way, 230
 tons of recyclable wastes were collected. Before Greener Way, wastes from Thimphu all go to the Memelakha
 land fill site. As of March in 2012, wastes at Memelakha has been reduced 20% by volume, particularly the
 items recycled by Greener Ways, including pet bottles, carton boxes, broken glasses, and rubber. The
 company also dedicates to educational outreach program, such as educating Bhutan on waste management
 through classroom presentations, environmental workshops, public displays and funding for nationally
 recognized recycling programs.

 Source: Greener Way company website. http://www.greenerwaybhutan.com/
 “Bhutan goes down Yonten's Greener Way”. http://www.recyclingwasteworld.co.uk/features/bhutan-goes-
 down-yontens-greener-way
 “Finding a greener way for recycling waste”. http://www.yanatravel.com/2011/news/finding-a-greener-way-
 for-recycling-waste.html
 Subba, S. (2012). “Greener Way to construct transfer station in govt. allotted land”.
 http://www.thebhutanese.bt/greener-way-to-construct-transfer-station-in-govt-allotted-land/




                                                                                                                  33
                                           Conclusions

        As noted at the beginning, this Note is not intended to lay out a particular road map for
furthering green growth in Bhutan. Instead, the purpose is to support the Government of Bhutan
in the design, implementation, and monitoring of green growth policies in identified priority
areas, to further the discussions on these issues.

         We noted some key growth related challenges facing Bhutan, a number of which are not
necessarily related to green growth. These included macroeconomic imbalances created by
hydropower led development; stagnation in agricultural productivity growth; rising youth
unemployment; various constraints to diversifying the economy; increasing tensions between
siting infrastructure while maintaining Bhutan’s forest cover; and in the longer term, increasing
vulnerability to climate change, particularly though not exclusively in the hydropower sector.

        Current policy focusing on priority areas like hydropower, sustainable tourism, expanded
value added from agriculture, and other environmentally friendly businesses is a solid base for
growth that can be green. The need for policy strengthening also is recognized for addressing
the environmental sustainability of ongoing urbanization, as well as increases in mining and
manufacturing activity. The question remains as to how and where among these areas of the
economy, as well as in forestry, increased green growth measures might further add to growth
and meet other economic priorities, without compromising environmental and social norms.
Expanded hydropower will do little to increase employment, and expanding agriculture will face
the challenge of countering incentives for urban migration as well as the need for adopting
higher-productivity approaches. For diversification into other sectors, a number of other barriers
need to be confronted.
         Our review thus shows that green growth policies in particular sectors and with respect to
urbanization need to be complemented by other good growth policies. These include
institutional reforms to improve the investment climate, infrastructure upgrading in particular,
and increased availability of skilled labor. Policies for how revenues from hydro exports are
used and how tourism is expanded, among others, also are needed to generate investments that
make growth more sustainable and inclusive.
      To conclude, we recommend several cross-cutting steps to deepen knowledge and enrich
ongoing policy dialogue:
1. Undertaking some rapid growth diagnostics of sectors, building on work already done as
   part of the preparation of 11th FYP while also identifying opportunities for greening
   growth. Of particular interest would be exploration of the potential generation of income and
   employment through a sustainably forest products industry, including timber and non-timber
   forest products. For example, the policy to provide direct grants of timber to households for
   home construction could be hampering the development of an efficient domestic building
   products industry. Another topic for investigation would be the potential development of
   other industry sectors beyond those currently in operation (mainly related to mining),
   especially the potential for job generation in new “green” product lines while also satisfying
   applicable environmental standards. Finally, analysis of potential tradeoffs between
   increasing agricultural productivity on the one hand, and more equitable and green outcomes

                                                                                                34
     on the other, and how these tradeoffs can best be managed, is another area of inquiry. The
     rapid sector diagnostics could be followed, as appropriate, by more detailed economy-wide
     analysis of green growth scenarios and policies.

2. Development of a natural-resources revenue management framework for Bhutan to ensure
   that the social surplus generated by current natural resource development – especially
   hydropower, but also minerals, and potentially from forests – can be used to support
   economic diversification and increases in other forms of societal wealth to support economic
   progress in the longer term.

3. Development of a “sustainable urbanization” framework for Thimphu, focusing especially
   on water quality, waste management, land use, public transport, disaster risk, and service
   delivery efficiency. In carrying out this task, it is important to note that while improved
   services increase the value of land, and generate good returns from development, little or no
   benefit accrues to cities under the current policy system because of low revenue capture by
   the cities. That in turn reflects extremely low property taxes and limited autonomy of local
   government. Policy reform on municipal finance management thus is another important link
   in achieving green growth.

4. Capacity building for addressing the environmental, social, and climate change impacts,
   associated with large-scale hydropower development. This would include the capacity to
   undertake basin-wide studies to assess the cumulative impacts of the development of
   hydropower projects in cascade along the same river basin, on river hydrology. It would also
   require capacity to apply innovative, science-based knowledge, tools, and approaches to
   underpin improvements around watershed planning and implementation, particularly
   management of sediment and impacts of climate change on the hydropower sector.

5. Capacity building for mainstreaming natural capital, including ecosystem services, in
   Bhutan’s national development planning and national income accounts. Given the
   abundance and economic importance of water resources to support hydropower development
   in Bhutan, for example, only a fraction of which is currently developed, it is critical that
   hydropower development be based on a sound management of catchment areas and forest
   resources to e.g. reduce variations in water flow and to reduce soil erosion. Forests also
   contribute directly to the economy by providing other goods and supporting the tourism
   industry. Policymakers need additional information to manage these important natural,
   economic assets – information not only about the state of forest resources and how it is
   changing, but also information on how forest resources and ecosystem services are affected
   by forestry and non-forestry policies. The WAVES initiative13 could support the
   development of (i) watershed accounts to assess the value of water regulation and soil
   retention services from watersheds for hydropower generation to help hydropower
   development in the state, (ii) forest accounts to assess the contribution of forests to the state’s
   GDP and support policies to increase contribution sustainably, (iii) mineral accounts to
   understand the extent to which rents are being captured, and (iv) tourism accounts to inform
   policies in the tourism sector. Such efforts would complement and strengthen the already

13
  WAVES (Global Partnership on Wealth Accounting and the Valuation of Ecosystem Services led by the WBG).
The WAVES Partnership is funded by an MDTF.

                                                                                                        35
innovative approach in Bhutan to plan and track economic growth – Gross National
Happiness Index and Policy Screening Tool.

Box 11: Gross National Happiness

Gross National Happiness (GNH) is the unique development philosophy in Bhutan. It was conceived by the
Fourth King His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck. With this philosophy, Bhutan seeks to maximize
happiness as the guidance for development, instead of pursuing purely economic growth. The concept allows
recognition to not only material needs of individuals, but also spiritual and emotion needs. There are four
pillars supporting GNH, i) sustainable and equitable socio-economic development, ii) preservation and
promotion of culture, iii) conservation and sustainable utilization and management of the environment, and iv)
promotion of good governance.

To implement this philosophy as a guiding principle for Bhutan’s development , the Gross National Happiness
Commission make sure that GNH is incorporated in the policies and that proper coordination is undertaken for
proper implementation of plans and programs. The GNH index and GNH Policy Screening Tool have been
introduced to operationalize GNH. GNH Index helps to track developmental progress over time. The 2010
GNH Index is based on 33 indicators from 9 domains, where the domains are health, education, living
standards, ecological diversity and resilience, good governance, psychological wellbeing, time use,
community vitality and cultural diversity and resilience. GNH Policy Screening Tool assesses the impacts of
introducing new policies and projects on GNH. The tool provides a system to score the projects/policies
according to how well they address the nine domains of GNH. The combined score allows decision makers to
determine if the project/policy can proceed.

                                                  Figure 7




Source: GNH website: http://www.grossnationalhappiness.com/
Gross National Happiness Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2013). “Eleventh Five Year Plan
        2013-2018”.
Planning Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, 1999. “Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and
        Happiness”.


                                                                                                             36
                                         Bibliography

(2012). “Labor Force Survey”. Cited in “Eleventh Five Year Plan 2013-2018”.

(2013). “Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) for Country: Bhutan”

Asian Development Bank and the Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities (CAI-Asia) Center,
       (2006). “Country Synthesis Report on Urban Air Quality Management, Bhutan”.

“Bhutan goes down Yonten's Greener Way”.
      http://www.recyclingwasteworld.co.uk/features/bhutan-goes-down-yontens-greener-way

D. Isenberg. “Kegg farms: which came first? The Kegg or the Broiler?” Harvard Business
       Review Harvard Business Review (2006), and updated from World Poultry news 2008.

“Finding a Greener Way for Recycling Waste”. http://www.yanatravel.com/2011/news/finding-
       a-greener-way-for-recycling-waste.html

Gardelle, J., Y. Arnaud, and E. Berthier, 2010. Contrasted Evolution of Glacial Lakes Along the
       Hindu Kush Himalaya Mountain Range Between 1990 and 2009. Global and Planetary
       Change 75: 47-55. Cited in Gautam, M.R., Timilsina, G.R. and Acharya, K., (2013).
       “Climate Change in Himalayas, Current State of Knowledge”.

Greener Way company website. http://www.greenerwaybhutan.com/

Gross National Happiness Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2013). “Eleventh Five
       Year Plan 2013-2018”.

Gross National Happiness Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2009). “Tenth Five Year
       Plan 2008-2013”.

Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, (2013). “RNR Sector 11th Plan (2013-2018)”.

Mehta, S. (2013). “Dam Building Spoils Bhutan’s Green Image”.
       http://www.thethirdpole.net/dam-building-spoils-bhutans-green-image-1/

Michael, T.B. and Xu, J. “China’s Sloping Land Conversion Program: Institutional Innovation or
      Business as Usual?”, Workshop on “Payments for Environmental Services (PES) –
      Methods and Design in Developing and Developed Countries.”

Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2010). “National Forest
       Policy of Bhutan 2010”, Final Draft.

National Environment Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2008). “Bhutan
       Environment Outlook”.

National Environment Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan. (2011). “Kingdom of Bhutan,
       Second National Communication to the UNFCCC”

                                                                                             37
National Environment Commission, (2010). “Strategy for Air Quality Assessment and
       Management in Bhutan”.

National Statistics Bureau, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2013). “Bhutan Poverty Analysis
       2012”.

National Statistics Bureau, Royal Government of Bhutan, (2013). “Statistical Yearbook of
       Bhutan, 2013”.

OECD Green Growth Papers, (2013). “What have we learned from attempts to introduce green-
     growth policies?”

Overseas Development Institute, (2011). “Bhutan’s success in conservation: Valuing the
      contribution of the environment to Gross National Happiness”.

Planning Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, 1999. “Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace,
       Prosperity and Happiness”.

Population and Housing Census of Bhutan 2005. Cited in National Statistics Bureau, Royal
       Government of Bhutan, (2013). “Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan, 2013”.

Royal Government of Bhutan, (2010). “Economic Development Policy of the Kingdom of
       Bhutan”.

RSTA, (2004). Registration form. RGoB, RSTA, Bhutan. Cited in Asian Development Bank and
      the Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities (CAI-Asia) Center, (2006). “Country Synthesis
      Report on Urban Air Quality Management, Bhutan”.

Shi, L, (2013). “The Mineral Industries of Bhutan and Nepal”. 2012 Minerals Yearbook, USGS.

Scherr, S. J., L. E. Buck, T. Majanen, J. C. Milder, and S. Shames. 2011. “Scaling-up Landscape
   Investment Approaches in Africa: Where do Private Market Incentives Converge with
   Landscape Restoration Goals?” Background Paper, Investment Forum on Mobilizing
   Investment in Trees and Landscape Restoration. EcoAgriculture Partners and Program on
   Forests (PROFOR), Washington DC, USA)

Scheyvens, R. (1999). “Ecotourism and the Empowerment of Local Communities”. Tourism
      Management 20(2): 245-249. Cited in Overseas Development Institute, (2011). “Bhutan’s
      success in conservation: Valuing the contribution of the environment to Gross National
      Happiness”.

S. B. Pokharel, V. P. Kesari, S. Das, D. Thapa. “Promotion of Non‐timber Forest Products
       through Community Forestry: Improving livelihoods in Central Terai by applying
       innovative value chain approach”.




                                                                                            38
Subba, S. (2012). “Greener Way to construct transfer station in govt. allotted land”.
       http://www.thebhutanese.bt/greener-way-to-construct-transfer-station-in-govt-allotted-
       land/

U. Narain & A. Orfei, (2012). Biodiversity, Nature-Based Tourism, and Jobs.

Uddin, S.N., Taplin, R., and Yu, X. (2006). Energy, Environment and Development in Bhutan.
       Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 11: 2083–2103. Cited in Wangchuk, S.,
       Siebert, S., and Belsky, J. (2014). “Fuelwood Use and Availability in Bhutan:
       Implications for National Policy and Local Forest Management”. Hum Ecol 42:127–135.

World Bank, (2014). “World Development Indicators”.

World Bank, (2011). “World Development Indicators”.




                                                                                                39
                                                      Annex 1 –Funding for Climate Change and Environment
     There are two fundamental avenues of financing: public financing and private financing. A long list of sources of funding does exist
     and the below table attempts to list the main ones. Also, the World Bank and UNDP have developed a website with the objective of
     helping clients to identify sources of climate finance (http://climatefinanceoptions.org/cfo/funding-sources).

Name            Amount       Activities/Objectives                                    Eligibility/Region/Focus                            How to Access                    Website
                             The Readiness Fund supports tropical and sub-            To be selected as REDD Country Participants,        The first step for interested
                             tropical developing countries in preparing               the following criteria is considered: being an      countries is to submit a
                             themselves to participate in a future, large-scale,      eligible REDD country (being a borrowing            Readiness Plan Idea Note to
Forest Carbon                system of positive incentives for REDD+. This            member state of IBRD or IDA, and at tropical        the FCPF. The next step is for
Partnership                  includes: adopting national REDD+ strategies;            or sub-tropical area); relevance of country in      the selected countries to
Facility                     developing reference emission levels (RELs);             the REDD context (significant area and carbon       prepare their Readiness Plan,
                                                                                                                                                                           http://www.forestca
(FCPF): The     $110         designing measurement, reporting, and verification       stock of forest, high relevance of forests in the   which is a framework for a
                                                                                                                                                                           rbonpartnership.org/
Readiness       million      (MRV) systems; and setting up REDD+ national             economy, significant deforestation or               country to set a clear plan,
                                                                                                                                                                           readiness-fund-0
Fund (Bhutan                 management arrangements, including proper                degradation pressure, and inclusive proposal to     budget and schedule to
already                      environmental and social safeguards.                     approach REDD); Quality of the Readiness            undertake REDD+ activities.
accessed)                                                                             Plan Idea Note; balanced approach in
                                                                                      geography and biome; and variety of
                                                                                      approaches to contribute to the learning
                                                                                      objective of the FCPF
                             FCPF will pilot incentive payments for REDD+             Countries that have made significant progress       FCPF
                             policies and measures in approximately five              in their REDD+ readiness endeavors may be
                             developing countries. Such performance-based             selected to participate in the Carbon Fund
                             payments will play an essential part in valuing
Forest Carbon                forests more while they are standing than when
Partnership                  they are cut. Payments would provide an incentive                                                                                             http://www.forestca
                $51
Facility                     to the recipient countries and the various                                                                                                    rbonpartnership.org/
                million
(FCPF): The                  stakeholders—including forest-dependent                                                                                                       carbon-fund-0
Carbon Fund                  indigenous peoples, other forest dwellers or the
                             private sector—within each of these countries, to
                             achieve long-term sustainability in financing forest
                             conservation and management programs.

                Tranche 1:   The fund focuses mainly on afforestation and                                                                 The BIOCF is housed within
The
                $53.8        reforestation activities and also includes agriculture                                                       the Carbon Finance Unit of
BioCarbon                                                                                                                                                                  https://wbcarbonfina
                million      and REDD+ projects                                                                                           the World Bank
Fund                                                                                                                                                                       nce.org/Router.cfm?
                and
(BIOCF):                                                                                                                                                                   Page=BioCF&ft=A
                Tranche 2:
Tranche 1 and                                                                                                                                                              bout
                $29.5
Tranche 2
                million




                                                                                                                                                                                        i
                            It supports project development and                      Grant funding and technical assistance to
                            implementation with capacity building and training,      support transformational change in developing
The
                            as well as further supports the pioneering role of       countries, leading to the implementation of
BioCarbon
                about $6    the BIOCF by developing methodologies and tools          their REDD+ strategies and the creation of                                          http://www.biocarb
Fund
                million     for carbon accounting, promoting policy dialogue         enabling environments that change the way                                           onfund-isfl.org/
(BIOCF):
                            and by disseminating lessons learned.                    land-use decisions are made. Grants will be
BioCFplus
                                                                                     disbursed through BioCFplus based on
                                                                                     performance milestones.
                            It seeks to promote reduced greenhouse gas               Results-based payments for achieved emission      ISFL, the multilateral fund, is
                            emissions from the land sector, from deforestation       reductions (BioCarbon Fund). The main metric      managed by the World Bank
The                         and forest degradation in developing countries           for results-based payments will be carbon
BioCarbon                   (REDD+), and from sustainable agriculture, as well       emission reductions, but other economic,
Fund                        as smarter land-use planning, policies and               environmental and social indicators may be
(BIOCF):Initi               practices, with a focus on but not limited to            monitored. Carbon payments (including some
                                                                                                                                                                         http://www.biocarb
ative for                   greening and securing supply chains.                     upfront milestone payments) will be made
                                                                                                                                                                         onfund-isfl.org/
Sustainable                                                                          through the BioCarbon Fund. ISFL aims to test
Forest                                                                               carbon accounting at a comprehensive
Landscapes                                                                           landscape approach, thus including forest,
(ISFL)                                                                               agriculture and possibly energy into a
                                                                                     comprehensive methodological approach on
                                                                                     which payments will be based
                            It is to finance four programs: a) Adaptation; b)        The prioritized areas are the most vulnerable     Global Environment Facility
                            Technology Transfer; c) Energy, transport,               countries in Africa, Asia, and the Small Island   (GEF). The World Bank has
                            industry, agriculture, forestry, and waste               Developing States (SIDS). Areas for               served as the Trustee of the      http://unfccc.int/coo
Special         Total       management; d) Economic diversification for fossil       adaptation: Water Resources Management,           GEF Trust Fund and provided       peration_and_suppo
Climate         amount: $   fuel dependent countries.                                Land Management, Agriculture, Health,             administrative services.          rt/financial_mechani
Change Fund     110                                                                  Infrastructure Development, Fragile                                                 sm/special_climate_
(SCCF)          million                                                              Ecosystems (including mountain ecosystems),                                         change_fund/items/
                                                                                     Integrated Coastal Zone Management, and                                             3657.php
                                                                                     Climatic disaster risk management.

                            It is to meet the urgent and immediate adaptation        The fund is for least developed countries. The    Global Environment Facility
                            needs of the Least Developed Countries, as               key priority sectors/areas of intervention for    (GEF). The World Bank has
                            identified in their National Adaptation Programs of      NAPA implementation through the LDCF will         served as the Trustee of the      http://unfccc.int/coo
Least                       Action (NAPA, a process for Least Developed              likely include: Water Resources, Food Security    GEF Trust Fund and provided       peration_and_suppo
Developed                   Countries to identify priority activities that respond   and Agriculture, Health, Disaster Preparedness    administrative services. GEF      rt/financial_mechani
Countries                   to their urgent and immediate needs to adapt to          and Risk Management, Coastal Zone                 will work with parties that       sm/least_developed
Fund (LDCF)                 climate change). The LDCF would provide                  Management and Infrastructure, Natural            have completed their NAPAs        _country_fund/item
                            financing for the ‘additional costs,’ imposed to         Resource Management, Community-Based              to finance each country’s         s/4723.php
                            development, that pertain to these needs.                Adaptation                                        priority activities.




                                                                                                                                                                                      ii
                           The Adaptation Fund is to finance concrete            The fund supports developing country parties to    Managed by the Adaptation
                           adaptation projects which reduce negative impacts     the Kyoto Protocol that are particularly           Fund Board (AFB). The GEF
                           from climate change. The activities include: water    vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate       provides secretariat services
                           resources management, land management,                change, which includes low-lying coastal and       and the WB serves as trustee
                           agriculture, infrastructure development, fragile      other small island countries, countries with       of the Fund on an interim
               $ 223.6     ecosystems, disease control and prevention,           fragile mountainous ecosystems, arid and semi-     basis. All applicants must
               million     disaster risk management.                             arid areas, and areas susceptible to floods,       submit project proposals
The
               pledged,                                                          drought and desertification. Country allocation    through a National               https://www.adaptat
Adaptation
               $205.5                                                            also considers the level of vulnerability to       Implementing Entity, a           ion-fund.org/
Fund
               million                                                           climate change; level of urgency and risks         Regional Implementing
               deposited                                                         arising from delay of action; ensuring access to   Entity, or a Multilateral
                                                                                 the fund in a balanced and equitable manner.       Implementing Entity.
                                                                                                                                    Proposals are required to be
                                                                                                                                    signed by the Designated
                                                                                                                                    Authorities of the country.
                           The Fund is expected to be fully operational in                                                          The fund is managed by the
                           2014. It will contribute to the achievement of the                                                       Green Climate Fund Board
                           ultimate objective of the UNFCCC. The Fund will                                                          and the World Bank serves as
               $35.7
                           promote the paradigm shift towards low-emission                                                          the Interim Trustee of the
               million
                           and climate-resilient development pathways by                                                            Fund
Green          pledged                                                                                                                                               http://www.gcfund.
                           providing support to developing countries to limit
Climate Fund   and $33.6                                                                                                                                             org/home.html
                           or reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and to
               million
                           adapt to the impacts of climate change, taking into
               deposited
                           account the needs of those developing countries
                           particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
                           climate change.
                           The Clean Technology Fund (CTF) provides              Countries' access of the fund is based on ODA      The CTF Trust Fund
                           middle income countries with highly concessional      eligibility as well as having an active MDB        Committee oversees the
                           resources to explore options to scale up the          country program. Channeled through the             Fund’s operations, provides
                           demonstration, deployment, and transfer of low        multilateral development banks (MDBs), CTF         strategic direction, and also
                           carbon technologies in renewable energy, energy       concessional financing focuses on large-scale,     approves and oversees its
                           efficiency, and sustainable transport.                country-initiated projects in: renewable energy,   programming and projects.
The Climate    $5231                                                             sustainable transport, energy efficiency.          IBRD serves as the Trustee
Investment     million                                                                                                              for the Climate Investment       https://www.climate
Fund (CIF):    pledged                                                                                                              Fund (CIF). If a country is      investmentfunds.org
The Clean      and $4588                                                                                                            interested in the CTF, MDBs      /cif/Clean_Technolo
Technology     million                                                                                                              concerned will conduct a joint   gy_Fund
Fund (CTF)     deposited                                                                                                            mission, to discuss how the
                                                                                                                                    fund may help finance scaled-
                                                                                                                                    up low carbon activities and
                                                                                                                                    investment plans will be
                                                                                                                                    developed. The plans will be
                                                                                                                                    submitted to Committee for
                                                                                                                                    endorsement.


                                                                                                                                                                                iii
                          It serves as an overarching framework to support                                                          The SCF Committee was
                          three targeted programs for scaled-up,                                                                    established to oversee and
                          transformational action aimed at a specific climate                                                       decide on the operations and
                          change challenge or sectoral response: The Forest                                                         activities of the SCF. IBRD
                          Investment Program (FIP) to support developing                                                            serves as the Trustee for the
                          countries’ efforts to reduce emissions from                                                               Climate Investment Fund
The Climate               deforestation and forest degradation; the Pilot                                                           (CIF).
Investment                Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) to pilot                                                                                            https://www.climate
Fund (CIF):               and demonstrate ways to integrate climate risk and                                                                                        investmentfunds.org
The Strategic             resilience into core development planning, while                                                                                          /cif/Strategic_Clima
Climate Fund              complementing other ongoing activities; the                                                                                               te_Fund
(SCF)                     Program for Scaling-Up Renewable Energy in Low
                          Income Countries (SREP) to demonstrate the
                          social, economic, and environmental viability of
                          low carbon development pathways in the energy
                          sector as well as to create new economic
                          opportunities and increase energy access through
                          the production and use of renewable energy.
                          Climate Change is one of the issue areas for the                                                                                          http://www.clintonf
                          foundation. Projects are developed to build more                                                                                          oundation.org/our-
The Clinton               energy efficient cities, promote clean energy, and                                                                                        work/by-
Foundation                reverse deforestation.                                                                                                                    topic/climate-
                                                                                                                                                                    change
                          GEEREF is a Fund-of-Funds advised by the               GEEREF invests in specialist funds developing      European Investment Bank
                          European Investment Bank Group, which invests in       small to medium-sized projects in the following    Group
                          private equity funds concentrating on infrastructure   sectors: Renewable Energy (including small
                          projects that generate clean power through proven      hydro, solar, wind, biomass and geothermal)
                          technologies with low risk.                            and Energy Efficiency (including waste heat
                                                                                 recovery, energy management in buildings, co-
Global                                                                           generation of heat and power, energy storage
Energy                                                                           and smart grids). GEEREF engages with funds
Efficiency                                                                       early in their development and seeks to enhance
                € 108
and                                                                              strategy, team capability and structure, being                                     http://geeref.com/
                million
Renewable                                                                        often the first cornerstone investor in a fund.
Energy fund                                                                      The GEEREF's funds are characterized with:
(GEEREF)                                                                         •Strong technical and private equity transaction
                                                                                 skills;
                                                                                 •A regional focus, an established local presence
                                                                                 and networks to generate deal-flow; and
                                                                                 •An overall size of between € 50 million and €
                                                                                 200 million.




                                                                                                                                                                                iv
                             The initiative of the BMUB (German Federal           The points applies to BMUB-funded projects          The Programme Office
                             Ministry for the Environment, Nature                 are as follows: The IKI supports mechanisms         International Climate
                             Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety) is to     for mobilizing additional funding, private          Initiative supports BMUB is
                a sum of
                             finance climate and biodiversity projects in         investments in particular, as well as sustainable   implementing the IKI. It
                at least
                             developing and newly industrializing countries, as   business models for climate change mitigation       evaluates project applications
                €120
International                well as in countries in transition. The Initiative   and biodiversity conservation measures;             and submits them to BMUB,         http://www.internati
                million is
Climate                      places clear emphasis on climate change              follows technologically, environmentally,           which takes the final decision.   onal-climate-
                available
Initiative                   mitigation, adaption to the impacts of climate       methodologically or institutionally ambitious       Projects are primarily selected   initiative.com/en/ab
                to be used
(IKI)                        change and the protection of biological diversity.   and replicable approaches that are transferrable    through an ideas competition.     out-the-iki/
                by
                                                                                  and that achieve results beyond individual
                initiative
                                                                                  projects: supports its partner countries in
                each year
                                                                                  making measurable, reportable and verifiable
                                                                                  (MRV) contributions to climate change
                                                                                  mitigation.
                             The UN-REDD Programme is a collaborative                                                                 Administration of the UN-
                             programme of UNDP, UNEP and FAO designed to                                                              REDD Programme MDTF is
                             provide technical and financial support to                                                               entrusted to the Multi-Partner
                             developing countries to develop the capacities                                                           Trust Fund (MPTF Office) of
                             necessary to implement REDD+ (REDD+                                                                      UNDP. The REDD+ technical
                             readiness capacities) and benefit from its social,                                                       and policy advisors of the
                             economic and environmental opportunities. The                                                            Participating UN
                             UN-REDD Programme supports nationally-led                                                                Organizations will support the
                             REDD+ processes and facilitates involvement of all                                                       development of National
                             stakeholders, including Indigenous Peoples and                                                           Programme documents at the
                             other forest-dependent communities, in national                                                          country level. The draft
                             and international REDD+ implementation. The                                                              National Programme
                $ 215.2
                             support is from two streams: direct support of                                                           document will be submitted to
                million                                                                                                                                                 http://www.un-
                             design and implementation of UN-REDD National                                                            the UN-REDD Programme
                deposited,                                                                                                                                              redd.org/AboutUN-
UN-REDD                      Programmes, and also complementary support                                                               Secretariat on behalf of the
                $195.7                                                                                                                                                  REDDProgramme/t
Programme                    through common approaches, analyses,                                                                     national government by the
                million                                                                                                                                                 abid/102613/Default
                             methodologies, tools, data and best practices.                                                           Resident Coordinator, and
                approved                                                                                                                                                .aspx
                                                                                                                                      will be presented to the UN-
                budget
                                                                                                                                      REDD Programme Policy
                                                                                                                                      Board for funding allocation
                                                                                                                                      and budget approval. After
                                                                                                                                      revision and fulfilling quality
                                                                                                                                      assurance requirements, the
                                                                                                                                      Multi-Partner Trust Fund
                                                                                                                                      Office will release funds to
                                                                                                                                      the Participating UN
                                                                                                                                      Organization(s) receiving the
                                                                                                                                      signed National Programme
                                                                                                                                      document and Submission
                                                                                                                                      Form.


                                                                                                                                                                                    v
                         The CCF is to facilitate greater investment in        All developing member countries (DMCs) are           The CCF resources are used
                         developing member countries (DMCs) to                 eligible for CCF resources. Types of activities      to service DMCs and can be
                         effectively address the causes and consequences of    that may qualify for CCF support are:                tapped through ADB's
                         climate change.                                       preparation of relevant strategies or action plans   operations department. The
                                                                               for ADB, its regional departments, and DMCs;         Fund Manager will review the
                                                                               investment in climate change mitigation or           applications by batches to
                                                                               adaptation measures; development of                  ensure that they comply with
Climate                                                                        knowledge products and services related to           the Implementation
Change Fund                                                                    climate change; facilitating knowledge               Guidelines for the use of
                                                                                                                                                                        http://www.adb.org/
(CCF) from     $ 50                                                            management activities, including regional            funds and the eligibility
                                                                                                                                                                        site/funds/funds/cli
Asian          million                                                         conferences and workshops; funding to off-set        criteria. If so, application will
                                                                                                                                                                        mate-change-fund
Development                                                                    ADB’s corporate carbon footprint. The CCF            be submitted to the
Bank (ADB)                                                                     focus on three areas: clean energy, sustainable      appropriate working group for
                                                                               transport and low-carbon urban development;          endorsement. After
                                                                               reduced emission from deforestation and              completion, the Fund
                                                                               degradation and improved land use                    Manager will forward the
                                                                               management; and adaptation.                          batch to the Climate Change
                                                                                                                                    Steering Committee to
                                                                                                                                    approve the allocation of
                                                                                                                                    resources from the CCF.
                         The CEFPF was established to help improve             All DMCs are eligible for CEFPF resources and        CEFPF resources are used to
                         energy security in developing member countries        eligible activities are: biomass, biofuel, biogas;   service DMCs and can be
                         and decrease the rate of climate change by            rural electrification and energy access;             tapped through ADB's
                         financing the deployment of new, more efficient       distributed energy production; waste-to-energy       operations department. The
                         and less polluting supply and end-use technologies,   projects; demand-side management projects;           Clean Energy Working Group
                         through either grant or non-grant resources.          energy-efficient district heating, transport,        will review and endorse
                                                                               street lighting, buildings and end-use facilities;   project proposals. The
                                                                               clean energy power generation, transmission,         Climate Change Steering
                                                                               and distribution; manufacturing facilities of        Committee allocates resources
                                                                               clean energy system components, high                 to selected project proposals,
Clean Energy
                                                                               efficiency appliances and industrial                 and then the approval of the
Financing
                                                                               equipments; energy service companies                 proposed CE project follows         http://climatefinance
Partnership
                                                                               development; carbon capture and storage;             the normal ADB procedure.           options.org/cfo/nod
Facility
                                                                               integrated gasification combined cycle or                                                e/3327
(CEFPF)
                                                                               IGCC, supercritical and ultra-supercritical
from ADB
                                                                               steam technologies. CEFPF can potentially
                                                                               invest in the followings to support finance
                                                                               policy, regulatory, and institutional reforms that
                                                                               encourage clean energy development:
                                                                               deployment of new clean energy technology;
                                                                               projects that lower the barriers to adopting
                                                                               clean energy technologies; projects that
                                                                               increase access to modern forms of clean and
                                                                               efficient energy for the poor; echnical capacity
                                                                               programs for clean energy

                                                                                                                                                                                    vi
                              The GCCA is an initiative of the European Union         To be eligible for GCCA funds, a country has        Governments must express an
                              (EU), and coordinated by the European                   to be among the 73 LDCs or SIDS that are            interest in receiving support
                              Commission (EC), aimed at strengthening dialogue        recipients of aid. An assessment is made of         from the GCCA. Funds are
                              and cooperation on climate change with developing       each country’s vulnerability to climate change,     then allocated to countries
                              countries most vulnerable to climate change and         in particular the risks related to floods,          based on availability of
                 €243         supporting their efforts to develop and implement       droughts, storms, sea level rise or glacier         resources and on population
                 million      adaptation and mitigation responses. It focuses on      melting and the coastal zone elevation, taking      figures.
The Global       from the     the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and the            into account the proportion of the population at
Climate          EC budget    Small Island Developing States (SIDS). It focus on      risk. The importance of the agricultural sector,
Change           committed    two pillars: provide platform for dialogue between      which is one of the sectors most sensitive to
Alliance         2008-        EU and developing countries on climate policy;          climate change, is also included in this                                             http://www.gcca.eu/
(GCCA)           2012,        and provides technical and financial support to         assessment. The country's adaptive capacity and
(already has a   further      targeted developing countries to integrate climate      how engaged they are in the dialogue on
programme        €47          change into their development policies and budgets      climate change is also assessed. Five areas are
with Bhutan)     million      and to implement adaptation and mitigation              prioritized for technical support: mainstreaming
                 committed    interventions                                           climate change into poverty reduction and
                 in 2013                                                              development efforts; adaptation; reducing
                                                                                      emissions from deforestation and forest
                                                                                      degradation (REDD); enhancing participation
                                                                                      in the global carbon market; and disaster risk
                                                                                      reduction (DRR).

                              The programme was launched by the International         Grant will co-finance IFAD baseline                 ASAP grants are blended with
                              Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to             investments in rural development, focusing on       IFAD baseline investments,
Adaptation
                 US$240       support climate and environmental finance for           climate resilience for smallholder farmers..        and do not employ specific
for
                 million of   smallholder farmers so they can access the                                                                  application procedures.          http://www.ifad.org/
Smallholder
                 commitme     information tools and technologies that help build                                                                                           climate/asap/index.h
Agriculture
                 nts and      their resilience to climate change. It provides a new                                                                                        tm
Programme
                 pledges      source of co-financing to scale up and integrate
(ASAP)
                              climate change adaptation across IFAD’s new
                              investments.
                              The facility supports finance-industry engagement       The selection criteria is as follows:               Financial institutions should
                              in the new climate sectors Renewable Energy and         innovativeness and market potential of the          make contact with the Facility
                              Energy Efficiency. The Facility provides                proposed financial product or service (i.e.,        to discuss a prospective
                              developing country financial institutions with          technically, commercially, geographically);         application before submitting
Climate                       technical assistance and funding for the                institutional and financial capacity of the         any documentation. The
Finance                       development of climate focused financial products       applicant to develop new products for the low       application requires
                 €28.3                                                                                                                                                     http://climate-
Innovation                    and services. CFIF provides funding support in the      carbon energy sectors; optional short-list of       submission of
                 million                                                                                                                                                   finance.org/#01
Facility                      form of grants for eligible financial product           consultants who could provide the technical         product/programme concept
(CFIF)                        development activities. The support covers up to        assistance services; applicants include financial   note and then successful
                              50% of actual costs, dispersed in milestone based       institutions operating in developing countries of   submissions will be short
                              tranches. CFIF can also provide direct technical        the Asia-Pacific region are eligible                listed and invited to submit
                              advisory services up to a maximum of 20% of total                                                           full proposals.
                              support provided.


                                                                                                                                                                                     vii
                           The programme provides financial and technical          To be eligible, the applicants need to be an         The project proponent can
                           support to projects that conserve and restore the       NGO/CBO (community-based organizations) in           contact the SGP National
                           environment while enhancing people's well-being         an SGP participating country. The proposed           Coordinator to receive
               the max
                           and livelihoods. SGP demonstrates that community        project needs to correspond to one of GEF focal      application guidelines and
               grant
                           action can maintain the fine balance between            areas and is aligned with the Country                forms and then prepares a
               amount is
                           human needs and environmental imperatives. The          Programme Strategy (CPS) of the country. The         brief project concept paper to
               $50,000
GEF Small                  programme provides grants of up to $50,000              applicant also needs to be one of the                submit. Reviewed by national
               per
Grants                     directly to local communities including indigenous      followings: a non-government organization, a         coordinator to be eligible,      https://sgp.undp.org/
               project,
Programme                  people, community-based organizations and other         community-based organization or a grassroots         propject proposal should be      index.php
               but
(GEF SGP)                  non-governmental groups for projects in GEF focal       organization.                                        prepared by project proponent
               averages
                           areas: Biodiversity, Climate Change Mitigation and                                                           and submitted by National
               around
                           Adaptation, Land Degradation and Sustainable                                                                 Coordinator to the National
               US$25,00
                           Forest Management, International Waters and                                                                  Steering Committee (NSC).
               0
                           Chemicals.                                                                                                   The NSC reviews and
                                                                                                                                        determines if the proposal is
                                                                                                                                        accepted and approved.
                           The fund is to facilitate the early entry into force    The NPIF assists eligible developing countries       Global Environment Facility.
                           and implementation of the Protocol. (The Nagoya         and countries in transition economy that are         The World Bank serves as its
                           Protocol is supplementary agreement to the              signatory countries and those in the process of      Trustee.
                           Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which         signing the Nagoya Protocol, and that intend to
                           provides a transparent legal framework for the          ratify the Protocol in order to accelerate the
                           effective implementation of one of the three            ratification and implementation of the Protocol.
                           objectives of the CBD: the fair and equitable           Projects under the NPIF are supported mainly
                           sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of   through the GEF Medium Size Project modality
                           genetic resources.) Activities include: pursue          ($1 million or less). Full size projects (above $1
                                                                                                                                                                         http://www.thegef.o
The Nagoya                 opportunities leading to ABS (Access to Genetic         million) can also be pursued.
                                                                                                                                                                         rg/gef/category/key
Protocol                   Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of
                                                                                                                                                                         words/nagoya-
Implementati               Benefits Arising from their Utilization) agreements
                                                                                                                                                                         protocol-
on                         between users and providers of genetic resources;
                                                                                                                                                                         implementation-
Fund (NPIF)                promote technology transfer, private sector
                                                                                                                                                                         fund-npif
                           engagement, and projects targeting investments in
                           the conservation and sustainable use of genetic
                           resources in-situ; build capacity among indigenous
                           peoples and local communities; further the
                           knowledge and scientific-base for the
                           implementation of the protocol; review capacities
                           and needs on ABS with focus on existing policies,
                           laws and regulations that compliments investment
                           from the GEF Trust Fund.




                                                                                                                                                                                   viii
                There are also funds to facilitate carbon credits     Such funds include:
                trading to mitigate greenhouse gas emission,          Community Development
                including investing in projects to produce emission   Carbon Fund (CDCF),
                reduction, promote emission trading, and market       Prototype Carbon Fund
                innovation.                                           (PCF), Danish Carbon Fund
                                                                      (DCF), Spanish Carbon Fund
Funds that
                                                                      (SPF), The Carbon
support
                                                                      Partnership Facility,
carbon market
                                                                      Partnership for Market
                                                                      Readiness (PMR), The
                                                                      Climate Change Technical
                                                                      Assistance Facility (CCTAF),
                                                                      EIB Post-2012 Carbon Credit
                                                                      Fund, etc.




                                                                                                     ix
