    Report No: ACS12930



    Islamic Republic of Pakistan
    Strengthen urban policy and Institutions in Pakistan
    {Strengthen Urban Policy & Institutions; and Streamline Sector Investment for Improved Service Delivery, Pakist
    (P131971).1}




    {3-30-215}




    GWASS
    SOUTH ASIA




1
  This is a Technical Assistance (TA) activity for two years (that is, FY13 - FY15), and has started under the traditional WSP PT codes. This
concept note is part of a wider WSP process to migrate to TA code. This initiative is part of the WSP global business area #4 “Targeting the
Urban Poor and improving services in small towns” hence, WSP global expertise and learning will contribute to the local knowledge a nd learning
and vice versa.
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findin
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colo
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning t
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and w
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearan
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                         2
                                     THE WORLD BANK GROUP




         Strengthen Urban Policy and
      Institutions and Streamline Sector
       Investment for Improved Service
              Delivery in Pakistan
                                          (P131971)
                                 Water and Sanitation Program
                                               1/5/2015




 This synthesis report details the process, outputs and intermediate outcomes of the above technical
assistance (TA) which was aimed at service delivery improvement in urban water and sanitation,
especially to the urban poor, by: (i) supporting the government in establishing efficient, autonomous and
responsive utility in Peshawar; (ii) facilitating the provincial/regional governments in formulation of
water sector policies; (iii) designing demand based “Pakistan Water Sector Technical Advisory Program”
for clients; and (iv) strengthening and aligning the urban (water) reform agenda in three provincial urban
units through national urban forum.

                                                    3
                                                         Table of Contents

1 Contents

Executive Summary......................................................................................................................... 6
Introduction of TA and Background................................................................................................ 8
Overview of Technical Assistance ................................................................................................. 11
   Results Framework .................................................................................................................... 11
   Process ...................................................................................................................................... 12
Intermediate Outcomes ................................................................................................................ 12
Outputs ......................................................................................................................................... 16
   (i) Supporting the government in establishing efficient, autonomous and responsive utility
   in Peshawar ............................................................................................................................... 16
      (a)        Committee report on urban water and sanitation utility for Peshawar ................................. 16
      (b)        Power Point Presentation to Chief Minister and minutes meeting ........................................ 19
      (c)        Advisory notes on recruitment and BoD of utility: ................................................................. 19
      (d)        Detailed design report of the water and sanitation utility ..................................................... 20
      (ii)       Facilitating the provincial/regional governments in formulation of water policies ............... 21
      (iii)      Designing demand based Pakistan Water Sector Technical Advisory Program – TAP ........... 22
      (iv)  Strengthening and aligning the urban (water) reform agenda in three provincial units
      through national urban forum ............................................................................................................ 23
      Other Demand Based Strategic Outputs............................................................................................. 24


ANNEXURES

             Committee report on Peshawar utility [Output A]
             Power point presentation and Minutes of Chief Minister Meeting [Outputs B, C]
             Advisory note on Recruitment and on BoD Peshawar utility [Outputs D, E]
             Blue print and Detailed Design Report on Peshawar utility [Output F, G]
             FATA Drinking Water Policy [Output H]
             Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Drinking Water Policy, Draft [Output I]
             Non-Revenue Water Information Kit [Output J]
             Program of 2nd Pakistan Urban Forum [Output K]
             WSSP Reform Communication Strategy [Output L]
             Policy Brief on Urban Water and Sanitation Services in Pakistan [Output M]
             Strategic input on Urban Water and Sanitation in Pakistan vision 2025 [Output N]




                                                                         4
Abbreviations and Acronyms

Abbreviations

ADB             Asian Development Bank

BoD             Board of Directors

CB              Cantonment Board

ESW             Economic Sector Work

FATA            Federally Administered Tribal Areas

GIS             Geographic Information System

GoKP            Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

IT              Information Technology

km              kilometer

KP              Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

LGE&RDD         Local Government, Elections and Rural Development Department

LGO             Local Government Ordinance

MGD             million gallon per day

MoD             Ministry of Defense

MSP             Municipal Services Project

NRW             Non Revenue Water

PBC             Performance Based Contract

P-CDG           Peshawar City District Government

PCNA            Post Crisis Need Assessment

PDA             Peshawar Development Authority

PHED            Public Heath Engineering Department

PUF             Pakistan Urban Forum




                                                    5
SAMA                 Services and Asset Management Agreement

SECP                 Securities and Exchange Commission, Pakistan

TA                   Technical Assistance

TAP                  Technical Advisory Program

TMA                  Town Municipal Administration

TOR                  Terms of Reference

UC                   Union Council

UPU                  Urban Policy Unit

USAID                United States Assistance for International Development

USPMSU               Urban Sector Planning Management Services Unit

WASA                 Water and Sanitation Agency

WSP                  Water and Sanitation Program

WSSP                 Water and Sanitation Services Peshawar


Executive Summary
      1. This synthesis report details the process, outputs and intermediate outcomes of the Water and
         Sanitation Program (WSP) - World Bank Technical Assistance (TA) to Strengthen Urban Policy &
         Institutions; and Streamline Sector Investment for Improved Service Delivery, Pakistan
         (P131971).2

      2. The TA was aimed at service delivery improvement in urban water and sanitation, especially to
         the urban poor, by: (i) supporting the government in establishing an efficient, autonomous and
         responsive utility in Peshawar; (ii) facilitating the provincial/regional governments in formulation
         of water sector policies; (iii) designing demand based “Pakistan Water Sector Technical Advisory
         Program” for clients; and (iv) strengthening and aligning the urban (water) reform agenda in
         three provincial urban units through national urban forums.

      3. Peshawar, located in the north-western part of Pakistan, is the largest city and capital of Khyber
         Pakhtunkhwa province. Due to its strategic location, about 160 kilometer (km) from federal
         capital Islamabad and 48 km from the historical Khyber Pass leading to Afghanistan, the city has


2
  This is a Technical Assistance (TA) activity for two years (that is, FY13 - FY15), and has started under the traditional WSP PT codes. This
concept note is part of a wider WSP process to migrate to TA code. This initiative is part of the WSP global business area #4 “Targeting the
Urban Poor and improving services in small towns” hence, WSP global expert ise and learning will contribute to the local knowledge and learning
and vice versa.

                                                                      6
    evolved as a commercial, industrial, social, political and cultural hub of the north-western region
    of Pakistan.

4. The water and sanitation function in the city was managed by seven institutions four Town
   Municipal Administrations (TMAs) I, II, III and IV, Peshawar Development Authority (PDA), Public
   Health Engineering Department (PHED) and Cantonment Board (CB). All four TMAs were
   provincially aligned to the Local Government, Elections and Rural Development Department
   (LGE&RDD) but created as body corporate to independently plan, manage and deliver municipal
   services. LGE&RDD was responsible for provision of human and financial resource (capital and
   operational) for municipal services to TMAs. PDA was also aligned to LGE&RDD and had other
   functions (city planning, development, urban roads, building control, and so on) and municipal
   services in a small part of the city. While PHED was the provincial department for provision of
   water in rural pockets of the city, CB was responsible for municipal service delivery in the Army
   garrison. CB is aligned to the Federal government and is administratively controlled by the
   Federal Ministry of Defense (MoD).

5. Groundwater is the main source of water and it is supplied through a piped network to
   customers. The city had four waste water treatment plants but none was functional and
   wastewater was directly discharged into river bodies. Less than 40 percent of the total 600
   tons/day waste is collected while the rest makes its way into drains. The final disposal is crude
   dumping into open lands in the vicinity of the city.

6. Specifically, this TA contributed in achieving the following:

        a) Assisted the Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (GoKP) in establishing Pakistan’s first
           autonomous, corporate governed and professionally managed urban water and
           sanitation utility in Peshawar. This was successfully achieved by addressing the
           institutional and governance structure of water and sanitation service delivery in
           Peshawar. The TA facilitated the functional amalgamation of seven fragmented
           municipal institutions in Peshawar – the provincial capital with a population of 2 million
           inhabitants – to carve out a citywide utility. The utility “Water and Sanitation Services
           Peshawar (WSSP)” is operational and delivering water and sanitation (sewerage,
           drainage and solid waste) functional services in the urban pockets of the city. The TA not
           only influenced the ongoing United States Assistance for International Development
           (USAID)-funded US$67 million Municipal Services Project (MSP) in Peshawar but
           delivered it in active partnership with USAID. GoKP committed a seed fund of Rs. 1,173
           million (US$1.17 million) for the establishment and operational cost of WSSP to sustain
           this institutional reform.

        b) Formulated the Federally Administrative Tribal Area (FATA) drinking water policy. The
           policy, which is the first of this type in FATA, provides a framework for addressing the
           institutional, administrative, legal, fiscal, technical, social and environmental issues and
           challenges of drinking water faced by FATA. The policy was developed in consultation
           with FATA secretariat staff, donors working in FATA, civil society and academia. The
           policy was approved by the Governor, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Similarly, the Drinking
           Water Policy of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province was also initiated under the TA and the
           draft is ready for submission to the provincial cabinet. The policy, once approved, will
           be a guiding framework for the sector to ensure improved water services to citizens of

                                                 7
                   Khyber Pakhtunkhwa by prioritizing drinking water, addressing functional clarity among
                   the roles of various stakeholders, and committing resources especially for unserved
                   segments of the society.

               c) Designed “Pakistan Water Sector Technical Advisory Program (TAP)” for the water and
                  sanitation sector in Pakistan. TAP is a demand-based TA available to service providers
                  and provincial governments to develop and implement innovative mechanisms for
                  improvements in water supply and sanitation sector performance, including through the
                  use of incentive-based financing instruments. TAP is a follow up of the National Water
                  and Sanitation Sector Study (2013) which was jointly delivered by WSP and operational
                  colleagues as Economic Sector Work (ESW).

               b) Supported the Urban Unit of Sindh and Punjab in organizing the second Pakistan Urban
                  Forum (PUF) in Karachi in January 2014. Over 7,000 participants attended the three-day
                  technical sessions and exhibition of the forum. Under the overall theme of "Managed
                  Urbanization," national and international speakers shared their research and practical
                  experience in urban sectors including urban water and service delivery. Under this TA,
                  seven urban water and sanitation sessions were organized in which more than 10
                  papers were presented and international speakers from South Africa, Uganda, Canada,
                  Spain, Korea, Malaysia, Bangladesh and India shared water and sanitation related
                  challenges and experiences.

Background and Introduction of TA

      1. A major bottleneck for improved water and sanitation service delivery in Pakistan was a weak
         articulation of the urban sector vision and an inefficient structure of service provision.3 The
         municipal water and sanitation sector in Pakistan is characterized by high access to
         infrastructure (91 percent access to improved water supplies and 72 percent access to latrines)
         but extremely low access to quality services (<30 percent safe consumption of water and no one
         is safe from the risks of unconfined excreta). This is rooted in a context where there is an overt
         focus on the creation of assets rather than the quality of services from those assets. In spite of
         the relatively high levels of access to improved infrastructure, the quality of access to services is
         poor and deplorably low. Like in many other developing countries, the thrust in Pakistan has
         been on “infrastructure” and not on “services.” The government and development partners
         have shied away from designing and implementing urban institutional reforms in large cities.
         “Reform is change of status quo, requires firm political commitment and could take long to
         deliver,” said a senior official and this could be the reason why urban institutional reform has
         been on the backburner of past governments.

      2. At the aggregate level, Pakistan is on target to achieve the water supply Millennium
         Development Goal (90 percent vs. expected 91 percent) but off target on sanitation (45 percent
         vs. expected 52 percent). However, the aggregate numbers mark an underlying trend that
         shows access in urban areas is declining slightly but is offset by improvements in rural areas.
         Urbanization, lack of long-term planning, weak municipal institutions, and absence of a sector
         regulator are some of the factors for the decline of services in urban areas.

3
    “Pakistan Water and Sanitation Sector Note”, 2013.

                                                         8
3. The government, being cognizant of the situation, had launched policy and institutional reform
   initiatives to address bottlenecks. In Pakistan, the provinces and regions/states are custodians of
   the sector (as per the 1973 Constitution of Pakistan) and are required to legislate on provincial
   sector policies and implement these through decentralized municipal institutions (local
   governments). In 2006, the Government of Punjab established a dedicated think tank to work in
   an advisory capacity on urban issues in Punjab. The “Urban Sector Planning Management
   Services Unit (USPMSU)” had a mandate to respond to legal, institutional, technical and
   management needs of line departments and cities just as a government consulting firm does. In
   2008, the Government of Sindh replicated the Punjab model and established a “Directorate of
   Urban Policy and Strategic Planning”. In 2009, the then Ministry of Environment approved the
   “National Drinking Water Policy Framework”.

4. The focus of the TA has been to support government clients in their articulation of a sector
   vision through the formulation of provincial water sector policies and improving the institutional
   and governance framework in urban areas of KP province. Encapsulated in the policy and reform
   debate were the issues of the structure of urban service delivery institutions, legal provisions
   and statutes for reforms, inter- and intra-institutional alignment at provincial and city levels, and
   institutional and governance framework of urban service delivery institutions which were all
   addressed under this TA. The major part of this TA was focused on urban institutional reforms in
   Peshawar which was pioneering work in Pakistan in the sector.

5. Peshawar, capital of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province, was the only city district among the
   eight city district governments in the country that did not had a citywide water and sanitation
   utility. Peshawar had seven municipal institutions working in isolation from each other with
   duplicate functions, diffused accountability and poor integrated planning that led to deplorable
   services. The fundamental issue underlying the poor state of services was the institutional
   arrangements. The number of agencies responsible for water services and erratic state of
   decision making, coupled with unclear lines of responsibility and accountability, inhibited the
   state of water and sanitation in the city. The 816 tubewells were pumping 90 million gallons per
   day (MGD) water into the distribution network while the estimated wastewater flow was
   around 52 MGD. The city had four wastewater treatment plants (stabilization ponds) but none
   was operational; wastewater was dumped directly into natural water bodies. In addition, the
   state of institutional capacity had also deteriorated and this resulted in poor sectoral planning,
   coordination and participatory schemes. In this situation, the best possible solution was to
   establish a single citywide water and sanitation utility for Peshawar similar to those in other
   large cities of the country.

6. In addition, Peshawar sits on the border with Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and
   Afghanistan and is on the frontline of war against terror. It has been hosting over 40 percent of
   3.5 million Afghan refugees since 1979, and over 300,000 internally displaced persons. As a
   result, the city has been paralyzed at various times due to massive security attacks. In the period
   between 2010 and 2014, Peshawar was hit by 370 attacks in which 2,521 people lost their lives
   and scores were injured – some seriously and with life-long disabilities. This security situation
   too has taken a toll on the provision of efficient water and sanitation services.

7. In 2010, the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) exposed select politicians and senior policy
   makers of Punjab and KP province through a study tour on “Urban Governance and Service

                                                 9
           Delivery Structures of Johannesburg, Durban and Pretoria” in South Africa. On return the
           Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (GoKP) requested WSP for a Technical Assistance (TA) to
           carry out institutional reform in Peshawar to improve services by incorporating the South
           African experience and learning. GoPK constituted the “Peshawar Utility Reform Committee”
           which had senior administrators as members and WSP staff as the only non-government
           member to work on reform.

      8. At the request of FATA and GoKP, this TA also supported the policy formulation process in the
         region and province, respectively. Two high powered committees were formed both by FATA
         secretariat and GoKP with members from the relevant departments, development partners and
         civil society. The FATA Drinking Water Policy was approved by the Governor of the KP province
         while the final draft of the KP Drinking Water Policy is ready for submission to the cabinet for
         approval. The objective of both policies is to provide a framework for the sector which
         prioritizes drinking water over other uses of water, guides sector investment especially the
         public funds, clarifies the role of stakeholders, advocates for coordination and harmonization,
         and commits higher allocation for the sector.

      9. The World Bank Group has had no dedicated drinking water lending operation in Pakistan since
         1996.4 Under this TA, WSP and the operations team of the World Bank Group jointly delivered
         the “Pakistan Water and Sanitation Sector Note” in 2013. The sector note is comprehensive as it
         covered four provinces, three regions/states and both urban and rural water and sanitation
         sector. The sector note had in-depth analysis of institutional, governance, technical, fiscal, policy
         reforms and regulatory aspects of the sector across Pakistan. The three volumes of the sector
         note - developed in consultation with federal, provincial/regional line departments - also has
         recommendations for the provinces and regions to improve the sector outlook on the basis of
         in-depth diagnosis. In order to continue the engagement – with the ultimate objective of
         designing an operation - WSP and the operation team joined hands to develop the “Pakistan
         Water Sector Technical Advisory Program – Technical Advisory Program (TAP)’ under this TA.
         The specific objective of TAP is: i) to assist provincial governments in Pakistan to develop
         innovative mechanisms to support improvements in water supply and sanitation sector
         performance, including through the use of incentive-based financing instruments; and ii) to
         build support for reform and investment in the sector.

      10. Under e TA, GoKP also established the “Urban Policy Unit (UPU)” in the province in 2011. The
          role of UPU is to act as technical support to cities and urban sector line departments in areas of
          policy planning, research and coordination. The idea of this unit was conceived by the
          committee which was working on the Peshawar urban utility. Under this TA, GoKP was exposed
          to both Punjab and Sindh urban units and, on the basis of this learning, the governance
          structure, mandate, scope of work, and human resources aspects were designed. This TA also
          supported networking of the three urban units especially on strategic urban water and
          sanitation issues, lessons and approaches. In January 2014, the urban units of Punjab and Sindh
          were supported to organize the second Pakistan Urban Forum (PUF) in Karachi. It had seven
          dedicated sessions on urban water and sanitation from governance to performance contracts
          and from benchmarking to services to urban poor. The final declaration of the forum duly
          covered the importance of urban water and sanitation sector.


4
    “Pakistan Water and Sanitation Sector Note”, 2013.

                                                         10
    11. The delivery of this reform TA was not without challenges. It was hampered by the security
        situation in the province, in general, and in Peshawar, in particular, and the May 2013 general
        election that resulted in a new government in the province. Many a time, committee meetings
        were adjourned in the middle due to an attack in Peshawar/KP as most committee members
        had to change their role from “reform” leader to emergency and “relief” provider/supervisor.
        Two senior members of the Peshawar utility reform committee – Commissioner Peshawar
        division and Senior Minister for local Government – also lost their lives in violent attacks and
        their sudden death hampered the pace of work. The May 2013 general elections resulted in a
        new coalition government in the province and it took quite a few months to bring the new
        political leadership on board on the urban utility reform.


Overview of Technical Assistance
    12. This TA has sought to improve urban water and sanitation service delivery by: (i) supporting the
        government in establishing efficient, autonomous and responsive utility in Peshawar; (ii)
        facilitating the provincial/regional governments in formulation of water sector policies; (iii)
        designing a demand-based “Pakistan Water Sector Technical Advisory Program” for clients; and
        (iv) strengthening and aligning the urban (water) reform agenda in three provincial urban units
        through the national urban forum.

Table 1: Results Framework

  Intermediate                  Indicator(s) *                       Project Outputs (Annexures)
  Outcome(s) *
                  - Provincial/regional   water     policy   APPROVED FATA DRINKING WATER POLICY
                    formulated;                              DRAFT KP DRINKING WATER POLICY
                  - Government process of service            ADVISORY NOTE(S) ON URBAN UTILITY REFORM IN
                    delivery informed to focus on reform,    PESHAWAR
                    performance, professionalism and
                    equity;
                  - Public at large better informed as a
Policy/strategy                                              REFORM COMMUNICATION STRATEGY
                    result of improved institutions and
informed
                    focus on civic engagements;
                  - Key     stakeholders/    development
                                                             BLUE PRINT AND DETAILED DESIGN REPORT, USAID
                    community/partners involved to
                    create synergies;
                  - Bank sector / country strategy
                    informed to advocate for improved
                    service delivery.
                     -   An autonomous and effective         ADVISORY NOTES ON INSTITUTIONAL
                         water utility established in        OPTIONS, GOVERNANCE OPTIONS,
                         Peshawar                            RECRUITMENT, BRIEFING PAPERS FOR
Client capacity                                              PROVINCIAL CHIEF EXECUTIVE, MINUTES OF
                     -   Capacity enhanced of the utility
increased                                                    MEETINGS AND POWER POINT
                         management to improve access
                         from present 77,000 legal           PRESENTATIONS, SECP INCORPORATION
                         connections     to     120,000      CERTIFICATE, ANALYTICAL REPORTS


                                                  11
                        connections;
                    -   Implementation            capacity
                        strengthened of the respective
                        service delivery institutions to
                        deliver sustained & improved
                        services;
                    -   Monitoring & evaluation capacity
                        increased of the respective
                        provincial authorities to monitor
                        results.
                    -   Facilitated exchange programs to CONCEPT NOTES AND NATIONAL AND
                        best practice with clients and INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE VISITS REPORTS,
Knowledge
                        clients/partners;
deepened
                    -   Creation of knowledge products NON-REVENUE WATER (NRW )TOOLKIT
                        and dissemination.
Innovative          -   New     innovative    approaches 2ND PUF PROGRAM
approaches   &          developed such as provincial URBAN UNIT BRIEF FOR CHIEF MINISTER
solutions               urban think tanks aligning urban
generated               water sector.


Process

   13. The process for delivering the TA was based on consultations, analytical and research work,
       establishing partnerships, ensuring ownership up to the level of chief executive of the province,
       leveraging finances, incorporating global lessons, and capitalizing on the existing opportunities.

   14. Technical support was extended to provinces and utilities and they were assisted in making
       informed decisions on urban institutional reforms; formulating robust policies; introducing new
       concepts of addressing prioritized sector issues; and bringing local and global knowledge. The
       nature of interventions delivered were informed through national and global exposure visits,
       learning events, advisory notes, and sector assessments, knowledge products and interactive
       PowerPoint presentations. Two interventions under this TA (TAP and second PUF) were fully
       designed and delivered jointly with the World Bank’s operations team. The areas of support
       under this TA were in alignment with the government’s overall agenda for the sector in terms of
       institutional reforms and improved governance.


Intermediate Outcomes
   15. Supporting the government in establishing an efficient, autonomous and responsive utility in
       Peshawar

       Water and Sanitation Services Peshawar (WSSP) was designed and established under this TA in
       Peshawar as a robust institution as all possible bottlenecks (lack of autonomy, political
       interference, inefficient structure, weak performance incentivize and nonprofessional
       management) were addressed in the management and governance structure of WSSP. The

                                                  12
rationale was to deliver improved services to customers, especially the urban poor, at an
affordable cost through institutional reforms as the existing municipal institutions had failed to
meet their objective.

This TA led to the “functional amalgamation” of the fragmented municipal institutions into a
citywide autonomous, corporate governed and professionally managed utility. WSSP was
incorporated with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) in 2013 and
started functioning in 2014. GoKP allocated Rs. 1,173 million (US$1.17 million) as the seed fund
for the company, the Board of Directors (BoD) was formally notified with the terms of
references constituted, senior managers were hired and about 4,700 relevant staff were
transferred from the existing municipal institutions to WSSP. A Services and Asset Management
Agreement (SAMA) was signed between Peshawar City administration and WSSP which
operationalized the company.

In 2010, on the request of GoKP – after the South Africa exposure visit – a concept paper was
developed to undertake an assessment of the water and sanitation sector in Peshawar and
propose reforms particularly focusing on institutional, governance and service delivery aspects.
GoKP constituted a high-powered committee with the Chief Minister as patron and
Commissioner Peshawar division as its chair. The committee comprised senior government
officials from relevant line departments and WSP was the only nongovernment member of the
committee. The committees – with support from WSP under this TA – conducted numerous
meetings and two large-scale stakeholder workshops (one with government officials of seven
institutions and the other with civil society, academia and politicians) and compiled an
assessment report with options for the final decision of the Chief Minister.

The committee presented its recommendations to the Chief Minister and Cabinet Ministers. The
Chief Minister approved the option of “Autonomous yet accountable public limited water and
sanitation utility for urban areas of Peshawar established on corporate patterns, governed by
an oversight body and run by professional managers”. The option was based on the premise of
“one city – one utility” to address institutional fragmentation, cross jurisdictional issues of water
and sanitation, and economies of scale. The clear oversight mechanism of WSSP (to BoD) and
professional management on a market-based salary would ensure the culture of efficiency and
services which is the hallmark of the corporate sector. On the directive of the Chief Minister, the
committee prepared the Terms of Reference (TORs) for the development of a “detailed design
of WSSP.” Nine professionals were engaged to work on the legal, institutional and governance,
technical, financial, reform communication, human resource (HR) and Geographic Information
System (GIS)/Information Technology (IT) aspects of WSSP. The final output was a “blueprint”
and “detailed design study – three volumes” in which every sector specialist contributed in
his/her area under the above recommendation.

The TA also influenced the design of the ongoing US$67 million water and sanitation project in
Peshawar – Municipal Services Project funded by United States Assistance for International
Development (USAID). A USAID representative was made part of the Peshawar utility reform
committee and the detailed design study was also financed by the USAID project.
While designing the reforms, the members of the Peshawar utility reform committee were
exposed to existing urban services delivery models in Punjab and Sindh provinces of Pakistan,
South Africa and Kenya in order to design the reforms based on practical, workable models.
Several interactive sessions were also arranged between committee members and senior

                                            13
   experts in the World Bank Group and Asian Development Bank (ADB) who shared their regional
   and global knowledge on utility reforms.

   Working with politicians and senior officials on the “reform agenda” proved to be a challenge
   given the large-scale peace and security issues in the city. The Chief Minister and his cabinet
   who provided the go ahead for the major institutional reforms lost in the May 2013 general
   elections and the new government was engaged from scratch on the reform agenda. A series of
   presentations was made to the new officials and politicians including the Chief Minister on the
   status of the sector, actions and decision of the previous government and progress on reforms.
   The new government, which was elected on the popular slogan of “change and reforms,” not
   only showed positive signs of commitment but also contributed substantially in the
   incorporation of WSSP (by introducing changes in the Memorandum and Article of Association
   of WSSP), the structure of BoD and criterion of hiring of senior management of WSSP.

   GoKP is impressed with initial performance of WSSP and has allocated funds to design
   companies in the remaining six large urban cities of the province.

16. Facilitating the provincial/regional governments in formulation of water sector policies

   The TA supported FATA and KP governments in their policy formulation processes. FATA, under
   the recently approved 18th Constitutional Amendment is now legally empowered to legislate in
   some areas including social sectors. Prior to the 18th amendment, FATA had no social sector
   policy and was managed under the federal policies. The water sector was in disarray due to a
   lack of institutional and functional clarity, lack of priorities in the sector and absence of a long-
   term strategic vision. The FATA policy, approved by the Governor, comprehensively covered the
   sector status, identified sector bottlenecks, prioritized drinking water over other competing uses
   of water, set the long-term vision, defined the investment needed to improve services, and has
   addressed institutional and functional clarity of stakeholders. The policy principles translated
   into actions on the ground will surely help in improving services.

   The final draft of KP Drinking Water Policy was also prepared under this TA. The policy captures
   the state of services in the sector, has set the goals and objectives as a vision for GoKP,
   identified issues and challenges, and has set priorities and policy principles. The policy strongly
   advocates a stronger role for community and institutional reforms as an important pillar that
   will drive the sector in the future.

   Both GoKP and FATA secretariats created separate working groups comprising key officials and
   sector partners, to deliberate on the policy. UNICEF and WSP led the process of policy
   deliberations through stakeholder consultations and research.

17. Designing demand-based Pakistan Water Sector “Technical Advisory Program TAP ”

   This TA supported the delivery of a “Pakistan Water and Sanitation Sector Note” as Economic
   Sector Work (ESW) in 2013. On the request of provincial governments and to sustain the dialog
   with clients, a TAP was also conceived under this TA. The TAP was jointly designed by WSP and
   operations unit colleagues of the World Bank Group/Water Global Practice. This demand-based
   initiative had two major objectives: (i) to assist provincial government(s) and service providers
   to develop innovative mechanisms to support improvements in sector performance, including

                                               14
   through the use of incentive-based financing instruments; and (ii) to build support for reforms
   and investments in the sector. These objectives were targeted through the development of well-
   designed financial instruments and creation of specific knowledge and advocacy products that
   would create a pipeline of financially viable projects. The TAP was included to complement local
   insight and core set of knowledge which WSP has created over the last few years in Pakistan
   with comparative worldwide knowledge from the World Bank’s operations group. In particular,
   the TAP will move “upstream” to create evidence-based advocacy that will build political
   support for reforms and investment in the sector and will move “downstream” to convert the
   sector knowledge into financeable opportunities. The funding for implementation of financial
   options could come from government or donors. The interventions under TAP – open to all four
   provinces - were identified and prioritized in consultations with clients.

   In consultations with stakeholders, a long list of priorities – among the recommendations of the
   sector note – was developed and Non Revenue Water (NRW) was identified as the priority area
   needing support in the Punjab utilities. An initial designing phase of a “performance based
   contracts (PBC) for reduction of NRW” was delivered under this TA. The initial findings of design
   revealed that the five Water and Sanitation Agencies (WASAs) of Punjab province are losing Rs.
   2.5 billion per year (US$25 million/year) on account of NRW. This information confirmed that
   the NRW reduction program had a solid business case in Punjab as it will assist in achieving
   better services and greater financial sustainability. In detailed discussions with senior
   government officials, the broad features of an implementation strategy with roles and
   responsibilities and the selection of a WASA as a pilot area was finalized. The next step, a
   technical study and design of “PBC for the Reduction of NRW” is being delivered under a
   separate TA (P131985).

18. Strengthening and aligning the urban (water) reform agenda in three provincial urban units
    through national urban forums

   In Pakistan, rapid urbanization and resultant needs for municipal services are putting
   unprecedented demand on existing service delivery mechanisms, especially in medium and large
   urban towns. The pace of urban growth exerts tremendous pressure on utilities that have a
   mandate to deliver service but are often constrained with institutional capacities and financial
   resources.

   This TA supported the provincial governments of Punjab, Sindh and KP to jointly deliberate on
   urban water sector issues, challenges and opportunities. The three urban units were the key
   beneficiaries to learn from each other and global experiences during the second (PUF) which
   was supported under this TA. The “Karachi Deceleration” of the second PUF captures the needs
   of the urban water sector as recommendations for provincial governments. The declaration
   covered the water and sanitation sector under urban governance and services and urged
   stakeholders to “carry out institutional reforms in urban water & sanitation sector ranging from
   corporatization to performance grants, and from improving accountability to professional
   management.”

   The TA also supported GoKP in establishing the KP “Urban Policy Unit (UPU)” which was added
   as an additional item in the TORs of the utility reform committee. The UPU became an active
   member of the committee and assumed the role of secretariat to coordinate and follow up the
   decisions. It used its staff to collect data from various relevant departments and committee

                                              15
           members analyzed the data. The UPU also provided support to USAID consultants (coordination
           between consultants and departments, data collection and follow up). UPU developed its
           business program to focus on other urban areas apart from water.

Outputs
      (i) Supporting the government in establishing an efficient, autonomous and
          responsive utility in Peshawar

      19. The urban reform in KP aimed to introduce a paradigm shift in the institutional and governance
          structure of sector institutions. The TA identified the underlying reasons for poor performance
          of existing institutions and proposed recommendations with a range of options. This facilitated
          the policy makers who made an informed decision after taking into account the political,
          administrative, financial and services aspects related to this big bang reform. The objective of
          the reform, as prescribed in the TOR of the committee, was to improve the service delivery in
          urban Peshawar and the committee was tasked to prescribe the model based on analytical
          work, research, national and global practices and local opportunities and constraints.
          The TA outputs on these initiatives are:

            Committee report on the Peshawar utility [Output A]

            Power-point presentation and Minutes of Chief Minister Meeting [Outputs B, C]

            Advisory note on Recruitment and on BoD of the Peshawar utility [Outputs D, E]

            Blueprint and Detailed Design Report on the Peshawar utility [Output F, G]


      (a) Committee report on the urban water and sanitation utility for Peshawar
                                       ANNEXURE (OUTPUT ) A: COMMITTEE REPORT ON PESHAWAR UTILITY

           The committee notified by GoKP was initially given four TORs5 to deliberate and present its
           findings along with recommendations to the Chief Minister of the province. The TORs were:




5
    “Recommendations on urban framework” was added later as an ad ditional TOR.

                                                       16
TOR 1: Review of the current situation, Table 2: ---- WSS Institutions by their Administrative Departments and
                                                                    Jurisdiction Areas
analysis and gap identification and
                                            S.No.   Institution      Admin.         Provincial/    Jurisdiction
options for proposed utility. The                                 Department          Federal
research and analytical work revealed         1    TMA-I             LGE&RD          Provincial         City
that:
                                              2    TMA-II            LGE&RD          Provincial   City and Peri-
     Peshawar           City      District                                                        urban areas
        Government (P-CDG) was the            3    TMA-III           LGE&RD          Provincial     University
                                                                                                     town and
        only city in Pakistan that did not                                                        adjoining area
        have a citywide water and             4    TMA-IV            LGE&RD          Provincial     Peri-urban
        sanitation entity unlike CDGs of                                                              areas on
                                                                                                    Peshawar-
        Lahore, Faisalabad, Multan,                                                                 Kohat road
        Gujranwala and Rawalpindi (in         5    PDA               LGE&RD          Provincial     Hayatabad
        Punjab province), Karachi (in                                                                township
        Sindh province) and Quetta (in        6    PHED               PHED            Federal       Peri-urban
                                                                                                   areas of the
        Balochistan province);                                                                          city
     None of the entities was                7    CB                 MoD                          Cantonment
                                                                                                  Area (Saddar)
        delivering 24x7 services and
                                            TMA: Tehsil Municipal Administration, PDA: Peshawar Development
        recovering 100 percent cost of Authority, PHED: Public Health Engineering Department, LGE&RD: Local
        operation. Heavy subsidy was Government, Election and Rural Development, MoD: Ministry of Defence
        provided by the provincial government to sustain the operation;
     The level of services is two to four hours/day, revenue recovery was in the range of 25
        percent except Peshawar Development Authority (PDA) which had over 90 percent
        recovery and the complaint handling system is poor in all seven;
     Lack of coordination, nonexistence of integrated planning at the city level, duplicate
        mandate, cross boundary issues, and defused accountability were identified as the root
        causes of poor services in Peshawar; and
     Peshawar had 819 tubewells for a population of 1.7 million managed by seven
        institutions while Lahore had only 419 tubewells for 7 million population managed by
        one utility. It was evident that the thrust in Peshawar had been on “infrastructure
        creation” rather than “integration and service delivery.”

The committee analyzed the situation in detail and proposed recommendations with options. It
also deliberated in detail on the pros and cons of all options including political sensitivity and
implications.

TOR 2: Recommend the mandate of the new institution while clearly identifying the
geographical boundaries and its institutional, vertical and horizontal alignment with other
entities. The research, interactions and exposure of committee members with other utilities of
Pakistan and sessions with the World Bank Group and ADB sector experts helped in the
preparation of the following scenarios and recommendations:

        Apart from inadequate water and sewerage services, the major problem that impacts
         the city is poor solid waste management. Only 30-40 percent of the solid waste is
         disposed through crude dumping around the city while the rest makes its way into
         drains and other natural water bodies;



                                                 17
                 The committee studied the institutional mandate of service providers in large cities of
                  Punjab and Karachi and found that water and sewerage, drainage and solid waste
                  functions were performed by three separate institutions within the city. Solid waste was
                  the function of the Solid Waste Directorate and its sweepers were keeping the
                  streets/roads clean by dumping the waste into drains which were managed by another
                  entity – the Town Municipal Administration (TMA). The TMA staff was keeping the
                  drains functional by pushing the solid waste into the sewers (manhole) which were the
                  responsibility of the WASAs.

       Analyzing the lessons from other cities, keeping in the view the size of Peshawar and existing
       opportunities (USAID Municipal Services Project (MSP) project), the committee recommended
       that all functions of water (bulk and retail) and sanitation (sewerage, drainage, solid waste
       management and hygiene) be entrusted to the new Peshawar utility to meet the larger
       objective of integration. The new utility shall be the only public municipality to deliver water and
       sanitation to the urban population of the city. As a result of integration, the present service
       providers (except the Cantonment Board (CB)) will cease to perform in water and sanitation
       services in urban Peshawar and will transfer assets and staff to the new utility. The existing
       institutions, however, will continue with other services (maintenance of parks, slaughter houses,
       internal roads, traffic, sign boards) in urban areas and water and sanitations in rural pockets of
       Peshawar.
                            Table 3: Proposed Options on the Mandate of the New Utility
          Option-1                         Option-2                          Option-3                    Option-4

• Water                          • Water                            • Water                     • Water
  • Bulk Supply                    • Bulk &                           • Bukl                      • Bulk
    • Source Development           • Retail                           • Retail                    • Retail
    • Transmision                    • Distribution                 • Sanition                  • Sanitation
    • Selling to existing            • Customers' orienation          • Sewerage                  • Sewerage only
      enitities                      • Revenue collection             • Drainage
                                     • other relagted                 • Solid waste mangement
                                       funcations



       The committee analyzed population growth, trends in urbanization and availability of space to
       redefine the boundaries of urban Peshawar in terms of operational boundaries of WSSP. The
       committee proposed that the WSSP geographical jurisdiction should be as the actual built up
       area of the city, along with a margin of the peri-urban area to cater to urbanization over the
       next 20 years. Based on available data, trends and projected growth patterns, it was
       recommended that 33 (existing rural) Union Councils (UCs) (basic administrative tier in a district)
       be notified as urban to take the tally of urban UCs to 92.

       TOR 3: Propose statutory arrangements for the new institution and identify amendments
       needed in existing laws. After reviewing the existing statutes, rules of business and Local
       Government Ordinance (LGO), the committee proposed that existing statutes provide space for
       the creation of a citywide utility without amending any existing laws. The corporate company
       may be incorporated under the Companies’ Ordinance 1984 of SECP.

       TOR 4: Propose HR requirements including qualifications, skills, experience and performance
       evaluation mechanisms of staff. The committee compiled the HR data of 4,740 staff of existing
       institutions such as vacancies and designations, qualifications, skill sets, experience and length

                                                               18
       of services. It was revealed that there was more than enough junior skilled staff (operators,
       valve man, plumbers, sweepers, sanitary inspectors) but very few who had experience and
       qualification to work on the middle and senior management position in the proposed utility.


    (b) PowerPoint presentation to the Chief Minister and minutes of the meeting
                           ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) B: POWER POINT PRESENTATION TO CHIEF MINISTER
                           ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) C: MINUTES OF MEETING CHAIRED BY THE CHIEF MINISTER

       In a marathon meeting on April 26, 2011, the committee briefed the Chief Minister of the KP
       province, cabinet ministers of the provincial government, Chief Secretary and administrative
       secretaries about the findings, recommendations and options as per prescribed TORs of the
       committee. After deliberations on recommendations and options, the meeting concluded with
       the following decisions: an autonomous utility will be carved from amongst the present
       institutions; a detailed design study with inputs from national and international sector experts
       be completed on critical aspects of new utility; and the existing committee will continue to
       supervise the output of the experts and ensure quality control.


    Committee recommendation for the improvement of services in Peshawar:
                   a) Reform and capacitate (seven) existing institutions;
                      b) Carve out a new citywide utility in Peshawar:
 b-i) an authority like in other large cities of Pakistan
 b-ii) a private limited company under the Local Government Department
 b-iii) a public limited autonomous corporate company; and

 “Autonomous yet accountable water and sanitation utility for urban areas of
  Peshawar established on corporate patterns, governed by an oversight body and
  run by professional managers.”
                                       Chief Minister Khyber Pakhtunkhwa vision


    (c) Advisory notes on recruitment and BoD of the utility:
                                               ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) D: ADVISORY NOTE ON RECRUITMENT
                                                       ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) E: ADVISORY NOTE ON BOD

       Under this TA, several advisory notes and briefing papers on recruitment of the senior
       management of the company were prepared. These included: job descriptions of CEO, Manager
       HR, Manager HR and Administration, and Manager Finance; application form for CEO and other
       senior managers; marking criterion for the interview committee based on skills, qualification
       and experience; and design of advertisement for senior positions.

       It was proposed to hire the professional staff through an open recruitment policy, that is,
       advertising in the press rather than appointing them through executive orders and on market


                                                 19
   salary with clear TORs. One of the reasons for recommending the market-based salary was to
   attract experienced and qualified staff for senior positions which is a rare commodity in
   Peshawar in the wake of deteriorated security conditions, unrest and law and order situation.

   A successful effort was made by the TA to ensure that the BoD of the utility had more
   private/professional members than ex-officio members. Several options with compositions of
   public and private BoD members were discussed and, finally, a BoD was approved that had 11
   private/professional members and only four ex-officio members. Detailed TORs of the BoD were
   also drafted, debated and approved by the competent forum.


(d) Detailed design report of the water and sanitation utility
                                       ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) F: BLUE PRINT AND DETAILED DESIGN REPORT

   On the directive of the Chief Minister, detailed TORs were developed for hiring experts who
   developed the blue print and detailed design study of WSSP. The following experts were hired
   by USIAD whose output was supervised by the committee under this TA: institutional and
   governance; financial; technical; legal; HR; IT; and communication.

   The major findings, recommendations and detailed course of action by some key experts are
   covered below:

   The report suggested that it was urgently necessary that water and sanitation services in
   Peshawar undergo the process of “aggregation and corporatization”. It recommended that the
   Peshawar utility be designed as a decentralized, yet integrated, organization with key functions
   of planning, design, construction and policy matters at the Head Office, while operations would
   be decentralized to the zonal level (four zones). The services of water supply, solid waste
   management, and sewerage & drainage were to be maintained at the local level, remaining
   closer to the customers.

   The utility’s head office would be responsible for all recruitments, master planning, financial
   planning, design & construction of facilities, major procurements of machinery & equipment,
   promotions and inter-zonal transfers. Each zone would have clearly defined boundaries,
   preferably through well-known major arterial roads. Each zonal office would be fully responsible
   for the quality of services, complaint redressal, minor repairs, operation of machinery and
   vehicles, and revenue collection. Each zone would have at least one peripheral customer care
   center, in addition to the one at the zonal office.

   The HR for the proposed company has two streams. The 4,000 or so employees from the
   existing service providers would be transferred to the company on deputation, without any
   layoffs. They will be offered deputation allowance and adjusted on suitable positions based on
   experience. However, since there was hardly any managerial or professional staff available, it
   would be necessary for them to be hired from the market, on market based salaries.

   On the financial side, it was assessed that even the current services by TMAs, PDA and CB are
   being subsidized, to the extent of around Rs. 600 million/year (US$6 million/year). It was
   proposed that the company would continue to need this level of subsidy for at least three years,
   albeit on a declining scale. The company would be covering the balance through improved

                                              20
    revenue collection and reducing the gaps, that is, efficiency gains. All capital expenditure shall
    be subsidized directly by GoKP, both for the establishment of the company and the
    rehabilitation/expansion of the network.

    There shall be no increase in tariff for at least three years. However, gradually all illegal
    connections would be legalized and a fee for solid waste management shall be levied in tandem
    with the improvement in services.

    GoKP also notified WSSP as a parent counterpart of MSP to address the “institutional home”
    issue of MSP which was identified as a major concern in MSP project documents. GoKP also
    stated that WSSP will take over the new infrastructure (tubewells, distribution networks and
    rehabilitated wastewater treatment plants) and machinery under MSP for delivering quality
    services to the citizens of Peshawar.

    GoKP has recently approved a scheme to conduct a feasibility study of replicating WSSP such as
    the institutional arrangement in other large cities of the Province.

(ii) Facilitating the provincial/regional governments in formulation of water policies

                                                            ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) G: FATA WATER POLICY
                                                              ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) H: KP WATER POLICY

18) This policy is a joint output of UNICEF and WSP. The first draft of the FATA Drinking Water Policy
    was drafted under this TA while UNICEF, having an advantage of being present in FATA
    secretariat, provided all local support to take it to the final stage.

    FATA has been governed by an administrative set-up that is different from the rest of Pakistan.
    The normal laws of the land are not applicable in most parts of FATA and the writ of the
    government is enforced through the offices of the Political Agents and traditional community
    structures. Since long, the interest of decision makers has been limited to maintaining the status
    quo in FATA. Failure of the decision makers to evolve a sustainable framework of development,
    and a vision to harness the potential of various segments of society for the development of the
    region has further exacerbated the already marginalized and impoverished citizens of the
    region.

    FATA came into international limelight post 9/11 and after clearing many areas of FATA from
    insurgents in 2001-09, the Government of Pakistan and donors started supporting FATA in a
    peace building strategy through a framework of Post Crisis Need Assessment (PCNA) in 2011.
    The goal of PCNA is to produce a helpful, pragmatic, coherent and sequenced peace building
    strategy for the government of Pakistan (FATA and KP) that delivers an agreed vision within 10
    years. The FATA Drinking Water Policy directly supports the third pillar of the PCNA (ensure the
    delivery of basic services). The policy aims at improved water services based on equity,
    affordability and directly contributing to peace-building in the region.

    The policy was finalized through consultative sessions and inputs from government
    representatives of FATA line departments, local politicians and development partners. In 2014,
    the policy was presented to the Governor of KP province, who is also head of FATA
    administration, and he approved the 2014 FATA Drinking Water Policy with immediate effect.

                                                21
         The KP policy was also initiated under this TA. GoKP constituted a technical committee
         comprising representative of line departments, development partners (WSP and UNICEF),
         academia and civil society.

         The policy is in line with the national drinking water framework, 2011, PCNA and KP
         development strategy. The committee sought inputs on various aspects of policy from
         stakeholders and finalized it in consultative sessions. The final draft of the policy is ready for
         submission to the cabinet for approval.


    (iii) Designing demand-based Pakistan Water Sector Technical Advisory Program – TAP

                                                                                ANNEXURE (OUTPUT ) I: NRW INFO KIT

    19) Under this TA, TAP’s first activity, “PBC for reduction of NRW in Punjab WASAs,” was conceived
        and partly designed. The activity was prioritized by stakeholders (four provincial governments
        and service providers) delivering services in urban and rural areas of Pakistan. The five WASAs of
        Punjab identified NRW as a priority area. A comprehensive concept of “PBC to reduce NRW in
        Punjab WASAs” with a component of exposure to regional best practices was developed under
        the TA. A toolkit capturing the principles and approaches, design details of successful
        implementation of NRW initiatives in East Asia and status of NRW in Punjab WASAs was
        developed under the TA with input from local and international experts. The toolkit was
        designed and distributed to participants of the NRW workshop in Lahore in November 2014.

                               Table 4: Punjab Water and Sanitation Agencies Data
Description                   Unit         Faisalabad       Gujranwala          Lahore           Multan         Rawalpindi
Population                    million      3.1              1.7                 6.2              1.8            1.3
Population Served             million      1.55             0.54                5.5              1.2            1.17
Population     Growth         %            3.58             3                   2.36             2.79           3
Rate
Water Supply
Annual Production       million            87.1             91.77               655              35.51          97.74
                        m3
Total Length of Water km                   1,487            372                 5,400            1,280          1,250
Mains
Metered Customers       %                  1                0                   56               0              0
Water Service Connections

Industrial                    No           80               65                  211              73             5              (bulk
                                                                                                                connections)
Commercial                    No           2,583            1,245               39,187           2,892          8,864
Residential                   No           114,260          24,781              586,891          58,371         104,302
Total                         No           116,923          26,091              626,289          61,336         113,717

6
 L-WASA switched to metered tariff for all connections (including nonmetered) in 2013 after approval of the Government of
Punjab.



                                                           22
Service
Area Coverage               %          65            35                89            65           90
Average Supply Time         Hrs/day    7             12                14-16         6            2-4
Average Pressure            M          6             Not provided      0-15          25           2
                                                                       (average=5)
Performance Indicator
NRW (best estimate)         %SIV       30.24         40                34            22         30
                            (Intermi   (30-06-       (10-11-2014)      (Nov-Dec      (Oct 2012) (10-11-2104
                            ttent)     2014)                           2012)
Efficiency
Average             Unit    Rs./m3     6.7           0.109             6.7           4.14         5.79
Production Cost
Billing Efficiency          %          -             25                -             31           100
Collection Efficiency       %          98            40                98            89           75
Staff Productivity          per        4             5                 4             6            8
                            1000
                            connecti
                            ons

        The data collected from the WASAs on NRW revealed that WASAs were losing Rs. 2.5
        billion/year on account of the electricity bill for pumping water which does not bring any
        revenue. The information collected from the five WASAs is reflected in Table 5.

        Table 5: Losses due to NRW in Five Provinces

Description    Unit              Faisalabad      Gujranwala   Lahore         Multan         Rawalpindi
Annual         Million m3        51              92           680            36             91
Production
NRW (best      %SIV              30           40              40             22             30
estimate)      (Intermittent)
NRW            Million m3        15           37              272            8              27
               Total NRW= 359 Mm3 / year
               Cost of electricity= 359*7Rs= Rs.2.5 billion/year (US$2.5 million /year)

        The next step under this initiative is to carry out a technical study and design bid documents for
        “PBC for reduction of NRW in Faisalabad WASA.” This activity will be financed under a separate
        TA (Capacity Building of Urban Utilities P13198).


    (iv) Strengthening and aligning the urban (water) reform agenda in three provincial
         units through the national urban forum
                                                    ANNEXURE (OUTPUT) J: PROGRAM OF 2ND PUF

    20) The TA supported the three provincial urban units (Punjab, Sindh and KP) to establish a network
        to discuss and deliberate on urban water and sanitation issues. The TA supported the second
        PUF in January 2014 in Karachi which has dedicated plenary and technical sessions on urban
        water service delivery, institutional management and services to urban poor. On second day,


                                                    23
   the ‘Pakistan Water and Sanitation Sector Note” was launched in a plenary session. The network
   of three urban units is already deliberating on planning of the third PUF to be held in Peshawar
   in 2016.

   The KP UPU, which was conceived by the committee during its deliberation on the design of
   WSSP, was also supported under this TA. The KP Urban Unit has been lending TA to WSSP since
   its establishment in areas such as asset inventory, HR capacity and GIS.

Other demand-based strategic outputs

20. As a part of WSP’s flexibility to respond to the demands of the sector (within the overall
    mandate and Business Plan), this TA delivered strategic outputs on the demand of clients and
    partners including the operation unit of the World Bank Group. Some of the strategic outputs
    are described below:
        – National Conference on Urban Water and Sanitation: Status Paper on Urban Water and
            Sanitation Services in Pakistan was developed and presented in the national conference
            on Urban Water in Sanitation. The conference was jointly organized by ADB and
            Planning Commission [Output M].
        – Vision 2025: Inputs on “Urban Water and Sanitation Chapter” of Pakistan vision 2025
            were provided to the Planning Commission division, Government of Pakistan [Output
            N].

   Both the outputs were delivered jointly with operation colleagues of the World Bank Group.




                                             24
