Report No: ACS13273


Republic of India
Piloting and operationalization of city
sanitation plans towards outcome oriented
sector investments
P131967


  th
28 April 2015




GWASS


SOUTH ASIA
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                                           Table of Contents
Executive Summary......................................................................................................................... 1
1      Background .............................................................................................................................. 6
2      Overview of Technical Assistance............................................................................................ 7
     2.1     Results Framework ........................................................................................................... 7
     2.2     TA Delivery Process .......................................................................................................... 8
3      Overview of Outputs ............................................................................................................... 9
     3.1     State sanitation strategies ............................................................................................... 9
       3.1.1        Integrated Urban Sanitation Program (Madhya Pradesh) .................................................... 9
       3.1.2        State Septage Management Strategy for Urban Centres in Tripura ................................... 11
     3.2     Capacity building through knowledge exchange ........................................................... 13
     3.3     Developing a multiyear investment program ................................................................ 14
     3.4     Coordination with development partners ..................................................................... 31
3.     Summary and learning ......................................................................................................... 33
                                                             List of Exhibits
Exhibit 1 Access to sanitation in urban areas in MP: Census 2011 ............................................................. 15
Exhibit 2 Targeted outcomes under MPSV 2025 ........................................................................................ 16
Exhibit 3 MP Sanitation Vision 2025: Investment outlay, phasing and financing mix ................................ 18
Exhibit 4 Impact of Differentiated user charges ......................................................................................... 21
                                                               List of Tables
Table 1: Results framework for the Technical Assistance ............................................................................ 7
                                                             List of Annexes
Annex 1: Integrated Urban Sanitation Program of Government of Madhya Pradesh
Annex 2: State Septage Management Strategy for Urban Centres in Tripura
Annex 3: Septage management study tour report
Annex 4: Madhya Pradesh State Sanitation Vision 2025
Annex 5: Institutional Strengthening of urban local bodies in Madhya Pradesh
Annex 6: Partnering for progress – Madhya Pradesh Sanitation Vision 2025
                                 List of Abbreviations
CPCB      Central Pollution Control Board
CSP       City Sanitation Plan
DPR       Detailed Project Reports
GoMP      Government of Madhya Pradesh
IEC       Information Education and Communication
IUSP      Integrated Urban Sanitation Program
JNNURM    Jawaharlal Nehru National urban Renewal Mission
MLD       Million Litres per Day
MoUD      Ministry of Urban Development
MPSV      Madhya Pradesh State Sanitation Vision
NRCP      National River Conservation Program
O&M       Operation and Maintenance
PMU       Project Management Unit
PPP       Public Private Partnership
SLB       Service Level benchmarking
SSC       State Sanitation Committee
STP       Sewage Treatment Plant
TA        Technical Assistance
UADD      Urban Administration and Development Department
UISDDMT   Urban Infrastructure Development for Small and Medium Towns
ULB       Urban Local Body
WSP       Water and Sanitation Program




4
Executive Summary
This synthesis report details the process, outputs and intermediate outcomes of the World Bank’s Water
and Sanitation Program (WSP) Technical Assistance (TA) to pilot and operationalize city sanitation plans
(CSPs) towards outcome oriented sector investments (P131967).
Traditional approaches to sanitation investments have involved piece-meal asset creation which focused
on partial infrastructure provisioning, often with very little focus on service delivery. As a result, several
urban projects in water supply and sanitation have often not rendered the envisaged service delivery
benefits. Centrally sponsored schemes have only supported network systems in sanitation and these
have been limited to a few cities. Further, the projects proposed and implemented under these schemes
have not been city wide and have only addressed a section of the city and network. As a result, only 200
out of the 7900 cities in the country have partial sewerage network and treatment (Ministry of Urban
Development, 2010).
It is in this context, that this TA sought to address issues of ad hoc planning though CSPs that are holistic,
intended for city-wide implementation and address the full cycle of sanitation. However, prior to
preparation and operationalization of CSPs, it was recognized that this needed to be anchored in a state-
wide sanitation program. The statewide sanitation program needed to:
       estimate and provide for the capital requirements to address the gaps in sanitation
        infrastructure across the sanitation service delivery chain (collection, treatment and disposal)
       estimate the operation and maintenance (O&M) requirements
       set out the framework for prioritization of cities, and attendant institutional frameworks
The TA primarily aimed at providing assistance to two low-income states towards improving the
institutional and regulatory framework to strengthen state and local government capacity for efficient
and sustainable service delivery. Progress on CSPs at the states was constrained by the lack of accessible
funding channels for ensuring access to sanitation facilities. Building on the Integrated Urban Sanitation
Program (the urban sanitation strategy of the Government of Madhya Pradesh), the Madhya Pradesh
State Sanitation Vision 2025 (MPSV), a state wide sanitation program addressing the full cycle of
sanitation, detailing capital, operation and maintenance estimates, prioritization and institutional
framework was developed with support of WSP. While the MPSV had set targets for the entire service
delivery chain (access, collection, treatment and disposal), on account of delays in the formulation of
new centrally sponsored schemes and with the expectation that there would be investment envelopes
provided for capital infrastructure investments in these, GoMP has allocated resources for construction
of individual / community toilets. Assistance was provided to the Government of Tripura (where an
approved State Sanitation Strategy was already in place) in development of the State Septage
Management Strategy for Urban Centres, which was approved and adopted by the State in 2014.
Since funds were only available for household sanitation, plans for improving the full cycle of sanitation
could not be addressed. It may be noted that the key personnel in Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the state

                                                                                                            1
are from administrative cadres at the state level, and hence, engaging at the state level had a direct
bearing on city-level capacities to plan and implement the Vision. Therefore, this TA was focused on the
development of state sanitation strategies in the two states and a state-wide sanitation program with
investment, targets, prioritization and institutional frameworks with the ultimate objective of
influencing CSPs and sanitation service delivery.
Objectives of the Technical Assistance
This TA aimed at piloting and operationalization of CSPs towards outcome oriented sector investments,
by supporting (i) select state and local governments with technical assistance to operationalize city
sanitation plans by targeting outcome oriented investments, and (ii) improving the institutional and
regulatory framework and strengthening state and local government capacity for efficient and
sustainable delivery of Govt. of India or World Bank or other development partner funded programs.
The TA was delivered through a mix of strategies, exposure study tours, analytical support and
discussions / consultations with various stakeholders relevant to the sanitation service in the states.
Elements of another TA which supported the implementation of the National Urban Sanitation Policy,
2008 (NUSP), especially septage management and cost recovery principles that provide the building
blocks for sustainable sanitation are being adopted and implemented through this TA in two states. The
outputs have been developed in close consultation and involvement of the various stakeholders.
Specifically, this TA contributed to the following:
(a) Support the development of state sanitation strategies in two states - The TA supported the
    development of state sanitation strategy for Madhya Pradesh and the septage management
    strategy for the state of Tripura. Both these states are low-income states, and the state strategies
    developed incorporated key elements focused on servicing the under-served population and urban
    poor. The strategies were developed to identify the regulatory, institutional, financing,
    implementation and monitoring frameworks for sanitation service delivery in the states. Having
    developed an integrated urban sanitation program, the Government of Madhya Pradesh prepared a
    state sanitation vision estimating the capital and O&M estimates and has committed INR 4,080
    million (US $ 66 million) for construction of individual, community and public toilets. A total of
    187,511 individual toilets and 607 community toilets have been sanctioned of which a total of
    50,000 individual toilets and 253 community toilets have been constructed.
    The state of Tripura has developed and adopted the State septage management strategy, which is a
    first in India. The Tripura septage strategy for urban centres details investment requirements and
    institutional frameworks for implementation. The Government of Tripura has identified clusters of
    towns that can be serviced through various regional septage treatment facilities. The strategy
    envisages a capital investment of about INR 230 million (~USD 3.7 million) for the setting up of four
    regional treatment facilities and select additional individual facilities (where clustering is not
    possible due to large distance) along with the procurement of equipment and transport for
    operationalizing septage management in the twenty statutory urban centres of Tripura. The cost of
    operations and maintenance is proposed to be charged under the strategy to the resident
    households who avail of the services. The state has also developed the detailed project report for a
    pilot demonstration facility which has been approved for funding by the Government of India. The
2
    pilot project encompasses all the aspects included in the state septage strategy and is seen as the
    learning ground for the state Urban Development Department (UDD) for identifying the key
    requirements of technology management, contracting procedures, partnership building (with
    private sector) required for septage management. The experience and knowledge gained from
    implementation of the Bishalgarh pilot project could provide valuable learnings to other states, and
    the Central Government.
(b) Strengthened the capacity of interested state governments for adoption of improved service delivery
    arrangements, through knowledge exchange – with high dependence of on-site sanitation (septic
    tanks) in urban India (38%), an exposure visit to Malaysia, a country recognized for having made
    considerable progress in on-site sanitation, was organized for participants from the national
    (Ministry of Urban Development, Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance) and State (Madhya
    Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala) governments. The visit provided an overview for the participants
    (including national, state and city level representatives) to understand the policy, technical, and
    institutional frameworks that have contributed to a successful septage management program. The
    exposure visit helped the national government to develop and release an advisory on septage
    management and the state governments of Madhya Pradesh and Tripura to consider and plan
    septage management as an option to improve sanitation.
(c) Estimating and developing an investment program to improve sanitation – A model was developed
    to estimate the investment requirements to address inadequacies in infrastructure across the
    sanitation service delivery chain in the State of Madhya Pradesh. Capital and O&M requirements
    were also estimated. A prioritization framework and timelines to achieve improvements in
    sanitation were also included as part of the investment estimates. These were discussed through
    consultations with GoMP, and this subsequently became a part of the MPSV. In addition, analysis
    was undertaken and recommendations made in regard to institutional strengthening of the ULBs,
    including re-defining business processes, staffing, competencies and training of personnel for the
    institutions in the delivery of sanitation services.
    While awaiting the formulation of new centrally sponsored schemes from GoI, the state has
    committed resources and commenced implementation of the state sanitation vision through the
    construction of individual and community toilets. The newly launched Swachh Bharat Mission,
    support from development partners (KfW and EU) and recommendations of the 14th Finance
    Commission that has allocated funds for septage management, provide a fillip to implementation of
    the state sanitation vision. The proposed centrally sponsored schemes (Smart Cities, New Urban
    Development Mission and National River Conservation Program) will further boost investments and
    help the state move forward towards realizing the sanitation vision. With a state sanitation vision,
    and a prioritization framework in place supported with investments from different agencies, the
    state can begin to test different approaches (network, non-network or mixed) to improve sanitation.
(d) Coordinating with development partners– the sanitation vision document for Madhya Pradesh was
    presented and discussed with the development partners including KfW, GiZ, ADB, World Bank, EU,
    DfID and IFC which have resulted in KfW and EU committing INR 3,620 million (USD 58 million) to
    support sanitation improvements in the state.

3
To summarize, this TA contributed to the following:

Intermediate Outcomes           Indicators                                   Results
                                                                    Achieved. Sanitation and
                                                                    septage          management
                                                                    strategies developed for the
Urban WSS policy agreed by Development of state sanitation states of Madhya Pradesh and
stakeholders and approved strategies in at least two lagging states Tripura. These strategies have
by state cabinets          by 2014.                                 been formally adopted by the
                                                                    respective                State
                                                                    Governments.

Government agency with a        The Urban Development Department             Partially Achieved. Capacity
clear mandate to lead and       (UDD) in states is vested with the           building for representatives
coordinate   the     policy     responsibility for policy and planning of    from 3 States (Madhya
development and planning of     sanitation services.                         Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala)
the urban WSS sector at the     WSP TA is building the capacity of UDD       and 3 National Ministries /
state level                     for effective policy and planning.           agencies (MoUD, Planning
                                Capacities of at least 5 state               Commission and Ministry of
                                governments (of which two will be in low     Finance).
                                income states) strengthened by 2014
                                through training, knowledge exchanges,
                                peer to peer learning etc.
A multi-year investment         A sanitation investment program that         Achieved.    A    multi-year
program for urban WSS based     addresses the full cycle of sanitation       investment program for urban
on a target-based needs         (access, collection, treatment and           sanitation developed and
assessment that is published    disposal) with clearly defined targets and   agreed by GoMP.
and agreed, including plans     consistent with the directives of the
for serving the urban poor,     national urban sanitation policy and the
developed at utility or local   state sanitation strategy, developed and
government level                operationalized in a state by 2014.
                                Development partner coordination will        Achieved.         Development
Formal programmatic urban
                                be undertaken for specific interventions     partners (KfW and EU) commit
water      and     sanitation
                                at the state level to support the            resources to GoMP to support
coordinating mechanism with
                                operationalization of the state strategy     the state sanitation vision.
the government that involves
                                and the city sanitation plan.
all development partners

The TA aimed at assistance to two states towards improving the institutional and regulatory framework
to strengthen state and local government capacity for efficient and sustainable service delivery. Lack of
accessible funding channels and an intervening election year constrained progress on CSPs. The Swachh
Bharat (Urban) Mission announcement on October 2nd 2014 (with guidelines being issued in December
2014) and new urban development schemes are expected to provide impetus to progress in this front.


4
A follow on TA could support the development of CSPs which will plan to address the full cycle of
sanitation and are city wide for network, non-network and mixed (network and non-network) and
piloted in a few cities. The learnings from these pilots could be used to scale sanitation improvements in
the state and elsewhere. Future TAs could build upon the current developments and harness the
capacities and prioritization that has been achieved in these states. In future, these states and cities
therein are likely to accelerate their progress in implementation of urban sanitation interventions,
assisted by improved sanitation and wastewater management through septage management, recycling
and reuse and implementation of national advisories in these realms. Implementation of sanitation
interventions in these states could also provide best practice models for CSP implementation, and
septage management systems for national advocacy.




5
1 Background
India’s urban population is witnessing rapid growth with United Nation’s (UN) projections of an urban
population of 590 million by 2030 implying the addition of 10 million urban dwellers per year. While
access to sanitation is high, the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater / septage (from on-site
sanitation solutions) is very poor and needs considerable improvement. Less than a third of the
wastewater generated in urban India, is properly treated and disposed and treatment does not exist for
the septage generated from on-site facilities in the country. This results in significant environment and
health impacts which disproportionately affect the urban poor.
Various reform initiatives have been launched by central, state and local governments to address the
service delivery shortfalls in urban water supply and sanitation. In 2005 an estimated 60 percent of the
USD 20 billion under the Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) was allocated to
investments in urban water supply and sanitation services spread across 63 urban centres. Under this
initiative, state and local governments were required to implement a set of reform conditions such as
the decentralization of service delivery, ring fencing of accounts, recovery of operating costs and
adoption of public private partnerships (PPPs) in service delivery to achieve universal access to services,
financial sustainability, transparency and accountability in service delivery and management.
Recognizing the need to improve urban sanitation, the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) in 2008
approved and adopted a National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP) with a vision to make “urban India
clean, healthy and liveable and ensure sustain public health and environmental outcomes for all their
citizens with special focus on hygienic and affordable sanitation facilities for the urban poor and
women.” The specific goals of the policy are (i) awareness creation and behaviour change, (ii) open
defecation free cities, (iii) integrated city wide planning. Since sanitation is a state subject, the policy
also required states to develop state sanitation strategies and cities to develop city sanitation plans.
Traditional approaches to sanitation investments have involved piece-meal asset creation which focused
on partial infrastructure provisioning, often with very little focus on service delivery. As a result, urban
sanitation projects have often not rendered the envisaged service delivery benefits. Centrally sponsored
schemes have only supported network systems in sanitation and these have been limited to a few cities.
The number of cities eligible to receive financial assistance under the centrally sponsored schemes
(JNNURM, Urban Infrastructure Development for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) and National
River Conservation Program (NRCP)) is 923, which is about 12 percent of the total number of urban
towns in the country. Further, the projects proposed and implemented under these schemes have often
been piece-meal, addressing only a section of the city. As a result, only 200 out of the 7900 cities have
partial sewerage coverage (Ministry of Urban Development, 2010). Further, according to the Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB, 2009), of the 38,254 million liters of wastewater generated each day
(MLD),in class 1 and class 2 cities accounting for about 70 percent of the urban population, treatment
capacities exist for only 11,787 MLD, or 30 percent of the requirement.
While JNNURM and other centrally sponsored schemes provided financial support to a few cities to
improve sanitation, these were directed to sewerage systems and / or sewage treatment plants. There
are no state wide programs to address improvements in urban sanitation. Consequently, there have


6
been little improvements in urban sanitation and the sector continues to suffer from lack of
understanding, planning and service improvements.
In this context, this TA is supporting State Governments to increase their ability to implement sector
reforms through:
       Development of State sanitation / septage strategies.
       Capacity building through knowledge exchange for improved service delivery arrangements, viz.
        study tour on septage management.
       Development of a multi-year investment program to improve urban sanitation.
       Coordinating with development partners for sanitation investments to support implementation
        of the state’s sanitation vision.

2 Overview of Technical Assistance
This technical assistance (TA) has sought to assist state governments by (i) supporting states to develop
sanitation strategies, (ii) capacity building through knowledge exchange for improved service delivery,
viz, study tours on septage management (ii) developing a state-wide multi-year investment program to
improve urban sanitation and institutional strengthening of urban local bodies, and (iii) coordinating
with development partners for sanitation investments.

2.1 Results Framework
Table 1 summarizes the intermediate outcomes, indicators, and achievements resulting from this TA.
                        Table 1: Results framework for the Technical Assistance



Intermediate Outcomes       Indicators                                       Results

                                                                 Sanitation and septage management
Urban WSS policy agreed                                          strategies developed for the states of
by stakeholders and Development of state sanitation strategies Madhya Pradesh and Tripura. These
approved   by      state in at least two lagging states by 2014. strategies have been formally adopted by
cabinets                                                         the respective State Governments.



Government agency with      The Urban Development Department (UDD)           Study tour to Malaysia for National
a clear mandate to lead     in the state is vested with the responsibility   (Ministry of Urban Development, Planning
and coordinate the policy   for policy and planning of sanitation            Commission and Ministry of Finance) and
development          and    services.                                        State (Madhya Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala)
planning of the urban
                            WSP TA is building the capacity of UDD for
WSS sector at the state
                            effective policy and planning. Capacities of
level
                            at least 5 state governments (of which two
                            will be in low income states) strengthened

7
                             by 2014 through training, knowledge
                             exchanges, peer to peer learning etc.




A multi-year investment      A sanitation investment program that A multi-year investment program for urban
program for urban WSS        addresses the full cycle of sanitation sanitation was developed for GoMP.
based on a target-based      (access, collection, treatment and disposal)
needs assessment that is     with clearly defined targets and consistent
published and agreed,        with the directives of the national urban
including    plans     for   sanitation policy and the state sanitation
serving the urban poor,      strategy, developed and operationalized in
developed at utility or      a state by 2014.
local government level

Formal      programmatic     Development partner coordination will be Development partners (KfW and EU)
urban      water     and     undertaken for specific interventions at the commit resources to GoMP to support the
sanitation coordinating      state level to support the operationalization state sanitation vision.
mechanism with the           of the state strategy and the city sanitation
government that involves     plan.
all development partners

2.2 TA Delivery Process
Technical support has been extended to Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) to inform and develop
the capacity of decision makers on models and strategies for improved and inclusive service delivery
arrangements. The nature of interventions included field assessments, study tours, investment
estimates and prioritization frameworks. The outputs have been developed in close consultation and
involvement of the various stakeholders.
Specifically, the assistance included the following:
Development of state sanitation strategies - which includes providing guidance and support to state
governments for development of state sanitation strategies as envisioned under the NUSP. This was
achieved through extensive interactions with the States and a mix of small, medium and large ULBs
therein to develop a framework encompassing the policy, legislative, institutional and financing aspects
for sanitation service delivery in the State. Relevant State Departments such as Urban Development,
Public Health and Engineering were involved in the consultations.
Participation of national (Ministry of Urban Development, Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance), state and city level representatives from Madhya Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala in the study tour
organized to Malaysia allowed these representatives to improve their understanding of on-site
sanitation systems. Interacting with local officials in Malaysia and observing the actual activities in


8
realistic settings not very different from India contributed to substantial enhancement in the capacity of
these officials to plan, design and implement similar schemes in their jurisdictions.
Strengthened capacity needs to be supported by a robust planning and implementation framework and
this TA supported the development of the same through extensive consultations with the GoMP,
including representatives from both State departments and a mix of representative Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) in the state. The Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) assisted in the development of a multi-
year sanitation investment program, prioritization and institutional framework to guide the
implementation and roll-out of the Madhya Pradesh State Sanitation Vision 2025 (MPSV) over the next
several years.
The final support under this TA was targeted at operationalizing the MPSV and assisting the GoMP in
securing support, including financial support, for the implementation and roll-out, in line with the
investment estimates prepared for MPSV. This required preparation of a brief on MPSV for development
partners, meetings and facilitating of discussions with various development partners.

3 Overview of Outputs
The intermediate outcomes were largely achieved through a range of different activities and outputs
targeted towards the State Government and ULBs, and are discussed briefly in the following section.
Various outputs have been developed during the course of this TA to support the objectives and
intermediate outcomes discussed earlier. These are discussed in brief in the following sections, and the
complete outputs are available in the Annex to this Synthesis Report.

3.1     State sanitation strategies
Sanitation is a state subject in India and NUSP requires states to develop state sanitation strategies.
State Sanitation Strategies provided the vision, goal and the framework for improving urban sanitation
in the state. The strategy also provided the policy and legal framework for cities to plan and improve
sanitation. The TA supported the development of State Sanitation Strategy in the states of Madhya
Pradesh and septage management strategy for the state of Tripura.
Support was provided to the states of Madhya Pradesh and Tripura to develop sanitation and septage
strategies, respectively. The sanitation and septage strategy of Madhya Pradesh (Integrated Urban
Sanitation Program (ISUP)) and Tripura are appended as Annex 1 and 2 to this report. Assistance
provided to these two strategies is envisioned to be transformational and result in improving the
sanitation service delivery in these two states through adoption of new sanitation and septage
management models that focus on asset creation as well as ensuring sustainability of any proposed
sanitation arrangements. The two states are also low-income states and the strategies developed
through assistance provided in this TA had specific and explicit provisions for reaching the un-served
population and urban poor.

3.1.1   Integrated Urban Sanitation Program (Madhya Pradesh)
With 22.5 percent of urban households in the state of Madhya Pradesh not having access to individual
household toilets, only 20 percent of the households on sewer systems and with no treatment to 50


9
percent of the households on septic tanks, the infrastructure inadequacies across the service delivery
chain are a cause of concern as they endanger the health and environment.
A baseline situation assessment was undertaken to understand the prevailing sanitation levels in the
state, the existing institutional arrangements and the roles and responsibilities of the different
institutions in the delivery of sanitation services. Based on the the baseline assessment, an integrated
urban sanitation program (IUSP) has been developed by Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP). The
IUSP signaled the government’s intent to eliminate open defection and for safe collection, treatment
and disposal of all human excreta and liquid wastes generated in the households. The salient features of
IUSP are discussed in the following sections:
I. Access to household sanitation
a) All urban dwellers will have access to safe and hygienic sanitation facility in household or
   community, so that no one defecates in the open.
b) Adequate availability and satisfactory upkeep of public/common sanitation facilities in all urban
   spaces.
II. Safe collection and treatment
     (a) Sanitary and safe disposal of human excreta and liquid waste from all sanitation facilities in
         urban areas.
     (b) Establish appropriate systems of operations and maintenance of the disposal system, ensuring
         financial sustainability or adequate financial flows to operate system unhindered.
III. Institutional Mechanisms for Urban Sanitation
Two levels of institutional arrangements were proposed, one for facilitation and advocacy and the other
for implementation.
IV. Facilitation and advocacy framework
The state level committee headed by the Principal Secretary, Urban Development Department will
provide strategic guidance and undertake periodic review to monitor and evaluate the program, the
district level committee headed by the Collector will review and provide guidance to plans prepared by
the cities and the city level committees will be responsible for preparation of the plans.
V. Implementation framework
State and city level urban sanitation cell have been proposed to assist with the implementation of the
program. The state level sanitation cell headed by the Commissioner, Urban Development Department,
will be responsible for providing technical guidance and facilitating interdepartmental coordination for
preparation and implementation of plans while the city level sanitation cell headed by the chief
municipal officer will be responsible for preparing city level sanitation improvement plans.
Building on the IUSP, the Government of Madhya Pradesh has prepared the Madhya Pradesh State
Sanitation Vision (MPSV) that articulates service delivery targets to achieve inclusive and affordable
access to sanitation in urban areas in the state by 2025. Taking Census 2011 sanitation baseline as a
starting point, the MPSV articulates state wide sanitation service targets, estimates investments

10
required to achieve these targets and details the institutional framework and financing mechanisms to
drive implementation to enable achieve the goal of sustainable affordable and universal access to
sanitation by 2025. The Government has committed INR 4,080 million (US $ 66 million) for construction
of individual, community and public toilets. A total of 187,511 individual toilets and 607 community
toilets have been sanctioned of which a total of 50,000 individual toilets and 253 community toilets have
been constructed.

3.1.2   State Septage Management Strategy for Urban Centres in Tripura
Urban sanitation in Tripura is characterized by:

           Large proportion of households (98 percent) having access to household sanitation facilities;
           Significant share of on-site sanitation arrangements amongst households with access to
            sanitation;
           Significant number of insanitary latrines
           Absence of arrangements for safe septage collection, conveyance treatment and disposal
Taking these into consideration, the Government of Tripura set out to develop a comprehensive strategy
for the safe management of septage in urban Tripura.
I. Goals:
The priority goals would be:
           Identification of specific sites and situations where application of septage to land is allowed
            after due process, enabling treatment and disposal of septage at such approved facilities
            under adequate supervision and oversight;
           Creation of the infrastructure needed for effective liquid waste management from
            households and establishments through capital investment and institution building or
            through collaborative arrangements, both being accountable to the residents through the
            ULB;
           Achievement of a high level of compliance with requirements and practices that are clear,
            effective, achievable and enforceable;
           Ensuring financial and process sustainability of the elements of septage management; and
           Ensuring safety of households, septage workers and the general population.
II. Institutional arrangements:
The strategy defines the institutional arrangement to be instituted for septage management across the
state comprising state level and ULB levels responsibilities with clearly defined roles and responsibilities.
III. Planning and financing arrangements:
This included development of a regional strategy focusing on cluster approach for project development,
communication and outreach plan, and financing strategy including provisioning for capital expenditures
and planning for tariff setting.
In preparation for the septage management strategy,the UDD carried out an estimation of the capital
investments and operating costs of septage management facilities for the urban centres using available

11
data on households, population and the household sanitation arrangements in place. Considering the
septage volumes arising from each urban centre, the management responsibilities of safe collection and
conveyance and the oversight efforts required for management of the septage treatment facilities, and
the reality of limited financial resources and staffing in the ULBs, a decentralized approach with regional
septage treatment facilities servicing a cluster of urban centres (as detailed in Table 2) is felt appropriate
for the implementation of the state strategy. It is anticipated that with increasing urbanization, the
increased capacities at the ULB through the process of devolution and management experiences in
implementing the current strategy, would set the stage for more dedicated facilities, if needed in future.

     Table (2): Regionalisation of Septage Treatment Facilities: Clusters, Urban Centres and Population

     Regional Definition for Treatment                 Urban Centres                     Total Population
                 facilities                                                               (Census 2011)
Cluster 1                                 Dharamnagar,     Panisagar,   Kailasahar,               89,713
                                          Kumarghat
Cluster 2                                 Teliamura, Khowai, Ambassa                              56,095
Cluster 3                                 Udaipur, Sonamura, Amarpur, Melaghar,                  106,237
                                          Santir bazar, Belonia
Cluster 4                                 Bishalgarh, Mohanpur, Jirania, Ranirbazar               63,238


Individual Towns                          Agartala, Kamalpur and Sabroom              438,408;   10,868     and
                                                                                      7,235
Source: Population Status of ULBs, 2014

The current strategy envisages a capital investment of about INR. 230 million (USD 3.70 million) for the
setting up of four regional treatment facilities and additional facilities in the three individual urban
centres along with the procurement of equipment and transport for operationalizing septage
management in the twenty statutory urban centres of Tripura. The cost of operations and maintenance
will be charged to the resident households who avail of the services.
The operating costs of collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal are to be recovered in full
through user charges levied on households whose septage is collected. The mechanism for this will be
set up by the ULB and will provide clarity and transparency to householders on their responsibilities.
Tariff-setting for septage services will seek to ensure that the septage management operations set in
place is financially viable and technically sustainable. In case of any support to be provided to identified
households (e.g. very poor households), the financial burden of this will need to be borne by the ULB
(through own funds or designated grants from the state), have transparent and accountable
mechanisms and be tendered in a timely manner to the service provider. In this matter, the State
Sanitation Committee (SSC) will have oversight powers and will direct the ULBs as needed. The SSC will
also direct the ULBs on the septic tank de-sludging frequency to be followed and communicated to
households. As this is one of the first initiatives in comprehensive septage management for urban
centres in the country, the optimal de-sludging frequency is expected to be arrived at over a few years
of iteration and feedback.


12
The UDD will earmark a certain percentage of its annual budget over the next three succeeding financial
years (from FY 2014-15 to FY 2016-17); towards soft components -behaviour change, communication,
technical support and administrative cost, which is essential to set the strategy in place and implement
action plans. The approximate fund requirement for implementing the strategy and making the
institutional arrangements operational over the three year period is anticipated to be about INR 7.5
million (USD 120,000). In addition, the behavior change and communication initiatives and support
systems for management at ULBs are anticipated to expend INR 10 million (USD 160,000) over the three
year period.
IV. Implementation arrangement:
This included preparation of septage management plans, standard setting, service delivery, regulation,
coordination, monitoring and evaluation and capacity building.
The State has adopted the Septage Management Strategy for Urban Centres in Tripura, and developed
an implementation roadmap identifying town clusters to be serviced through a regional septage
treatment facility. The state has further developed a detailed project report for a pilot septage
management project in the town of Bishalgarh. The pilot project encompasses all the aspects included in
the state septage strategy and will provide a roadmap for state-wide scale up. The project has been
submitted to the Central Government for financial support, and has been given in-principle approval for
implementation. The project is likely to be implemented over the next two years, with support from the
Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) on the design, procurement and capacity building components.
This is likely the first project in the country to plan, design and allocate finances for a specially designed
septage management system, including a stand-alone septage treatment facility. The experience and
knowledge gained from implementation of the Bishalgarh pilot project will also be shared with other
states, and the Central Government.

3.2 Capacity building through knowledge exchange
The NUSP has accorded high importance for the safe collection, treatment and disposal of septage from
on-site installations. With 38 percent of urban Indian households dependent on septic tanks and with
limited knowledge on septage management in the country, there was a request from the National and
State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala for a study tour to learn from countries
where systems are in place to effectively address the various challenges of septage management.
Accordingly, a study tour to Malaysia was organized as they had implemented septage management at
scale and are also recognized as pioneers in septage management. Specific objectives of the study tour
were to:
           Learn the process, outcomes and challenges faced while implementing the septage
            management program in Malaysia.
           Understand the policy framework, institutional arrangements, monitoring and regulatory
            frameworks for septage management in Malaysia.
           Study the various technology options adopted, their strengths and limitations.
           Undertake field visits to septage treatment and disposal facilities to expose the participants
            to systems in operation.

13
The study tour included a mix of in-class training and site visits to operating treatment and disposal
facilities. The participants were provided with an overview of septage management focusing on the
evolution, governance, technology, regulatory and monitoring requirements. They also had an
opportunity to understand the technology selection process, management information systems and
advocacy campaigns for septage management.
Field visits to observe septage collection at households and processing in non-mechanical, mechanical
and centralized septage treatment facilities were also organized.
For the participants the key learning areas were:
    Understanding the process of approval of design and construction of septic tanks and ensuring that
     water, electricity and other utility connections are contingent on production of certificate of proper
     design and construction of septic tank.
    The role of a centralized government agency vested with powers for water and sanitation being
     given responsibility for delivery of septage collection and treatment process in the cities.
    The shift from “on demand” to “regular desludging” and how this change was brought about.
    The management information system to notify household and to track the emptying, transport,
     treatment and disposal of septage
    Communication and outreach campaigns to promote septage management
Following the visit, the following actions were implemented:
a) The Ministry of Urban Development, Govt. of India developed and released an advisory on septage
management.
b) The Govt. of Tripura developed a septage management strategy and a plan to pilot septage treatment
facility in a small town in the state.
c) The Govt. of Madhya Pradesh has decided on adopting septage management as the option for
improving sanitation in all towns with population lower than 100,000. This was used as a basis while
estimating the investment needs to improve sanitation in the state.

3.3 Developing a multiyear investment program
This TA supported the GoMP in developing a multiyear investment program to address the
infrastructure gaps (access, collection, treatment and disposal), prioritization framework and timelines
for implementation.
The findings of Census 2011 on urban sanitation in Madhya Pradesh (MP), with 22 percent prevalence of
open defecation and less than 20 percent population having access to sewer connection highlights the
journey that needs to be traversed to achieve universal urban sanitation. The GoMP, in recognition of
this situation, had earlier in 2009, formulated guidelines of the Integrated Urban Sanitation Program
(IUSP) (following the launch of the NUSP in 2008) with the goal of achieving totally sanitized, healthy and
liveable cities and to enhance living standards of communities with special emphasis on the urban poor.
Building on the intent expressed in the IUSP guidelines, the GoMP developed a state sanitation vision
document that articulates service delivery targets to achieve inclusive and affordable access to

14
sanitation in urban areas in the state by 2025. Adopting Census 2011 sanitation data as the baseline, the
MPSV articulates state wide sanitation service targets, estimates investments required to achieve these
targets and details the institutional framework and financing mechanisms to drive implementation to
achieve the goal of sustainable affordable and universal access to sanitation by 2025. The MPSV also
details the operation and maintenance estimates, options for capital financing and implementation
arrangements.
In order to support the implementation of the investment program, institutional strengthening of ULBs
was undertaken with a view to understand and recommend changes to the process for planning,
implementing and monitoring projects. The institutional strengthening also included manpower review
and staffing requirements, their competencies and training needs for delivery of MPSV.
Sanitation investment estimates - Following the launch of the NUSP in 2008, the GoMP initiated the
IUSP in 2009 with the goal of achieving totally sanitized, healthy and liveable cities and towns and to
enhance living standards of the communities with special emphasis on the urban poor. The findings of
Census 2011 (Exhibit 1) reinforce the need for escalated policy attention to address the challenge of
achieving universal and affordable sanitation for all. While prevalence of open defecation is high at 22
percent, only about 20 percent of the urban population has access to a sewer connection.

                    Exhibit 1 Access to sanitation in urban areas in MP: Census 2011
              120.0%
                          Sanitation Access Baseline - 2011 Census
                                                                                      22.5%
              100.0%

                                                  3.3%        1.2%       2.8%
               80.0%

               60.0%                 20.2%

               40.0%
                                                                                  OD Incidence:
                         50.0%                                                        22.5%
               20.0%

                0.0%
                       Septic tanks Piped sewer Community Improved       Others       Open
                                       system     toilets Pit latrines              Defecation


It is in this context that GoMP is launching the MPSV 2025. MPSV 2025 builds on the intent of the IUSP
guidelines and articulates service delivery targets to achieve inclusive and affordable access to sanitation
in urban areas in MP by 2025.
Targeted outcomes: MPSV 2025 aims to make all urban areas in MP fully sanitized by 2025 and
attempts to bring a comprehensive service delivery orientation to its implementation by setting
identifiable and monitorable targets. Exhibit 2 presents the targets under MPSV 2025 (along with the
Census 2011 baseline). Among other things, MPSV 2025 aims to:
    Make urban areas in MP open defecation free by 2017.



15
    Facilitate toilet access initially with community toilets provision and migration to 99.8% individual
     toilet coverage by 2025.
    Achieve 100% safe disposal of waste-water generated by 2025 through a combination of sewerage
     systems (75% coverage), on-site systems (23.5% septic tanks + 1.5% pit latrines)




                              Exhibit 2 Targeted outcomes under MPSV 2025

                                MPSV Targets - Sanitation Access (% of Households)

                              2025                        75.1%                               23.5%      -
                                                                                        1.3%
                              2022                53.8%                        23.7%
                                                                                         0.1%
                                                                      1.2%
                              2017        29.7%            21.9%
                                                                       2.4%
                                                                                    3.9%
                        Census 2011    20.2%                  50.1%                             22.5%
                                                                                       3.3%
                                   0%           20%         40%              60%          80%           100%
                                  Piped sewer system   Septic tanks             Other systems
                                  Community Toilets    Open


The targets for elimination of open defecation applies to the 20 percent urban households only which
will be provided with toilets. This target is to be achieved in a four-year period (commencing in 2013).
This has already translated in 30 cities in the state becoming open defecation free. The state
Government has already committed financial resources to achieve this target, in addition to that
available from the central schemes. The impetus to achieve these objectives will also come from the
support, including financial support, committed by the Central Government through schemes such as
the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM).
The target relating to proving access to piped sewerage to 75 percent population has been developed
based on the program guidelines adopted to determine eligibility of cities for piped sewerage systems
(limited to cities with population above 100,000, cities along river banks, and cities of religious
significance). This is consistent with the thinking of MoUD, which plans to improve sanitation in the
country covering 70 percent population though network and 30 percent through non-network solutions.
Investment outlay, phasing and financing mix: Traditional approaches to sanitation investments have
involved piece-meal asset creation focused on infrastructure provisioning, often with very little focus on
service delivery. As a result, several urban projects in water and sanitation have often not rendered the
envisaged service delivery benefits. Further, resource constrained planning meant that sanitation
service delivery ended up being under-funded.
MPSV 2025 aims to correct this legacy by modelling and estimating the state-wide investment
requirements based on prevailing gaps in sanitation indicators, proposed targets set under MPSV 2025.
The estimation has been done on a normative basis and based on a phased transition and migration of
16
households from the Census 2011 baseline to desired sanitation standards across toilet access and
waste water management components of the sanitation value chain in line with the phasing of service
delivery targets outlined under MPSV 2025. Key assumptions and prioritization approach underlying this
investment assessment are summarized below:
    Toilet Access: Investment needs for toilet access component has been modelled based on a
     household transition across 5 categories namely, Individual toilets with sewer connection / septic
     tanks, pit latrines, community toilets, others and none, with Census 2011 baseline as a starting point
     based on a transition matrix as given below:
     o    ‘None/OD’ to toilets with Sewer connection / ‘Septic Tanks’ or ‘Community Toilets’ in the ratio
          of 50:50 by 2017 making MP urban areas Open Defecation Free
     o    All ‘Community toilets’ will have 100 percent septic tank coverage by 2025; 30 percent of
          existing households dependent on ‘community toilet’ access will shift to ‘individual toilets with
          sewer connection / septic tanks’ by 2017 and remaining 70 percent households will also
          migrate to individual household toilets by 2025
     o    15 percent of houses with access to ‘other’ types of sanitation will shift to ‘individual toilets
          with sewer connection / septic tank’ facility by 2017 and 40 percent of ‘others’ will shift to ‘pit
          latrines’; rest will continue in ‘others’ category till by 2017. By 2025, ‘others’ will shift to
          ‘individual toilets with sewer connection / septic tanks or pit latrines in the ratio of 40:60
     o    By 2025, 90 percent of new households will be provided with ‘individual toilets with sewer
          connection / septic tanks’.
    Waste-water management: Access to septage / waste-water collection and treatment is envisaged
     through a combination of sewerage systems and on-site systems.
     o    Sewerage System: A prioritized roll-out of sewerage systems is envisaged under the MPSV
          covering a) Municipal Corporations, b) ULBs with over one lakh population and c) Cities /
          Towns on river banks and of religious / tourism importance. 97 cities (translating to about 75
          percent of urban population) qualify for sewerage systems based on prioritization. Within
          these, cities with the following characteristics would be preferred:

                District headquarters and cities with partial sewerage coverage
                Cities which are densely populated
                Cities where land is readily available for construction of sewage facilities
                Councils willing to implement reforms and user charge framework
     o    Septage Management systems: On-site systems (septic tanks and pit latrines) are proposed in
          all other cities not proposed to be covered by sewerage systems as well as uncovered areas
          within cities provided with sewerage network provision. GoMP would also issue septage
          management guidelines based on which ULBs will oversee implementation of septage
          collection, treatment and disposal at the household level.




17
Exhibit 3 summarises the investment outlay and break up across the different sanitation components,
phasing across plan periods and financing mix to implement MPSV 20251.



             Exhibit 3 MP Sanitation Vision 2025: Investment outlay, phasing and financing mix

Area of Investment                                              In Million Rs.              In Million US $
Flush/Pour Flush connected to 'Sewer /Septic tank'              2,7688.7                    446.6
Pour Flush connected to Pit Latrine                             1,0147.2                    163.7
Migrate - 'Other' to 'Sewer / Septic Tank'                      2.5                         0.04
Migrate - 'Other' to 'Pit latrine'                              0.9                         0.015
HH investments                                                  37839.3                     610.3
Community toilet blocks                                         1742                        28.1
Septage treatment facility                                      1424                        22.97
Waste water treatment assets                                    92704.4                     1495.2
Investment by State agencies                                    95870.3                     1546.3
Community based assets                                          287.4                       4.6
Treatment assets                                                1140.1                      18.4
Replacement of Assets                                           1427.5                      23.0
IEC Activities                                                  4556.8                      73.5
Investment by State                                             101854.6                    1642.8
TOTAL INVESTMENT UNDER IUSP                                     139693.9                    2253.1




1
    The investment estimates for MP have been prepared based on assumptions on unit cost of providing sanitation
services to individual households (to address the full cycle of sanitation). The unit costs used to develop the models
account for experience from the field, and are higher than those included in the HPEC estimation to develop
investment estimates for urban infrastructure services including sanitation for the entire country.

18
Phasing Details           2012-17        2018-23                  2023-25
TOTAL INVESTMENT

In Million Rs             57170          55910                    26600
In Million US $           922.1          901.8                    429.0
Cumulative
In Million Rs             57170          113080                   139690
In Million US $           922.1          1823.9                   2253.1
BY GoMP
Each Plan period
In Million Rs             20240          18300                    8530
In Million US $           326.5          295.2                    137.6
Cumulative
In Million Rs             20240          38540                    47070
In Million US $           326.5          621.6                    759.2
SHARE OF GOMP
Each Plan period          35%            33%                      32%


Cumulative                35%            34%                      34%


Financing mix: The large outlay required for achieving the targets of MPSV 2025 calls for innovative
approaches to financing beyond just budgetary outlays. Further the nature of capital investment
requirement under each component of investment namely (i) Individual assets; (ii) Community assets;
(iii) Septage assets; and (iv) Waste water assets vary and therefore require different structuring and
funding sources. The rationale underlying each category is explained below:
Capital costs
1. Household assets
Below poverty level households will be provided with 90 percent of the resources required for the
construction of household toilets by the government (80 percent state and 10 percent urban local body)
and the balance contributed by the beneficiary. For above poverty level households, beneficiary will be
80 percent and government contribution 20 percent (10 percent state and 10 percent urban local body).
2. Community assets
Community assets are proposed to be funded predominantly by ‘Local area Grants’ like the Member of
Parliament (MP) / Member of Legislative Assembly (MLA) grants to an extent of 70 percent, with the
state and urban local bodies contributing 20 percent and 10 percent, respectively.

19
3. Septage treatment assets
The investments required for septage collection, treatment and disposal would be met through private
sector while the government would fund the treatment and disposal facility.
4. Sewerage network and treatment assets
Waste water investments are capital intensive and are envisaged to be funded through a combination of
GoMP/ Government of India (GoI) funding, borrowings and user financing. While the Sewage Treatment
Plants (STP) investments are proposed to be implemented through public private partnerships on a build
operate model2, the network assets will be largely funded with central / state government funds. For
modeling investment, capital cost of STP is assumed at 25 percent of the total cost the sewerage system
with return of 20 percent assumed for investments made by the private sector.
The current five-year budget outlay by the State for sanitation (2012-2017) is INR 4590 million (~USD 75
million). The fund allocations by the State in the last two years (2013-14 and 2014-15) on sanitation
have averaged to USD 13.5 million. Investments proposed under the MPSV will require a about a five-
fold increase in the State fund allocation for the sector. This increase will provide the necessary funds to
address the sanitation service delivery for the entire state.
The investments proposed for sanitation under the MPSV are about half the investments committed to
and allocated by the state government for improving water supply service delivery in the state. The
Government committed funds for the water sector amounting to about INR 10,000 million each year
(~USD 160 million per year), which are comparable about double to the investments required under the
MPSV.
Given that the Government has made comparable significant financial commitments for improvements
in the water sector, the investments proposed for the sanitation sector under MPSV appear to be
realistic.
Implications of operation and maintenance costs at a household level
The operation and maintenance (O&M) cost obligations of the investments made are expected to be
largely met by the households through a comprehensive user charge framework that takes into account
affordability considerations (through a cross subsidy framework) and the need to achieve cost recovery
objectives. MPSV 2025 envisages that apart from meeting the O&M cost obligations, it is also feasible to
recover the debt servicing component of capital expenditure through user charges




2
    The state has developed a comprehensive PPP framework, approved by the state Government. GoMP has already
initiated PPP projects on municipal solid waste in the State. The State has adopted a systematic approach for the
implementation of MSW projects in all ULBs in the State with the State cabinet approving implementation of
Municipal Solid Waste Management of all 378 ULBs through “Cluster based Regional Landfill site approach
involving Private Operator”. The state has developed a PPP model for this identifying the financial model and
concession terms. A similar approach is envisaged under the MPSV.

20
Use of graded user charges:
The average O&M costs at a household level translate to Rs 130 per month per household (US $ 2.1). A
flat rate across ULBs would result in a negative impact on the lower income households. Therefore, a
graded user charges would benefit all stakeholders. For this purpose, the user charges would be fixed on
a differentiated structure to ensure that the lower income households do not bear this high burden.
Through an iterative analysis using with graded user charge levels across income categories (Refer
Exhibit 4 below) based on available state wide category wise household income information3, it seems
possible to have a user charge structure where households belonging to the lowest income category
have equitable access to sanitation services at as low as Rs 10 per household per month (US $ 0.16).

                                  Exhibit 4 Impact of Differentiated user charges

         Income data for Madhya
                Pradesh                                    Household income category
                                 1
    Annual household income                        75,000-
    Rs                                <75,000      150.000          150,000-300,000    >300,000

    US $                              < 1210       1210 – 2420      2420 – 4840         >4840

    % of HH under various
    categories            20%                      19%              40%                21%

    Average household O&M
    cost(Rs. month / household)                                                                   130

    Average Household O&M
    cost (US $ month/household)                                                                   2.09

    With graded user charges
    (Rs. month/household)             10           70               150                260

    With graded user charges
    (US $ month/household)            0.16         1.12             2.4                4.19

    % contribution to O&M             1.5%         10.2%            46.6%              41.6%



Considering O&M and full cost recovery


3
    Source: Market Skyline of India, Indicus Analytics, 2006

21
While the above user charge cater to 100 percent O&M cost recovery, full cost recovery (100 percent
O&M and debt servicing) would mean an increase in the ‘user charges’ from Rs. 130 per month per
household (US $ 2.09) to Rs. 177 per month per household (US $ 2.85), with an annual increase of Rs. 15
per year (US $ 0.24).
User charges under PPP option

As PPP is also an option for the construction, operation and maintenance of the STPs in the state4, the
user charges for this option have also been computed. Two options have been considered, namely 100
percent cost recovery + profit margin on private sector investments and 100 percent cost recovery +
profit margin on private sector investments + debt servicing for the sewer network.
User charge impact to meet 100% O&M Cost recovery + profit margin
The first year of PPP operation would require a user charge of Rs. 142 per month per household (US $
2.29), if it has to meet 100 percent O&M including PPP margin. It goes up by Rs. 10 (US $ 0.16) every
year on average, i.e., the user charges reaches INR 180 ( US $ 2.90) at the end of 5 years, if a city has to
recover 100 percent O&M from user charges. This translates to a year-on-year increase of Rs. 10 (US $
0.16) per month per household or Rs 50 (US $ 0.80) at the end of every 5 years.
User charge impact to meet 100 percent O&M + profit margin + debt servicing (sewer network)
If a city has to meet the full O&M and debt servicing cost including the profit margin of the private
operator, the user charge will go up to Rs. 188 (US $ 3.0) in the first year of PPP operation. An annual
increase of Rs 22 (US $ 0.35) per month per household is required.
Financing GoMP’s contribution

Borrowings
     The total share of GoMP contribution of investment works out to INR 47700 million (USD 769
      million). The model assumes that GoMP would be able to finance 70 percent of this requirement
      through long-term borrowings sourced from development agencies such as World Bank, ADB, JICA
      and KfW. The borrowings are assumed to be in the form of concessional long term lines of credit
      (with 20 year tenure and 5 year moratorium).
     It is assumed that the repayment obligations on account of the borrowings will be met from GoMP
      and ULB contribution in the ratio 75: 25.
     The total ULB contribution required from all ULBs is in the order of INR 10000 million (USD 161
      million) over a 13 year period. Modeling under MPSV 2025 reveals that the debt servicing can be
      largely met by ULBs from Thirteenth Finance commission devolution from GoI. The model indicates



4
    Under the MPSV, PPP has been proposed as an option for the construction, operation and maintenance of the STPs
in the state. The Government intent will be to try and structure the STP investments through public private
partnerships on a build operate model as far as possible, which will need to validated at the implementation stage for
individual projects.

22
     that 25 percent of Thirteenth Finance Commission grants due for the next five years are adequate to
     meet the ULB’s share of contribution. Expecting 100 percent efficiency in collection of user charge
     from the first year would be ambitious and unrealistic. Therefore, the model attempted an option
     of phased recovery of user charges (starting at 50 percent and reaching 100 percent over a 5 year
     time horizon), and estimated that the state government would need to provide a grant of INR 780
     million to meet the shortfall while adopting a phased approach to 100 percent collection of user
     charges.

Institutional Framework
The emphasis of MPSV 2025 is to create an implementation framework that would facilitate service
delivery focused on implementation through holistic planning and prioritisation, ring-fenced funding and
project development with focus on service delivery outcomes rather than asset creation targets. GoMP
has already articulated the contours of the Institutional framework for IUSP implementation which shall
be further strengthened on the lines described below
    The MPSV shall be implemented under the oversight of the Urban Administration and Development
     Department (UADD). The Institutional framework (refer Exhibit 5) for implementation of MPSV was
     envisaged at two levels namely:
     o    Facilitation and Advocacy Framework: To make the MPSV a community centric program,
          effective leadership and willingness is necessary. Additionally, to achieve a good quality output
          and effective operation and maintenance, regular monitoring, reviews at various levels are a
          necessary condition. To enable effective facilitation and advocacy at various levels, a state
          level, district level and city level committees have been proposed.
     o    Implementation framework: The Implementation framework has been proposed at two levels
          to implement and coordinate the program and involved the State level Urban Sanitation Cell
          and City level Urban Sanitation Cell.

                          Exhibit 5 Proposed Institutional framework for IUSP



                                                 INSTITUTIONAL
                                                  FRAMEWORK


                      Facilitation and
                         Advocacy                                           Implementation
                        Framework                                             Framework



  State level
                     District level Urban      City level        State level Urban     City level Urban
Coordination and
                          Sanitation          Sanitation          Sanitation Cell      Sanitation Cell
  Monitoring
                         Committee            Committee
  Committee




23
To strengthen the implementation framework at the state level, a dedicated Project Management Unit
(PMU) with requisite skill sets and funding would be set up to work under the oversight of the UADD and
the State level Urban Sanitation cell envisaged under the IUSP guidelines.
The role of the PMU shall include:
    Project Development: through creation of bankable projects through preparatory activities
     including preparation of City Sanitation Plans (CSP), feasibility studies and Detailed Project Reports
     (DPR).
    Project Appraisal and Financing: covering evaluation of possible financing approaches, project
     structuring and finalization of financing mix and hand-holding ULBs to achieve financing closure
    Support to Project Bidding and contracting: develop standard bidding guidelines and documents in
     compliance with GoMP’s procurement practices and hand-holding ULBs in project bidding
    Reform implementation: The PMU shall be responsible for developing a reform agenda for the
     program in consultation with various stakeholders and for monitoring implementation of the same
     at the project level.
    Project monitoring and impact assessment: The PMU shall be responsible for project monitoring to
     ensure achievement of service delivery outcomes and for disseminating information on progress of
     the IUSP. In case of projects where there is debt financing involved, the PMU would work with the
     UADD to ensure timely repayment and adherence to debt conditionalities and obligations.
    Adequate capacity and capabilities at the ULB level shall be created as part of the on-going
     implementation of Urban Cadre in the state. The role of ULBs in the MPSV would cover a) Project
     Bidding and Contracting, b) Project Implementation and Monitoring c) Project Operations and
     Maintenance d) Service Delivery and ensuring compliance to service delivery targets envisaged e)
     Cost recovery and Collection efficiency (where applicable) f) Reporting of project outcomes to
     PMU/PDC and UADD and g) Meeting loan and interest repayment obligations for any loans taken.
     The PMU / PDC will hand-hold ULBs in project development, procurement, implementation and
     monitoring

Institutional strengthening
In order to successfully implement MPSV 2025, it is imperative to understand and strengthen the
institutions engaged in the delivery of sanitation services. This required mapping the institutions
presently engaged in the delivery of urban sanitation services, understanding their roles and
responsibilities, key challenges and recommendation to overcome these challenges in sanitation service
delivery. The institutional strengthening also included review of the ‘as-is’ process for planning,
implementation and monitoring and the proposed changes to the process to improve the
implementation of MPSV. Finally, the review also included the staffing, competencies and training needs
of the institutions to support and deliver MPSV was also determined.
Institutional arrangements for urban sanitation
The Urban Administration and Development Department (UADD) is the nodal state department
responsible for policy, strategic planning, financing and monitoring body for all urban infrastructure

24
projects in the state. UADD is headed by the Principal Secretary and supported by the Commissioner
who is responsible for day to day operations. A team of technical and financial personnel assist the
commissioner in the planning and implementation of urban projects.
UADD has seven division offices, each of which is responsible for a cluster of districts (and the ULBs in
that district). The Division Offices execute administrative and engineering functions. The Divisions are
headed by a Deputy Director (Administrative head) and an Executive Engineer (Engineering functions)
and provide administrative and engineering support to the urban local bodies.
District Urban Development Agency (DUDA) headed by the Collector is responsible for planning and
monitoring of all projects in the district.
The urban local bodies (ULB’s) are administratively attached to a Division Office (only Municipal Councils
and Nagar Panchayats; Municipal Corporations report to the Commissioner directly). The ULBs are
headed by a Chief Municipal Officer (CMO) or Commissioner for corporations. The ULBs are responsible
for local planning and implementation of projects.
As part of the MPSV 2025, the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh had committed resources for the construction
of individual and community toilets. The roles of the various institutions were therefore studied in the
context of the planning, implementation and monitoring of these projects.
The institutions involved and their roles in the stated context are as shown below:



                                                                Role across Project Value Chain
                   Key Mandate / Functions related
  Institutions
                           to Sanitation                  Planning &       Sanction &      Execution &
                                                          Finalization     Bid Process     Monitoring

                   Nodal body for development of
                    urban sector in the state.                                                 
                                                               
 UADD Head         Role: Policy formulation,
 Office (HO)        monitoring and evaluation of
  & Division        programs, management of
                                                          (State Level
   Offices          municipal administration,
                                                           Planning)       (Sanction)      (Monitoring)
                    government & funding agency
                    liaison.

                   District level body under the                                             
                    Collector to facilitate urban
  DUDA &
                    development (Planning and
   District
                    Monitoring)                             (District
 Committees        This was proposed in the MPSV            Level
                    2025                                   Planning)       (Sanction)      (Monitoring)



25
                                                                                  Role across Project Value Chain
                         Key Mandate / Functions related
     Institutions
                                 to Sanitation                           Planning &             Sanction &       Execution &
                                                                         Finalization           Bid Process      Monitoring


    Urban Local          Responsible for implementation                                                              
                          of programs / schemes including                                            
      Bodies
                          in sanitation (as per 74th                         (Local
                                                                                                (Bid Process)
                          Amendment)                                       Planning)                             (Execution)

                         Identification of bankable
                          projects for the MP Urban
       MPUIF
                          Infrastructure Fund                                                       
     (proposed)
                         This was proposed by the GoMP
                          as part of the MPSV 2025

The ‘as-is’ process in the planning, implementation and monitoring of projects were then studied to
identify key challenges and recommendations to address these challenges are detailed in the table
below:

    Sanitation
      linked              Key Challenges                            Proposed Solution                       Envisaged Benefits
    processes
                     The sanitation projects          Need to link the planning process to                 Overall execution
Project
                      in the ULBs are                   the overall objectives of the MPSV                    of projects in line
Planning &
                      identified by the ULBs            2025                                                  with MPSV
Finalization
                      based on requests                Projects to be approved only on the                   objectives
                      from the public,                  basis of a feasibility study                         Only feasible
                      elected                          Finalization and prioritization of the                projects are
                      representatives or                projects to be undertaken by a District               approved
                      requirements of the               Planning Committee (a committee                      Greater
                      ULB with no guidance              included in the IUSP and chaired by                   ownership at the
                      from Division or Head             the District Collector) on the basis of               ULB levels for
                      Office. Also, these               the feasibility report and budget                     developing the
                      projects are identified           availability5.                                        city sanitation
                                                                                                              plans as they
                      and approved in an
                                                                                                              would define the
                      adhoc manner without



5
    Since the role of the District Planning Committee was subsequently diluted, the projects at the ULB level are being sanctioned
centrally by the UADD, based on a DPR prepared at the ULB level. The DPR includes a field level survey of the households that
require an individual toilet and a survey of community areas that require a Community toilet.


26
 Sanitation
   linked           Key Challenges                    Proposed Solution               Envisaged Benefits
 processes
                 any alignment to a                                                     need for asset
                 larger Sanitation                                                      creation
                 strategy of the state.


                Lack of uniformity in      Development of standard DPRs and          Uniform
Sanction &
                 the Detailed project        Bid documents (with clauses defined        implementation
Bid Process
                 Report (DPR) and Bid        based on best practices) by the UADD       of contracts,
                 preparation owing to        for use by the ULBs                        processes and
                 decentralization of the    Standardized process flow across the       timelines across
                 process to the ULB          state proposed                             the state
                 Level                      Proposed that the Divisions play an       Better contracts
                Non-standard                advisory role and support the ULBs         for managing 3rd
                 practices followed                                                     party entities in
                 across the state in bid                                                terms of
                 process                                                                accountability
                                                                                        and risk
                                                                                        mitigation
                                                                                       Easier tracking
                                                                                        centrally
                No clear definition of     Clear milestones for various types of     Stringent
Monitoring
                 milestones for projects     projects defined                           implementation
& Control
                 being executed -           Milestone linked payments built into       of contract
                 reporting of project        the contracts (which can be                clauses
                 progress is subjective      developed at the UADD and used by         Independent
                No correlation of           the ULBs)                                  monitoring
                 physical progress and      Project Monitoring Framework for           ensures data
                 financial payment to        clear accountability of execution and      accuracy
                 contractor                  monitoring defined.
                No checks and              Provisions made for third party
                 balances at the             inspection / monitoring to ensure
                 Divisional or HO level      independent data flow to the Head
                 and thereby no              Office – serves to validate data
                 accountability at these     flowing through internal channels
                 levels for project
                 progress


In the table above certain process changes have been proposed. However, mere modification of
processes will not improve the execution on the ground. This has to be accompanied by other enabling
provisions, such as strengthening the institutions with personnel with required skill sets. These required

27
an assessment of personnel and competencies of the personnel for the different institutions. Job
descriptions, training and development program for the personnel was also developed. These have been
discussed below:
Alignment of people to strengthen institutions
The overall organization structures of the UADD, the Divisions and of the ULBs were reviewed. To ensure
alignment of the structures to the proposed process changes, some changes were required to be
implemented. These changes in the structures are as follows:
UADD Head Office: In the Head Office, the Sanitation cell was strengthened to include a Head - Project
Monitoring, a Head – Finance Monitoring, a Head – Design and Engineering and a Head – O&M and MIS.
This, it was believed, would ensure consolidated planning and execution of sanitation projects in the
state of MP. Key to this transformation was the creation of a Project Monitoring Team under the
Commissioner, to whom the Head – Project Monitoring and the Head – Finance Monitoring would be
reporting.
UADD Division Office: In this office, there was a need to increase the level of the Head of the Division.
This was to provide greater delegation of powers and also to ensure more robust project monitoring. A
separate post for project monitoring was also created at the Division office.
ULBs: The staffing needs and the job descriptions of the staff at ULB’s to deliver sanitation services was
determined. It is to be noted that in proposing these numbers, the ULBs were clustered into logical
groups based on population and manpower numbers were proposed accordingly. An illustration of the
manpower norms proposed for ULBs is provided below:

                                 Proposed
Sl.   Name of Post                        Proposed Job Description
                                 Manpower

                                             Oversee the monthly review meeting, approve bills for
1     Chief Municipal Officer        1
                                             release of payments to contractors

2     Asst. Director (Finance)
                                             Tracking overall payment status to contractors (project
3     Accounts Officer               1       wise / budget), approval for issue of payment to
                                             contractors
4     Asst. Account Officer

                                             Initial checking of terms and conditions of tender
5     Accountant                     1
                                             documents against bills submitted, bid security, EMD

6     Asst. Gr. I
                                             Assist AE / Sub Engineer in bid process; Assist Accountant is
7     Asst. Gr. II                   1
                                             verification of bills etc.
8     Asst. Gr. III

28
Sl.      Name of Post                    Proposed Proposed Job Description
                                         Manpower
    9    Executive Engineer                 16    Bid process management

         Assistant         Engineer
10                                                         Projects: Inputs on sanitation plans, check Feasibility
         (Civil)
                                               1           Report; DPR, contract process, review template, conduct
                                                           site inspections; fill measurement book, update USMIS
11       Sub Engineer (Civil)

         Assistant         Engineer
12                                             1
         (O&M)                                             O&M: Maintain asset register, O&M of assets, track
                                                           utilization of asset
13       Sub Engineer (O&M)                    0

Competency Development of Resources
With the processes, structures, job descriptions and manpower defined, it was necessary to also define
the competencies that incumbents involved in sanitation need to display. Both, technical and
behavioural competencies were defined for all job holders. Technical competencies were derived from
the job descriptions while the behavioural competencies were articulated for the institution as a whole.
Subsequently, technical and behavioral competencies were identified for the sanitation department of
UADD. These competencies were defined at three levels: Level 1 - Aware, Level 2 - Apply and Level 3 -
Expert. An illustration of these definitions is provided below:

    Competency
                             Definition – Level 1                Definition – Level 2      Definition – Level 3
      Name

Tendering            Understand the procurement Ability to draft a contract Ability to draft a contract
                     process; standard clauses to be for      standard   projects; for        standard      and
                     included in the bid documents; modify clauses as required complicated             projects;
                     nature of inputs that are to suit the project (within ability to draft model
                     required to prepare a bid defined guidelines); obtain contracts with provisions
                     document; variation in clauses necessary inputs to prepare for modification to suit
                     with types of bids (turnkey, rate the bid document; ability to various kinds of projects;
                     contract); evaluation of bids;    evaluate bids;               standardize the bidding
                                                                                    procedure and associated
                                                                                    timelines

These were then mapped to individual job holders. While this mapping will vary for different technical
competencies, it shall be largely standardized for the behavioural competencies. The competency



6
    Depending on cost of works to be executed in the ULB


29
mapping (shown below) denotes the level at which an incumbent is expected to display a certain
competency.

       Competency                                          UADD                                   ULB

                             Hea
                                              AE –                             JD –   AE –
                             d–                       JD –              SE –
                                     JD –     Proj             AC               O&    O&
                             Sani                    Financ            Desig
    Cluster      Name               Project   ect             Office            M      M     CMO        AE
                             tati                       e               n&
                                     Mtrg.    Mtr               r              and    and
                              on                     Mtrg.             Engg.
                                               g.                              MIS    MIS
                             Cell

               Tendering
Tendering                     2       2        2       1          1     1                     2         2
               Process

Based on job descriptions and competencies, the training course outlines were developed. These include
details such as batch size, module duration, name of trainers, competencies to be developed through
the programmes and training methods.
A sample training program is as shown:

Name of Module          Course for Chief Municipal Officers

Participants            Chief Municipal Officers

Batch Size              30 in each course

Module Duration         7 Days (tentative)
                        1.   Knowledge of sanitary or hygienic practices and public health
                        2.   Knowledge of Sanitation Equipment / Assets
                        3.   Knowledge of Govt. Schemes relating to Sanitation
Competencies       to
                        4.   Knowledge of Tendering Processes
be developed
                        5.   Planning Knowledge – Sanitation Requirements of States / District / ULBs
                        6.   Knowledge of Project Processes
                        7.   Knowledge of Financial Monitoring
                        1.   Open Discussions
                        2.   Lectures
Training Method
                        3.   Visit to District / Field Offices, Dumping Sites, Toilets
                        4.   Practical Demonstrations and Case Studies

Others
     Funding for projects under the MPSV would be linked to a comprehensive reform agenda which
      would be finalized by UADD. Key reforms envisaged under the MPSV 2025 shall include a)
      Preparation of holistic and comprehensive CSPs b) Improving Information baseline for reporting on

30
     Service Level benchmarking (SLB) indicators, City Sanitation Rating and tracking requirements of
     urban poor, c) Specification of service delivery targets in CSP /DPRs, d) Implementation of a user
     charge framework and cost recovery guidelines that facilitate shift to O&M cost recovery initially
     and progressively towards recovery of debt servicing and part of capital costs, e) linking sanitation
     user charges fixation/revision to water supply user charges, f) formulation and implementation of
     guidelines for Community Participation and g) Implementation of Consumer management and
     grievance redress mechanisms.
    PPPs would be actively evaluated and implemented under the MPSV in line with the PPP policy
     articulated by GoMP. Possible areas where PPPs in sanitation would be evaluated include a)
     Management of Community Toilets, b) Septage collection, conveyance and treatment, c)
     Development and operation of STPs and d) Sewage recycling and re-use for non-potable
     applications. In addition, the scope for increased outsourcing of O&M of sanitation assets using
     service delivery linked contracting approaches will also be evaluated and implemented to enable
     sustainable performance and quality related outcomes.
    A regulatory framework would be set up to guide ULBs to fix cost recovery targets, tariff fixation
     /revision approach and manage PPPs. GoMP is considering setting up of a Regulator for water and
     would evaluate expanding its scope to cover sanitation services. The regulatory framework would be
     reviewed periodically to keep it consistent with MPSV objectives and changes to GoMP’s PPP policy.
    GoMP would develop specific guidelines for community participation under the MPSV to provide
     for adequate consultations at the pre-project stage and ownership /participation during project
     implementation and delivery. All projects developed under MPSV will conform to community
     participation guidelines. GoMP would also evolve mechanisms to support Information Education
     and Communication (IEC) activities commensurate with the scale and scope of projects
     implemented.
    Following the launch of MPSV, the government decided to focus on provision of individual and
     community toilets and has committed Rs. 4,080 million (US $ 65.8) for the period 2012 - 2017. A
     total of 187,511 individual toilets and 607 community toilets have been sanctioned of which a total
     of 50,000 individual toilets and 253 community toilets have been constructed. The government is
     also in the process of getting approval from the cabinet for creation of an urban cadre in the state.
     Further, KfW and EU have committed Rs 3,620 million (US $ 58.38) for urban sanitation
     infrastructure and DfiD is working to setup an urban infrastructure fund in the state, which will
     support the implementation of urban water supply and sanitation projects.

3.4 Coordination with development partners
The MPSV was shared in a meeting with development partners and discussed in individual meeting with
the partners. These and subsequent meetings have resulted in KfW and EU committing INR 3,620 million
(US $ 58 million) to improve urban sanitation in the state. DfiD is working with the government to setup
an urban infrastructure fund which will support the implementation of urban water supply and
sanitation projects.



31
The GoMP shared the state sanitation vision with development partners at a workshop in Bhopal on 8th
February 2013. They detailed the state sanitation vision, investment estimates and the reforms
proposed under the state sanitation vision are:
        Preparation of CSPs and identification of Projects.
        Guidelines for DPRs preparation covering mandatory specification of service outcomes targeted
         from project interventions and mandatory requirement of community consultations during DPR
         preparation
        Improvement of information baseline and reporting on SLB indicators, City Sanitation Rating and
         tracking requirements of urban poor
        Implementation of user charge framework while addressing affordability considerations and
         needs of urban poor) and progressively move to user financing. Cost recovery to cover O&M
         initially and progressively to cover Debt servicing and O&M.
        Linkage of (fixation and revision of) user charge for sewerage to water supply user charges;
        Implementation of Consumer management and grievance redressal systems.
They sought to actively promote PPPs as they recognized them as means to address capacity and
financing gaps in the water and sanitation sector and as a means to usher in a strong service delivery
orientation. GoMP intends to build on its own experience in the water sector and lessons from other
initiatives in sanitation sector. It will adopt a programmatic approach to develop bankable PPP projects
with sustainable financing structures to enable efficient project development and to provide visibility for
reputed private sector players to participate in the process.
GoMP would build requisite internal capacities to develop PPPs to bring rigor in project development,
structuring and appraisal. It would also incorporate appropriate mechanisms (including viability gap
funding, cross-subsidisation, transition support funding) to address viability/affordability considerations.
Extensive public consultations would be an integral part of development of PPP projects which would be
subject to rigorous oversight and monitoring by UADD and respective ULBs, which would continue to
hold the final accountability for service provision. Possible areas for PPPs that are being envisaged in
sanitation include a) Management of Community Toilets, b) Septage collection, conveyance and
treatment, c) Development and operation of Sewerage Treatment Plants and d) Sewage recycling and
re-use for non-potable applications. In addition, outsourcing of O&M of sanitation assets will also be
explored to achieve service delivery standards.

Support expected from Multi-lateral and Bi-lateral agencies
GoMP recognizes that implementation of MPSV 2025 calls for developing a range of structural,
administrative and financing capacities and it is in this regard GoMP is looking to the multi-lateral and bi-
lateral agencies for support to the program. In particular, GoMP is seeking support from multi-lateral
and bi-lateral agencies with regard to the following:
     1. Technical Assistance
           a. Program design and Scoping


32
            b. Creation of institutional framework including the proposed Madhya Pradesh Urban
                Infrastructure Fund (MPUIF) and a PMU
            c. Project Development, Structuring and Appraisal.
     2. Financial assistance
            a. Concessional long term Lines of Credit / Lending support to MPSV 2025.
Following the workshop and meetings, KfW and EU have committed Rs. 3,620 million (US $ 58.38) to
support the state sanitation vision. DfiD is working with the government to setup an urban
infrastructure fund which will support the implementation of urban water supply and sanitation
projects.

     3. Summary and learning
The TA aimed at assistance to two states towards operationalizing pro-poor CSPs, and improving the
institutional and regulatory framework to strengthen state and local government capacity for efficient
and sustainable service delivery. Progress on City Sanitation Plans at the states was constrained by the
lack of accessible funding channels for ensuring access to sanitation facilities. With an intervening
election year, the financing provision issue remained as-is, till the announcement of Swachh Bharat
(Urban) Mission on October 2nd 2014 (with guidelines being issued in December 2014). Thus, the focus
of the TA was on improving the institutional and regulatory framework to strengthen state and local
government capacity for efficient and sustainable service delivery. The TA contributed to the
development of the urban sanitation sector in the two states of Madhya Pradesh (LIS) and Tripura (LIS).
Madhya Pradesh: In Madhya Pradesh the TA assisted in the development of the state sanitation
strategy. Building on the sanitation strategy, the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh developed a state sanitation
vision, a multiyear statewide sanitation program with detailed estimates of investment requirements for
asset-building (capital expenditure) and investments for operation and maintenance (O&M) over the
entire service delivery chain, prioritization and institutional frameworks for delivery of services. In order
to strengthen and build capacities of the institutions for service delivery the Urban Development
Department (GoMP) has proposed the restructuring of the department cadre in the ULBs (UDD is in the
process of obtaining cabinet approval) for the establishment of an institutional framework staffed by
cadre with required skill sets for efficient delivery of sanitation services. While awaiting the formulation
of new centrally sponsored schemes from GoI, the state has committed resources and commenced
implementation of the state sanitation vision taking up provisioning for the urban poor through the
construction of individual and community toilets. The newly launched Swachh Bharat Mission which
aims to make the country open defecation free will further strengthen the government’s sanitation
initiative. Support from development partners (KfW and EU) through firm investment commitments and
the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission that have devolved a enhanced share of national
revenues to the states, highlighting septage management as an area for grants to ULBs, provide a fillip
to implementation of the state sanitation vision. The roll out of new centrally sponsored schemes (Smart
Cities, New Urban Development Mission and National River Conservation Program) will further boost
investments and help the state move forward towards realizing the sanitation vision. With a state
sanitation vision, program and a prioritization framework in place supported with investments from


33
different agencies, the state can begin to test different approaches (network, non-network or mixed) to
improve sanitation.
As follow on TA could support the development of city sanitation plans which are plans to address the
full cycle of sanitation and are city wide for network, non-network and mixed (network and non-
network) and piloted in a few cities. The learnings from these pilots could be used to scale sanitation
improvements in the state.
Tripura: In Tripura, the TA assisted the State in the development and adoption of the Septage
Management Strategy for Urban Centres. This strategy developed an implementation roadmap
identifying clusters of towns to be serviced through a regional septage treatment facility with the
estimates of investment requirements to realise Tripura’s urban sanitation goal. Following up on this,
the state developed a detailed project report for a pilot septage management project in the town of
Bishalgarh. The pilot project encompasses all the aspects included in the state septage strategy and is
seen as the learning ground for the state Urban Development Department (UDD) for identifying the key
requirements of technology management, contracting procedures, partnership building (with private
sector) required for septage management and prepare the basis for institutional strengthening through
capacity building of its urban cadre and further refine the roadmap for state-wide scale up enunciated in
the strategy. The project has been submitted to the Central Government for financial support, and has
been given in-principle approval for implementation. The project is likely to be implemented over the
next two years and a follow on TA could support the design, procurement and capacity building
components. This is likely the first project in the country to plan, design and allocate finances for a
specially designed septage management system, including a stand-alone septage treatment facility. The
experience and knowledge gained from implementation of the Bishalgarh pilot project will also be
shared with other states, and the Central Government.
Learning: The TA went into both the states predicated on the availability of financial resources from the
Govt. of India schemes (JNNURM and North East 10% lumpsum scheme) and state Governments’ own
resources. However, delays in the formulation of the revised JNNURM constrained the availability of
funds. Thus, the TA was constrained to focus on putting the necessary building blocks for strengthening
the institutional and regulatory aspects, but these remain untested on the ground. However, the said
period also provided space for the TA to engage with the state governments in highlighting the need for
septage management and getting their priority and buy-in for this novel approach. The limited financing
flows over the last year and the experience with capital intensive conveyance and treatment solutions
or the lack of suitability of these in Tripura’s small towns, have also aided the effort of the TA, in seeking
alternate approaches. In Madhya Pradesh, this has meant working with the state and development
partners resources and focusing on the implementation of the state sanitation vision to improving
individual and community access to sanitation, while awaiting new centrally sponsored schemes to
address other aspects of sanitation, namely collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater / septage.
However with the state sanitation vision, an investment program and a prioritization framework in
place, the state can begin to test different approaches (network, non-network or mixed) to improve
sanitation in a holistic manner, as and when new centrally sponsored schemes become effective.
Further, a key lesson of working in a remote state like Tripura was that considerable traction on policy
implementation can be gained by working at multiple levels, viz state and city level institutions. The

34
training workshops and surveys have helped build capacities and prepared the state and the town of
Bishalgarh for piloting septage management.
Future TAs could build upon the current achievements in terms of priority being accorded to sanitation,
and develop on capacities built in these states. In future, these states and cities therein are likely to
accelerate their progress in implementation of urban sanitation interventions, assisted by improved
sanitation and wastewater management through septage management, recycling and reuse and
implementation of national advisories in these realms. Implementation of sanitation interventions in
these states could also provide best practice models for CSP implementation, and septage management
systems for national advocacy.




35
