Report No: ACS13192



Republic of Indonesia
Rural Sanitation Market Expansion of Domestic
Private Sector in Indonesia



April 16, 2015




GWASE

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC




                                          1
Standard Disclaimer:



This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.



Copyright Statement:



The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may
be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.


For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.


All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                         2
 Contents

Overview of Technical Assistance (P143167)
Rural Sanitation Market Expansion of Domestic Private Sector in Indonesia                                  4
…………………………………………………………
Executive Summary                                                                                          5
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
Main                                                                                                       8
Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..                                         8
  1. Background: Scaling Up Rural Sanitation in Indonesia……………………………………………………………………………..                   8
    1.1 Indonesian Community-Based Total Sanitation Strategy (Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat or
         STBM)……
    1.2 Pilot Implementation of STBM through a Global Learning Program Implemented in East Java Province
         as Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing                                                      8
         Project……………………………………………………………………………………
  2. Technical Assistance Objectives and Results…………………………………………………………………………………………….                       10
    2.1 Objective of the Technical                                                                         10
         Assistance……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
    2.2 Summary of TA                                                                                      10
         Results…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
  3. Key Innovations Introduced through the Rural Sanitation Market Development Component of               11
       STBM……..                                                                                            11
    3.1 Tapping the Market Opportunity
         …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
    3.2 Improving the Sanitation Business Model to Serve the                                               12
         Poor……………………………………………………………………..
        3.2.a Product                                                                                      12
        Research…….………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
        3.2.b Optimizing the On-site Construction Process to Lower Cost and Improve Quality                13
        …………………………….
        3.2.c Simplifying the Purchase Process through a One-Stop Sanitation Shop Concept                  14
        …………………………….
    3.3 Sanitation Entrepreneurship Development Assistance                                                 17
         …………………………….……………………………………………..
    3.4 Fostering Transition from Small-Scale Independent Businesses to an Industry Association            19
         …………………….
    3.5 Working with Banks and MFIs to Introduce Sanitation Financing                                      23
         …………………………….……………………………….
    3.6 Systematizing Public-Private Collaboration in Rural Sanitation                                     25
         …………………………….………………………………….
    3.7 Evolving roles for different actors and identifying capacity development needs                     28
         ………………………………………
    3.8 Delivering at Scale through PAMSIMAS Project                                                       28
         …………………………….…………………………….…………………………..
  4. Analyzing the Effects of Sanitation Firms and CLTS Triggering to Improved Sanitation                  30
       …………………………………
    4.1 Comparison by Propensity Score Matching                                                            31
         ……………………………………………………………………………………………..
    4.2 Analysis of Improved Sanitation Adoption Since Triggering                                          32
         ……………………………………………………………………..
  5. Summary Results and Lessons Learned                                                                   33
       ……………………………………………………………………………………………………….



                                                                                                            3
    5.1 No short cuts in sanitation entrepreneur and business model development                               34
        …………………………………………..
    5.2 Wanted: entrepreneurs who can sell sanitation                                                         35
        ………………………………………………………………………………………
    5.3 Better viable business through sales territory recruitment and franchising                            36
        ……………………………………………..
    5.4 Industry associations form and evolve organically                                                     38
        ……………………………………………………………………………………
    5.5 Symbiotic relationship between entrepreneurs and local health officers                                39
        …………………………………………………
    5.6 Beginning program supply-side strengthening activities before CLTS can help build momentum,           40
        government buy-in and enterprise capacity so that demand generation activities can have the most
        impact
        …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
    5.7 Mapping the expected roles and capacities of different stakeholders is essential to the process of    41
        strengthening rural sanitation markets
        ……………………………………………………………………………………………………

Annex-1 District Wide Approach                                                                                42
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Annex-2 Applying Value Engineering to the Development of an Economic and Hygienic Latrine Design (Case        43
Study: Sanitation Entrepreneurs in East Java)
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Annex-3 Entrepreneur Application Form                                                                         52
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Annex-4 Appendix 6: Entrepreneur Selection Criteria                                                           57
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
Annex-5 One-stop Shop Business SOP Pocket Book                                                                61
………………………………………………………………………………………………
Annex-6 Presentation deck and Infographic on Opportunity for Microfinance Institutions in Indonesia’s Rural   79
Sanitation Market
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

List of Figures

Figure 1. Constructing concrete septic tanks with new fiberglass molds and casting technique                  14
…………………………….
Figure 2. Example product brochure for four new latrine packages                                              14
………………………………………………………………………
Figure 3. Snapshot of the APPSANI Association                                                                 20
……………………………………………………………………………………………………..
Figure 4. Number of APPSANI active members by province, July                                                  23
2014……………………………………………………………………..
Figure 5. Percentage of APPSANI members by gender                                                             23
…………………………………………………………………………………………….
Figure 6. The One-stop-shop business process and integration with CLTS                                        27
……………………………………………………………..
Figure 7. Households in Village with Improved Sanitation                                                      33
……………………………………………………………………………………..
Figure 8. DPSP Theory of Change Diagram                                                                       34
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Figure 9. Dashboard of APPSANI Web-based                                                                      37
………………………………………………………………………………………………………..


                                                                                                               4
List of Tables

Table 1. One-stop-shop (OSS) business model                                                                    16
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
Table 2. Entrepreneurship Training Supported During TA                                                         17
……………………………………………………………………………………..
Table 3. APPSANI Area of Services                                                                              21
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
Table 4. Pre-triggering, triggering, and follow up CLTS                                                        27
………………………………………………………………………………………….
Table 5. Propensity Score Matching to Estimate the Impact of CLTS and Sanitation Firms on Access to Improved   31
Sanitation
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..

List of Boxes

Box 1. Selecting high-potential applicants for enterprise training                                             35
…………………………………………………………………………




                                                                                                                5
 Abbreviation and Terms

CLTS                        Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) is an innovative methodology for mobilizing
                            communities to completely eliminate open defecation (OD). Communities are facilitated to
                            conduct their own appraisal and analysis of open defecation (OD) and take their own action
                                                                  1
                            to become ODF (open defecation free)
Improved                    An improved sanitation facility is defined as one that hygienically separates human excreta
Sanitation Facilities                           2
                            from human contact
MoH                         Ministry of Health
OD                          Open Defecation is any form of defecation that does not ensure the separation of excreta
                            from human contact
ODF                         Open Defecation Free is the condition when all individual within one defined community stop
                            practicing open defecation
               3            PAMSIMAS (Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities) is the
PAMSIMAS
                            Indonesian Government’s national program to deliver water supply, sanitation and improved
                            hygiene practice to rural and peri-urban areas. PAMSIMAS works with communities to plan,
                            finance, manage and maintain their own water supply and sanitation systems and improve
                                               4
                            hygiene behaviors.
Sanitation                  Activities to reach customers and persuade them to buy and use sanitation products or
Marketing                   services. Application of social marketing practices to scale up the demand and supply for
                            improved sanitation, particularly among the poor.
STBM                        Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat or Government’s Policy for Community-Based Total
                            Sanitation
TSSM                        Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing – three strands; CLTS to generate demand,
                            sanitation marketing to reinforce demand generation and increase supply of sanitation goods
                                                                                                             5
                            and services, and strategies to strengthen the government’s enabling environment .
WSLIC                       Water & Sanitation for Low Income Communities Project, WSLIC-1 (1994-99) and (WSLIC-2)
                            (2003-2007) projects supported by the World Bank. WSLIC 2 operated in seven provinces and
                            aimed to provide water supply, improved health and hygiene behavior, and community
                            development, to about 2,500 communities.
WSP                         The Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) is a multi-donor partnership administered
                            by the World Bank to support poor people in obtaining affordable, safe and sustainable
                            access to water and sanitation services




 1
     http://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/page/clts-approach
 2
     WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation, http://www.wssinfo.org/definitions-methods/
 3
     http://new.pamsimas.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&layout=item&id=15&Itemid=129
 4
     http://aid.dfat.gov.au/countries/eastasia/indonesia/Pages/economic-growth-init4.aspx
 5
     http://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP-Indonesia-Sanitation-Impact-Evaluation-Field-Note.pdf



                                                                                                                                6
Overview of Technical Assistance (P143167)
Rural Sanitation Market Expansion of Domestic Private Sector in Indonesia
This report is a synthesis of fieldwork findings and recommendations developed since October 2012
under this Technical Assistance (TA) carried out by the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program
(WSP). The recommendations have been developed through on-going consultations and meetings with
the Directorate of Environmental Sanitation and Directorate General of Human Settlements, Ministry of
Health, Government of Indonesia.

Other materials available to the client under the TA include:
   - Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) of One-stop Shop Sanitation Business Model
   - SOP Assessment of APPSANI Member
   - Facilitation Manual of Sanitation Entrepreneurship Training
   - Training Modules of Sanitation Entrepreneurship Training
   - Study report on Women in Rural Sanitation
   - One-stop Shop Sanitation Business Franchise Brand Book
   - APPSANI business process mobile application platform and web-based dashboard
   - Study report on Applying Value Engineering to the Development of an Economic and Hygienic
       Latrine Design (Case Study: Sanitation Entrepreneurs in East Java)
   - Presentation deck and Infographic on Opportunity for Microfinance Institutions in Indonesia’s
       Rural Sanitation Market




                                                                                                     7
Executive Summary
This report describes and assesses the performance of technical assistance TA-P143167, “Rural
Sanitation Market Expansion of Domestic Private Sector in Indonesia,” provided by the World Bank
through the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) carried out from October 2, 2012 to March 31, 2015
to support the development of a rural sanitation market in Indonesia. This technical assistance (TA) was
implemented as part of a larger effort to assist the Government of Indonesia achieve at-scale results in
rural sanitation through its National Strategy for Community-Based Total Sanitation (Sanitasi Total
Berbasis Masyarakat - STBM).

Background

Ranked second in the world for number of open defecators, Indonesia’s poor sanitation costs the
country an estimated USD 6.3 billion in lost revenues each year, equivalent to about 2.3% of annual
GDP. Nearly 31% of the rural population – 37 million people - practice open defecation, and an
additional 24% use unimproved facilities. Given this massive public health challenge, the Government of
Indonesia recognized the need for innovative, scalable solutions.

Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS), a structured method of behavior change to shift community
attitudes around open defecation, was adopted as the primary national approach to scaling up rural
sanitation after successful pilots in 2005. Taking it a step further, in 2008 the Indonesian Ministry of
Health launched the National Strategy for Community-Based Total Sanitation (STBM), an approach that
combines CLTS with efforts to increase the ability of the market to provide sanitation products and
services and strengthen the enabling environment for implementation.

STBM marked a significant departure from previous publicly-funded toilet construction programs in
Indonesia. Not only did it recognize the power of local communities to take collective action to stop
open defecation, it also explicitly identified a role for the local private sector in meeting the increased
demand for affordable, desirable sanitation products and services following CLTS.

TA Objectives and Results

The development objective of this TA was to strengthen the ability of the local private sector in five
project provinces by increasing the number of firms working in rural sanitation and helping strengthen
their capacity.

The TA worked with the local private sector to refine the one-stop shop business model previously
introduced. Traditionally, households interested in purchasing a toilet needed to design the structures
themselves, source the raw materials and hire and supervise masons – an expensive and time-
consuming process. The one-stop shop business model offers customers with a range of affordable,
desirable sanitation solutions delivered by one-stop-shop sanitation enterprises. It provides households
a complete turnkey solution, including home delivery of all building materials, on-site construction
services, and flexible payment options.

The TA also supported the development and evolution of an industry association of sanitation
enterprises called APPSANI (in Indonesian, Asosiasi Pengelola dan Pemberdayaan Sanitasi Indonesia) to




                                                                                                         8
support the Government of Indonesia with replication and development of these enterprises within the
context of National Strategy for STBM

The TA introduced a number of new innovations that have led to significant increases in access to
improved sanitation in Indonesia, in addition to providing valuable learning on developing sanitation
firms that can be applied in other countries. Specific innovations tested included:

       The use of fiberglass molds and new concrete casting techniques to mold concrete septic tank
        rings, reducing costs and simplifying the installation procedure
       Working with banks and microfinance institutions to develop new loan products for purchasing
        improved sanitation, helping households afford this purchase by spreading the cost over time
       Shift to a more integrated and flexible approach on ‘sequencing’ of product promotion by the
        enterprise and CLTS triggering event by district health staff to better coordinate supply-side and
        demand-side interventions

By the end of the TA, 25 training events were held for 1,026 participants. 194 APPSANI-supported
entrepreneurs built 47,715 toilets in the five project provinces, representing an investment of USD four
million by households in improved sanitation.

While a fully randomized impact evaluation of the TA was not possible, it was possible to conduct a
quasi-experimental evaluation using statistical techniques to compare villages with and without a
sanitation firm. The analysis found that villages with both CLTS triggering and a sanitation firm active in
the village had rates of improved sanitation coverage (60% as of November 2014) five percentage points
higher than villages with only CLTS triggering (55% as of November 2014). The analysis also found that
CLTS villages have improved sanitation coverage rates (as of November 2014) 5 percentage points
higher than villages that have not had CLTS triggering activities, a finding in line with impact evaluations
previously conducted. The results achieved through the TA provide evidence that STBM’s approach of
combining CLTS with market-based approaches is a more effective way of improving access to improved
sanitation.

Lessons Learned

The results of this TA, along with WSP’s emerging learning from similar TA in other countries, suggest
that engaging the private sector can help in expanding access to rural sanitation in Indonesia. Lessons
learned during implementation will help guide future work in this area, and can inform the design of
sanitation markets programs in other countries as well:

There are no short cuts in sanitation entrepreneur and business model development. A markets-based
approach to rural sanitation may initially take more time to establish a foundation for scale, but the TA
has shown that once the demand and supply-side constraints have been addressed there is much
greater potential for scale and long-term sustainability.

It can be challenging to find entrepreneurs willing and able to sell sanitation. In the early stages of the
TA, training tended to attract many district health workers who were familiar with the topic of
sanitation. However, these health workers often had other commitments and did not have the
entrepreneurial drive often found in successful business-owners. APPSANI now encourages a much
broader range of potential businesses.



                                                                                                          9
Franchising and sales territories can help build scale. To grow their sales, enterprise must expand into
other villages or sub-districts, implying increased travel time and cost. Because most entrepreneurs
spend only about one-third of their time managing their sanitation businesses, they may not have
sufficient resources or interest to manage large numbers of installations simultaneously. In light of these
challenges, APPSANI and its members began a pilot to explore the opportunity for changes to the
business model. APPSANI utilizes a mobile app and IT platform: Centralized order taking is enabled by
the use of a mobile app. The mobile app enables the enterprises to better track costs and revenues, and
to monitor the performance of the sales agents.

Industry associations evolve slowly. The formation and growth of APPSANI did not happen overnight.
The initial concept grew slowly out of discussions among enterprises themselves, after they had
practical experience running one-stop-shops. The key to APPSANI’s membership growth so far has been
the fact that its services address specific member needs. Members have identified access to finance,
business support and government linkages as the main reasons why they chose to join APPSANI.
Services themselves have come on-line over time, usually by piloting with a small group of members
before expanding to the entire network. This approach to service roll-out has allowed for progressive
learning among APPSANI staff and members, and step-by-step improvements to service provision. While
external facilitation support by WSP and others had a role to play, the process and evolution of APPSANI
demonstrates that industry development can be facilitated but does not happen in a directed, top-down
approach.

Relationships between entrepreneurs and local health officers are critical. One-stop-shop
entrepreneurs report the most success when they build close working relationships with government
health staff and link their sales efforts to broader CLTS and demand promotion activities. One of the
critical barriers for sanitation entrepreneurs is the conversion of potential demand to real consumer
demand; that is, from a generally felt need to stop open defecation, to the actual purchase an improved
latrine product. The investment required to change sanitation behaviors and establish new social norms
is significant, and it may not be realistic to expect that the private sector alone can fully bear this cost. In
focus groups conducted in 2012, enterprises with the highest volumes of sales identified partnerships
with sanitarians, district health center staff, health workers, and village heads as the most important
contributing factors to their success.

The learning and experience from East Java point to the critical role the local private sector can play in
both achieving and sustaining open defecation free communities. The initial program logic assumed
that households within triggered communities would climb a ‘sanitation ladder’ from very low cost,
homegrown innovations inspired by the community triggering process, to increasing levels of service as
communities seek to maintain their ODF status over time. This logic implies that CLTS triggering should
therefore happen first, followed by other efforts that emphasize the available sanitation facilities. In
fact, the market research clearly identified specific sanitation product preferences and perceptions that
exist across the population, even before triggering. Households did not simply change their
dissatisfaction with ‘basic’ lower-cost dry pit latrines, and in many cases opted to jump directly to the
desired pour-flush latrine types or delay construction until they could afford this option. These findings
among households led the program to shift to a more integrated and flexible approach, in which one-
stop-shop enterprises are present at triggering events and able to introduce available products and
services at the post-triggering stage, and to follow up with potential customers afterwards.




                                                                                                             10
Beginning program supply-side strengthening activities before CLTS can help build momentum,
government buy-in and enterprise capacity so that demand generation activities can have the most
impact. The strategic decision to kick-off new provincial activities with the enterprise training and
exposure visit was taken for two primary reasons. The evidence and experience from East Java indicated
that developing private sector capacity can take time, and that it is most effective to begin this process
as early as possible so that adequate supply is available to meet the consumer demand unlocked by
CLTS and behavior change activities. Thus, one important goal and expected outcome was for the two or
three enterprises from each province to go back to their homes and set up pioneer one-stop-shop
enterprises straight away. These pioneers could then be the provincial-level proof of concepts, leaders
and examples to other potential enterprises at provincial level.

Mapping the expected roles and capacities of different stakeholders is essential to the process of
strengthening rural sanitation markets. In Indonesia, provincial and district governments make funding
decisions for the majority of health activities. Health authorities have many competing priorities and
only limited funds. The national team at the STBM Secretariat has worked with the provincial governors
and health coordinators to make sure that the STBM is a line item in every budget. The easier it is for
local government to understand the entire STBM concept, the more likely they will be to develop
concrete tasks, steps, and roles that can be used as the basis for budgeting and planning. Once the
overall concept is clear, however, most local health authorities can see the benefits of working with the
private sector. When households that can afford to pay invest in their own sanitation facility, the
government can more effectively target support to those most in need.

Facilitating collaboration between one-stop shop enterprises with potential finance institutions is
crucial in providing consumer with credit to purchase toilet. Low awareness of potential finance
institutions and their limited availability of low-cost of finance has hindered them to expand their
services in sanitation consumer financing. In collaboration with Water.org, the TA provided a more
systematic support and technical assistance to build their interest and enable them to develop
consumer financing product. In most of the cases, facilitation between enterprises with potential FI
partner was crucial to be provided in which case APPSANI played crucial rule in the process.


Recommendations

The lessons learned through this TA provide guidance on next steps for APPSANI, WSP and the
Government of Indonesia.

Increase the number of trainees who become entrepreneurs. Approximately one-fifth of the
participants in one-stop shop training elected to start a sanitation business. Ensuring that the quality of
training is consistent across venues, while also providing post-training mentoring support from existing
entrepreneurs can improve this ratio. The market timing is also important – trainings should be
sequenced with CLTS activities to ensure that there is sufficient demand for the newly-trained
entrepreneurs.

Continue to test the APPSANI social franchise model. By standardizing services and centralizing some
core business functions, APPSANI can move towards a new social franchise model that generates
operating efficiencies over a larger service area. Standardization has been a key element of this
evolution, since it enables APPSANI to build its brand through more consistent quality in product and
service delivery. At present, however, it is still unclear how much enterprises will be willing to pay for


                                                                                                        11
these benefits, for instance, through franchise fees. Even if this new model cannot achieve full financial
sustainability at first, compared to the current industry association the social franchise may be more
scalable due to its improved operating efficiencies.

Continue to build local government support for STBM. Budgeting and planning cycles and bureaucratic
processes differ from one local government to another. Annual planning and mid-year budget revisions
do not always happen as planned, and this affects local government ability to execute its CLTS,
promotions, and training plans. In addition, high turn-over and staff rotation within the line agencies
means institutional knowledge is frequently lost.




                                                                                                       12
Main Report

     1. Background: Scaling Up Rural Sanitation in Indonesia

     1.1 Indonesian Community-Based Total Sanitation Strategy (Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat or
         STBM)

Ranked second in the world for number of open defecators, Indonesia’s poor sanitation costs the
country an estimated USD 6.3 billion in lost revenues each year, equivalent to about 2.3% of annual
GDP.6 Nearly 31% of the rural population – 37 million people - practice open defecation, and an
additional 24% use unimproved facilities. Given the scale of the sanitation problem, the Government of
Indonesia recognized the need for innovative at-scale solutions.

The Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS)7 approach was adopted as the primary national approach to
scaling up rural sanitation after successful pilots in 2005. Taking it a step further, in 2008 the Indonesian
Ministry of Health launched the National Strategy for Community-Based Total Sanitation (STBM), an
approach that combines CLTS with market-based approaches and behavior change communications in
order to 1) sustain behavior change and create community demand, 2) increase market supply of
sanitation products and services, and 3) strengthen the enabling environment for implementation.

The STBM marked a significant departure from previous publicly-funded toilet construction programs in
Indonesia. Not only did it recognize the power of local communities to take collective action to stop
open defecation, it also explicitly identified a role for the local private sector in delivering affordable,
desirable sanitation products and services to rural consumers. While conceptually it seemed straight-
forward to bring together community-based and market-based approaches, in practice a great deal of
learning-by-doing was required: While CLTS was gradually institutionalized within the Ministry of Health
and provincial, district and local line agencies, these agencies were less familiar with how to engage the
private sector at scale. New types of public-private partnerships required substantial changes to how
government agencies operated and conceived of their roles. At about the same time, relationships and
implementation arrangements within the government were being shaped by the broader
decentralization of governance in Indonesia. Local governments needed the capacity and the political
will to provide financial and human resources for sanitation implementation. Simultaneous learning
about how to implement a range of approaches in a decentralized way created both opportunities and
challenges to at-scale implementation.

     1.2 Pilot Implementation of STBM through a Global Learning Program Implemented in East Java
         Province as Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing Project

To demonstrate at-scale implementation of STBM, the Ministry of Health and the East Java Provincial
Government, with technical assistance from the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program (WSP),

6
  WSP, 2008. Economic Impacts of Sanitation in Indonesia: A Five country study under the Economics of Sanitation Initiative (ESI), Research
Report.
7
  Community-led Total Sanitation (CLTS) is a methodology for mobilizing communities to completely eliminate open defecation. Communities
are facilitated to conduct their own appraisal and analysis of open defecation and focuses discussions on the behavioral change needed to
ensure sustainable improvements. By raising awareness that as long as even a minority continues to defecate in the open everyone is at risk of
disease, CLTS triggers the community’s desire for collective change, propels people into action and take their own action to become open
defecation free.



                                                                                                                                           13
launched the Scaling-Up Rural Sanitation program, a global learning initiative on how sanitation
programs can be designed and implemented at scale.

The global program is based on a theory of change developed by WSP that connects strengthening
sanitation supply with behavior change and demand creation for sanitation, rooted in an enabling
environment that allows a programmatic approach at-scale. Demand creation – through approaches
such as CLTS and Behavior Change Communications (BCCs) – combined with sanitation marketing efforts
focus on getting communities to stop open defecation and aims to convince households to purchase,
build, and use improved latrines.

The pilot of the global program implemented in East Java was called Total Sanitation and Sanitation
Marketing, or TSSM, Project.8 It began as a learning project across all 29 districts of rural East Java,
combining CLTS, behavior change communication, and sanitation marketing approaches. With regard to
market development, the underlying hypothesis of the project is that, to capture the full benefits of
sanitation, it is not enough that communities become open defecation-free (ODF). Benefits can be
better sustained where access is to an improved sanitation facility through the availability of products
from local entrepreneurs.9

When the TSSM project began, East Java had a population of about 37.4 million people, including 20
percent of Indonesia’s poor, and rural improved sanitation coverage was just at 38%.10 Across the
province, the 8 million households lacking access to improved sanitation had an estimated market value
of around USD 323 million.11

As at-scale CLTS triggering got underway, the program used formative market research to segment the
rural market into two broad groups. For the first market segment of open defecators (comprising 40% of
the market), the aim was to change open defecation behavior by implementing CLTS reinforced with
other key behavior change messages. For the second segment of unimproved and semi-
permanent/temporary latrine owners (comprising 15% of the market), the focus was to stimulate
household investment in upgrading from a basic facility to an improved latrine with consumer-driven
product features.

The implementation of TSSM showed that while demand for improved toilets exists in villages that have
undergone demand creation through CLTS, suppliers were not ready to offer rural households product
options that meet their aspirations and budgets.

To address this, TSSM initially focused on training masons and staff of district health centers
(‘sanitarians’) to offer more affordable, better quality construction services. About 1,700 masons and
health staff were trained and, in some districts, encouraged to use the “WC-ku sehat” (“My Latrine is
Hygienic”) logo in their marketing materials.

While some of these masons did go on to offer new, more affordable sanitation services, the vast

8
  The initiative was initially part of the 2008-2012 multi-country WSP Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing (TSSM) Program, supported by
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
9
  WSP. Kullman, Craig, et al. WSP, World Bank. Long Term Sustainability of Improved Sanitation in Rural Bangladesh, 2011
10
   N. Mukherjee, 2011. Factors Associated with Achieving and Sustaining Open Defecation Free Communities: Learning from East Java, WSP
Brief. Note, currency given at 2011 exchange rate.
11
   S. Giltner and A. Surianingrat, 2010, Sanitation in Indonesia: A Market Assessment.



                                                                                                                                          14
majority - more than 97 percent - were found to be inactive or not using their new skills for sanitation. 12
Masons gaining new skills from the training tended to move to the cities to serve a more profitable
market, rather than staying in their villages. Challenges with the process and criteria for mason selection
and other implementation difficulties contributed to this low rate of trained and active masons.13

Masons had little capital, few business skills, and low profit potential due to their limited geographic
reach. They were unable to offer value added services such as pre-purchase consultation and home
delivery of latrine materials, and lacked the capacity to keep up with new CLTS-generated demand,
resulting in backlogs of latrine orders. Commonly, triggered households were simply unaware of where
or how to purchase affordable, quality latrines because the linkage between government-led demand
promotion and local masons was weak.


       2. Technical Assistance Objectives and Results

       2.1 Objective of the Technical Assistance

The development objective of this technical assistance is to increase rural market reach by rural
sanitation entrepreneurs in 5 (five) provinces by 1) increasing the number of sanitation entrepreneurs
competent in undertaking a one-stop-shop sanitation business, and 2) strengthening capacity of these
entrepreneurs and facilitating networking with potential private organizations to accelerate expansion.
Both objectives address two main challenges in rural sanitation market development. Increasing the
number of sanitation entrepreneurs competent in undertaking a one-stop-shop sanitation business will
provide access to affordable sanitation products to a wider market. While strengthening the capacity of
these entrepreneurs and facilitating their networking with potential private organizations will add value
of their services delivered to customers.

       2.2 Summary of TA Results

The TA worked with the local private sector to refine the one-stop shop business model introduced
during TSSM project and its delivery model through enterprise to customers. One-stop shop business
model offers customers with a range of affordable, desirable sanitation solutions delivered by one-stop-
shop sanitation enterprises. It provides households a complete turnkey solution, including home
delivery of all building materials, on-site construction services, and flexible payment options. The TA also
supported the development and evolution of an industry association of sanitation enterprises called
APPSANI, or in Indonesian, Asosiasi Pengelola dan Pemberdayaan Sanitasi Indonesia14 to support the
Government of Indonesia with replication and development of these enterprises within the context of
National Strategy for Community-Based Total Sanitation (Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat - STBM).

     Intermediate Outcomes                Indicators Proposed in PCN                                 Results Achieved

 Government capacity and                - Monitoring capacity of                   - Number of training funded by LGs (local
 knowledge on sanitation                  trained entrepreneurs                      governments) in 5 provinces: 25 training

12
     E. Perez, 2012. What Does It Take to Scale Up Rural Sanitation? WSP Working Paper.
13
     The Learning Note ‘Sanitation Market Transformation in Indonesia: Working at Scale’ explores at-scale implementation in more detail.
14
   The Learning Notes ‘Sanitation Market Transformation in Indonesia: Designing Viable Business Models’ and ‘Sanitation Market
Transformation in Indonesia: From Business Support to Industry Growth’ describe the one-stop-shop model and broader industry evolution.



                                                                                                                                            15
supply activities has           performance increased              events with 1,026 participants
increased
                                                                 - Number of training funded by LGs outside 5
                                                                   provinces: 14 training events with 243
                                                                   participants, and 3 trainings with 74
                                                                   participants from other non-government
                                                                   organizations
                                                                 - Data on active entrepreneurs available in
                                                                   East Java province; available with close
                                                                   assistance from project consultants in the
                                                                   other 4 provinces health office (East Java,
                                                                   Central Java, Bali, NTB)

Remarks: This particular indicator is to gauge government monitoring capacity related to sanitation supply. This
was measured in two ways:
    1.   Government investment to fund the trainings. This is to show government awareness of the
         importance of and interest in developing local enterprises to better respond to the demand generated
         from their demand generation activities, and
    2.   The availability of data at health offices on number of enterprises and their performance. This shows
         government level of ownership to the supply strengthening approach as one key component in STBM
         program. The information generated from this monitoring process will feed into their annual planning
         whether to invest more in training or in facilitating networking with other industry players, for
         example.
Other than its organic resources available at health offices, local government investment to this approach was
mainly to fund entrepreneurship training events. There were 25 training events involving 1026 participants were
conducted during the project implementation. The cost structure for one training event was covered around
30% by the TA for resources person fee and transportation, and 70% by the government for venue, equipment,
tools, and participants’ accommodation.

OS3 (One Stop Shop            - Volume of sales in unit of       - Toilet constructed in 5 project provinces:
Sanitation) entrepreneurs       toilets constructed and            47,715 units, representing total sales of USD
are improving their             amount in USD from                 4 Million by 194 entrepreneurs
operations                      existing and new OS3
                                                                 - Toilet constructed outside 5 provinces
                                entrepreneurs
                                                                   including PAMSIMAS: 2,335 units,
                              - OS3 entrepreneurs                  representing total sales of USD 197
                                consistently prepare               thousand by 71 entrepreneurs
                                financial records
                                                                 - Financial record practices still limited among
                                                                   entrepreneurs despite 2 business skill
                                                                   workshops and several coaching sessions
                                                                   conducted (less than 35%). An initiative
                                                                   using mobile application platform is now
                                                                   undergoing to assist entrepreneurs with
                                                                   their financial record

Remarks: The volume of units sold measured in this TA resulted from enterprises operating the one-stop shop
business model. The project compare the market uptake of one-stop shop business enterprise with current
market mechanism in terms of the impact it had on improving sanitation access. To find out whether there is a
positive relationship between the presence of one-stop-shop entrepreneurs and access to sanitation in the
communities where they work, a comparison by propensity score matching villages from 3 provinces (East Java,
Bali and West Nusa Tenggara) was conducted. The analysis found that villages with both CLTS “triggering” and a



                                                                                                                 16
sanitation firm active in the village had rates of improved sanitation coverage (60% as of November 2014) five
percentage points higher than villages with only CLTS triggering (55% as of November 2014).

A sanitation business         - Support to entrepreneurship       - Number of qualified trainers within
association such as             training or workshop events         APPSANI: 19 trainers; with 42 training events
APPSANI has strengthened        facilitated by governments          supported including 3 trainings from other
capacity to expand market       or other organizations to           non-government organizations
coverage                        replicate OS3 entrepreneurs
                                                                  - Amount invested by entrepreneurs member
                                provided
                                                                    of APPSANI: USD 252 thousand, with half
                              - Investments using any               from entrepreneurs’ personal funds
                                source of finance (personal
                                funds, equity and debt) has
                                increased

Remarks: In the effort to improving enterprises                                               2013        2014
operations, the TA also monitors enterprises’           # ENTERPRISESSURVEYED                        90      187
financial performance indicators which can be seen      PRODUCTION DATA (Average)
in the table below. This financial performance data        Unit sold per month                  9.34        6.38
would suggest some challenges faced by the                 Selling price (USD)                103.70      109.18
enterprises and feed into the capacity building and        Production cost (USD)               81.91       86.16
assistance planning of APPSANI for their members.             Sales Margin                       21%         21%
                                                        FINANCIAL DATA (Average_USD)
                                                           Annual Revenue                     11,620       8,363
                                                           Expenses (incl. Marketing Costs)    8,988       6,654
                                                           Fixed Assets                        2,329       3,420
                                                           Current Assets                        844       1,146
                                                           Receivables                           504         449
                                                              Net Income                       2,632       1,709
                                                              Profit Margin                      23%         20%

Capacity of APPSANI to        - Implementation capacity to        - SOP and accreditation mechanism to
develop and certify             certify members of                  measure members’ compliance to the SOP
members has increased           association strengthened            established and tested; capacity of APPSANI
                                                                    staffs developed
                              - Number of existing and new
                                OS3 entrepreneurs entering        - Number of entrepreneurs serving the
                                the market (already in              market in 5 provinces: 194 enterprises;
                                business for more than 6            outside project 5 provinces: 71 enterprises
                                months)

Remarks: The specific capacity of APPSANI staff to be developed here was on the accreditation process of its
members. The project hired a consultant to work with APPSANI to develop guidance and tool to be used for this
accreditation purposes. A pilot activity was conducted to test and refine the guidance and tool while at the
same time learned how the tool can be fined tune – suitable for APPSANI staff. As part of the process, the TA
also conducted on-the-job training for APPSANI staff. The survey was conducted by these staff with selected
entrepreneurs. The results were then summarized, analyzed and fed into the capacity building plan of APPSANI
for members surveyed.



   3. Key Innovations Introduced through the Rural Sanitation Market Development Component of
      STBM




                                                                                                                  17
       3.1 Tapping the Market Opportunity

The TSSM project targeted households with low socio-economic status through a mason-based service
model. However, it became clear that training masons was not sufficient to address all household
consumer needs or supply-side challenges constraining the availability of improved sanitation products
to reach them.

Consumer research conducted under TSSM assessed a range of aspirations held by low-income
households and found that people associate good facilities with social status but perceive them to be
unaffordable.15 Key market gaps identified also from the research were: 1) over estimation by low-
income households of cost (price) of toilet; 2) complicated process for people to purchase latrine; and 3)
toilet purchase at the lowest priority when households have extra money. These gaps could not be
addressed by an intervention focused only on a public demand-creation and mason training – they
needed interventions directed at introducing innovations with the very business model16 that existed in
rural Indonesia at that stage. The business model had to 1) reduce the cost of production; 2) provide a
credible, one-stop shop point of sale for rural households; and 3) allow modular improvement and
financing to allow poorest households to purchase and upgrade when they have extra cash.

Developing and testing this new business model was a first, proof-of-concept stage of the TA. In order to
commercialize the business model, links to market support needed to be developed and established.
These included: 1) establishment of a sanitation entrepreneur development program; 2) establishment
of a sanitation industry association; 3) formalizing public-private roles in demand-creation and
marketing and ultimately, in achieving improved rural sanitation outcomes; and 4) introducing
sanitation financing products through local financial institutions.

Developing a market development approach was based on the assumption that there is a market
opportunity – indeed, a significant one. Over 40 percent of Indonesia’s 247 million residents do not have
access to improved sanitation. At 54 million people in total, Indonesia has the second highest number of
open defecators worldwide.17 In rural areas, only 46 percent of the 121 million rural residents have
improved sanitation and another 31 percent – 37 million people - regularly practice open defecation.
While these numbers demonstrate Indonesia’s staggering sanitation need, they also represent a vast
untapped market opportunity worth an estimated USD 1.3 billion in rural areas alone for one-time sales
of improved sanitation facilities.18 An IFC study conducted earlier (2009) had consistent finding:
estimating that the market value for toilet construction in East Java Province alone could reach USD 323
million across 8,000 villages.19

       3.2 Improving the Sanitation Business Model to Serve the Poor




15
     Nielsen. Consumer Survey Prepared for WSP. Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing Research in East Java, 2008
16
    Business model describes the process by which an enterprise creates economic value for its target customer, itself, and its investors. It
includes the methods to deliver a product or service to its target markets for which customers are willing to pay and therefore, generates profit
for the enterprise.
17
    Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2014 Update. Joint Monitoring Programme, WHO/UNICEF.
18
    J. Sy, R. Warner and J. Jamieson, 2014.Tapping the Markets: Opportunities for Domestic Investments in Water and Sanitation for the Poor.
World Bank.
19
    Cowater International Inc. Study Report Prepared for IFC. Indonesia Sanitation Market Assessment, 2010



                                                                                                                                             18
Despite the sizeable market opportunity, the total number of entrepreneurs and their relatively low
monthly installation figure at 15 units per month shows that market coverage is not organically
expanding. What has been holding the market back from reaching these millions of unserved
households? For the most part, the sanitation industry has largely failed to supply products and services
that the majority of rural households want and can afford. A combination of weak consumer demand,
inappropriate business models, fragmented supply chains and lack of supportive market-entry policies
has led to weak private sector investment in sanitation.

            a. Product Research

Research undertaken in East Java during TSSM project implementation revealed that rural poor target
households want a pour-flush latrine that is easy to clean, odor-free, easy to maintain, durable, and
safe. 20 The ideal latrine has a ceramic pan with a concrete slab fitted with a water seal to prevent bad
odors. Although they indicated a preference for a septic tank, most households had very little
understanding of or interest in the underground components of a latrine. Households estimated that
the ideal pour-flush water seal latrine is too expensive, costing at least IDR 1.4 million (USD 117) 21. They
had limited knowledge of other latrine options. For most households, dry pit toilets were considered a
temporary measure not worth sustaining over the long term.

The initial marketing strategy priced a concrete-slab dry pit latrine at around IDR 240,000 (USD 20) as a
starter-level option, and encouraged enterprises to offer lower-cost pour-flush options with offset leach
pits as an alternative to existing septic tanks. These options did not include a shelter. However, follow-
up action research in 2011 indicated that poor households generally did not want to buy the dry pit
starter option. Some households delayed latrine construction until they could afford the desired pour-
flush type. Where lower-cost pour-flush models costing IDR 750,000 (USD 62) were offered, poor
households opted to jump directly to this product.22 Interviews with enterprises also confirmed that
80% of their sales came from “premium” latrines costing IDR 1-1.2 million (USD 85–100), even when
they offered the lower-cost options.23

The most common underground latrine structures in Indonesia are pits lined with stacked precast
concrete rings or simple septic tanks with in-situ concrete casings. Initially, masons and enterprises in
the TA program simply offered a wider range of these existing technologies, using available tools and
molds. With the clear consumer preference for the premium pour-flush, the TA began to consider how
underground technologies could be redesigned for affordability. At the same time, the Ministry of
Health raised concerns about improving safety and avoiding groundwater contamination. New
standards for the sale of “healthy latrines” specified that they should not contaminate water or topsoil,
and be insect-free, odor-free, safe, easy to clean, and private.

            b. Optimizing the On-site Construction Process to Lower Cost and Improve Quality

To be able to construct latrines that met the government’s “healthy latrine” requirements while
lowering production costs, the initiative brought on board the Institut Teknologi Sepuluh November (ITS)
Surabaya in East Java to work with sanitation entrepreneurs. Institut Teknologi Sepuluh November

20
     Nielsen. Consumer Survey Prepared for WSP. Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing Research in East Java, 2008
21
     Note: Approximate 2014 exchange rate of USD 1 = IDR 12,000 used unless otherwise noted
22
     Mukherjee, Nilanjana. 2011. Action Research, TSSM.
23
     Cowater International Inc. Study Report Prepared for IFC. Indonesia Sanitation Market Assessment, 2010.



                                                                                                                        19
estimated the cost of materials and labor for a typical concrete-ring septic tank latrine at about IDR
1,331,000 (USD 111). These designs were costly, prone to leakage, and difficult to install. New designs
would need to satisfy enhanced performance criteria including cost efficiency, leak resistance, simplified
construction process and equipment, faster construction, and flexibility. Using a value engineering
approach, a range of alternative design options was explored, including different precast concrete ring
options and alternative on-site casting approaches.

The final design included the use of new fiberglass molds to construct the latrine closet (a ceramic pan
fitted in concrete slab) as well as fiberglass inner molds and a simplified technique for cast-in-situ leak-
proof concrete casings for septic tanks (see figure 1).

                   Figure 1. Constructing concrete septic tanks with new fiberglass molds and casting technique




This design has optimal performance and reduces overall costs of the standard design by about 26%, to
IDR 978,700 (USD 82).24 After this enhanced technology was developed, the ITS team standardized a
portfolio of four modular “healthy latrine” product packages, ranging from about IDR 650,000 to
1,150,000 (USD 54–96), as illustrated in Figure 2.

           a.         Simplifying the Purchase Process through a One-Stop Sanitation Shop Concept

The market research also revealed that the latrine purchase and construction process is quite
complicated. Typically, households get information about latrine options from neighbors, health cadres,
and masons. When ready to purchase, they consult a mason to get a bill of materials. Households must
then go to the market to purchase all the necessary materials, usually visiting at least two shops, and

24
   For details on the product design process, see Jefi, M., and L. Trisunarno. 2012. “Applying Value Engineering to the Development of an
Economic and Hygienic Latrine Design (Case Study: Sanitation Entrepreneurs in East Java),” Proceedings of the 10th Production Systems
Seminar. For full design specifications and construction steps, see “Standard Operating Procedure for One Stop Shop Sanitation Service, SOP 2
Healthy Toilet Construction,” at www.wsp.org/toolkit/toolkit-home.



                                                                                                                                           20
then transport materials back to home. Finally, the mason comes back to negotiate the final price for
labor and to build the facility. This process involves multiple negotiations and shopping trips, creating
purchase hurdles for households such as opportunity cost of time, increased cost of materials, and a lack
of price transparency.

Working with existing private sanitation entrepreneurs, the TA introduced a turnkey business model,
referred to as a ‘one-stop-shop’ model. A one-stop-shop sanitation entrepreneur is a single enterprise
offering bundled services including a range of product options, home delivery of materials, full home
installation, flexible payment options, bulk purchase discounts, and in some cases maintenance and de-
sludging services. Entrepreneurs are taught how to provide advice to customers on their needs and a
range of toilet facility options. They offer a range of materials and source these for the customers and
then install on-site. By aggregating services, the one-stop-shop reduces transaction costs and provides
end-to-end services that connect consumers with building material suppliers, masons, and other value
chain actors.

                         Figure 2. Example product brochure for four new latrine packages




Unlike business models used elsewhere, such as those in Bangladesh, the Indonesian one-stop-shop is
primarily an aggregator of services and supplies, and usually does not engage directly in mass
production and delivery of precast parts. This keeps their fixed costs low and cash locked in inventories
to a minimum. The one-stop-shop purchases all materials and arranges for the materials to be delivered
to the household by the supplier, usually a district-based retailer. In some cases, the entrepreneur has
his/her own trucks and directly manages transport. The entrepreneur employs, trains, and manages
teams of masons for on-site construction. Masons work on a fee-for-service basis, and enterprises
typically keep a roster of about four masons on call. The enterprise also manages a network of trained
commissioned-based agents who coordinate order-taking and payment transactions at the village level.
These agents are usually local health volunteers, and are recruited based on recommendations from
health centers and other entrepreneurs. Table 1 maps the main features of the one-stop-shop business
model.




                                                                                                      21
The one-stop sanitation shop model was first piloted in 2009 in East Java. About 60 entrepreneurs
identified by local governments were trained on toilet sales, installation, and simple book keeping. Most
participating entrepreneurs came from existing small- and medium-size business owners or play a role in
government such as health sanitarians, teachers or midwives. By early 2012, at least 30 of them had
become part- or full-time one-stop sanitation shops that have sold and installed more than 15,000 units
of toilets among them.




                                                                                                      22
Table 1. One-stop-shop (OSS) business model

Key Partners                       Key Activities                                 Value Proposition                    Customer Relationships                     Customer Segments
OSS coordinates and works          OSS undertakes:                                OSS entrepreneurs offer              OSS maintains customer satisfaction        OSS targets:
with:                                 Market analysis and social mapping         customers:                           by:                                            All households without
    Raw material suppliers            to identify target consumers in each           A range of four new MOH-           Using local sales agents as points          latrines or with poor-
    Mason teams                       village                                         approved “healthy latrine”          of regular contact                          quality latrines within a
    Commission-based                 Triggering events and product                   product packages                   Offering personal assistance to             feasible transport, typically
     agents/cadres                     promotion                                      Free pre purchase                   help site latrine                           within a sub-district
    Sanitarians, health center       Order receiving and taking payments             consultation to assist with        Offering after-sale services such as        (village-level market sizing
     staff, village officials,        Managing home delivery and mason                product and site selection          maintenance and de-sludging                 and segmentation is done
     sanitation committee and          construction teams                             Home delivery of all               Maintaining good relationships              during social mapping)
     other government staff           Sourcing and purchasing of raw                  materials                           with local health staff
    APPSANI (Indonesian               materials                                      Full-service on-site
     Association of Sanitation        Bookkeeping and financial                       construction by trained
     Management and                    management                                      mason team
     Empowerment)                     Business planning, production                  Price discounts for bulk
                                       planning, stock management                      purchase orders by groups
                                      Human resource management,                      of households
                                       including recruitment and training             Payment flexibility to
                                                                                       include cash, group savings
                                                                                       (arisan), bank/MFI credit, or
                                   Key Resources                                                                       Channels
                                                                                       installment payment
                                   To effectively operate, OSS needs:                                                  OSS reaches customers through:
                                                                                      Maintenance and de-
                                       Latrine production equipment (tools,                                               Commission-based agents (often
                                                                                       sludging services
                                        molds, mixers, etc.)                                                                local health cadres)
                                       Raw materials (cement, sand,                                                       Product promotion after
                                        reinforcement bar, PVC pipe, etc.)                                                  community commitment is made
                                       Trained mason teams and sales                                                       at village-level triggering events
                                        agents                                                                             Door-to-door follow-ups after
                                       Adequate capital and space for stock                                                village events
                                       In some cases, OSS also maintains                                                  Print material reinforcement
                                        trucks for material delivery                                                        (posters, banners, brochures, etc.)
Cost structure                                                                                            Revenue streams
The main costs for the OSS are:                                                                           OSS receives revenues through:
    Fixed investment in molds, equipment and tools, other fixed assets                                       Operating on a cost-plus model (customer pays cost of goods plus a profit margin)
    Variable cost of raw materials, marketing costs, time for training, village visits                       Interest from installment payments
    Fee-for-service payment to mason teams for construction                                                  Small premiums for add-ons (e.g. custom designs)
    Per-latrine commissions to sales agents                                                                  Also offers discounts for group bulk purchases
    Transport delivery fee from retailer, or vehicle fuel and maintenance if self-delivered

        Adapted from the Business Model Canvas, www.businessmodelgeneration.com




                                                                                                                                                                                          23
The project facilitates modification to the business model. Best practices shared by the entrepreneurs
during workshops or meetings or identified from coaching process have been documented and
reshaped the business model. Some main improvements to the business model since it was developed
in 2009 are:
     Sequencing of demand – supply activities (2011). Shift to a more integrated and flexible
        approach on ‘sequencing’ of product promotion by the enterprise and CLTS triggering event by
        district health staff to better coordinate supply-side and demand-side interventions.
     Seamless leak-proof septic tank design (2012). In collaboration with Institut Teknologi Sepuluh
        November (ITS) Surabaya, the project explore the use of fiberglass molds and new concrete
        casting techniques to mold seamless concrete septic tank rings, increasing strength and reducing
        costs.
     Target financing of financial institutions for enterprises (2013). Initially, the focus of the business
        model on financing was for the FIs to channel credit to enterprises for working capital. The focus
        was then shifted to facilitate installment payments of customers to purchase sanitation
        products from enterprises.
     Sales and promotion (2014). A more structured process on selling and promoting the product
        were adopted. Facilitated by the association, enterprise network with village health cadres and
        develop their capacity to become its promoter and fee-based sales force.

A standard operating procedure (SOP) of one-stop shop sanitation business model25 was developed to
document the business process in the format that can be easily followed by any potential entrepreneurs
to run the business.

     1.2 Sanitation Entrepreneurship Development Assistance

At the kick-off of the STBM program in the 5 provinces (with assistance from this TA), MoH and WSP first
focused on sensitizing provincial leaders to the market facilitation approach. A group of stakeholders
from each new provinces, including potential one-stop-shop enterprises and provincial government
staffs, were invited on an exposure tour to a district in East Java that was considered successful in all
three programmatic aspects of demand creation, supply strengthening and enabling environment
strengthening. (See also sub chapter 3.6). This event had been able to show evidence and promote the
approach to local government staffs from 5 provinces and other organizations identified working on
rural sanitation development in those provinces. Working with APPSANI and STBM Secretariat, the TA
prepared a mechanism to response to LGs or other organizations requests to support their training
mainly with trainers and training facilitators.

During the course of the TA, 42 entrepreneurship training events were held, reaching 1,343
participants. These include training conducted by local governments in 5 provinces of SURS project,
other LGs with request through STBM Secretariat to APPSANI, and other non-government organizations.
See table 2 for more detail.

The aim of the sanitation entrepreneurship training was to produce competent sanitation providers who
are able to deliver one-stop shop business value to target customers i.e. to create markets, fill orders,
provide the products and services that consumers want and can afford, and maintain profitable

25
  See Training Manual, Training Modules, and Standard Operating Procedure for One Stop Shop Sanitation Service at
www.wsp.org/toolkit/toolkit-home




                                                                                                                    24
businesses. Entrepreneurship training is a key determining factor in the success of creating sanitation
suppliers. The TA uses the training curriculum developed since TSSM project in which three cycles of
trainings were conducted inviting 60 participants. As part of the curriculum development, an analysis on
the effectiveness of the training was conducted by monitoring the progress made by participants with
their business after taking part in the training. Based on the analysis, adjustments to the training
curriculum and methodology were made, including on the process of selecting participants, training
materials, and methodology.26

                                          Table 2. Entrepreneurship Training Supported During TA


                                      Funding Source             # Training Events           # Participants
                                  West Java                                            7                        235
                                  Central Java                                         4                        438
                                  East Java                                          10                         266
                                  Bali                                                 2                        40
                                  West Nusa Tenggara                                   2                        47
                                  LGs through STBM Secr.                             14                         243
                                  Other Organizations                                  3                        74
                                                                                     42                   1,343

Selection of the participants was key to the success of the training. People who are motivated to run
sanitation businesses and have business experience and skills make more appropriate training
participants. Therefore, the training organizers needed a selection process to filter the candidates
proposed by each district, which included an assessment of their personal information, motivation, work
and business experience. Using the information provided on the data forms, the training organizer and
district health office evaluated the candidates and selected appropriate participants. To ensure that the
selection process is effective, it should be carried out well beforehand, at least two weeks in advance.

The training materials were aimed at transferring a comprehensive set of knowledge and skills to the
participants, and also to build characteristics important in an entrepreneur. Based on an assessment
conducted in 2010 of trained entrepreneurs who managed to start the business, key character traits
were initiative, ability to see and take advantage of opportunities, perseverance, attention to quality,
self-confidence, supervision of work, and understanding the importance of business relations. This
competency profile was translated into the delivery of the training materials to participants including
the selection process.

In this TA component, a study was conducted to seek opportunities to foster women’s participation in
rural sanitation business. Women’s businesses overall are not facing significantly different constraints
than men’s businesses among the entrepreneurs in the sample studied. 27 Thus, recommendations focus
around increasing the proportion of women attending the trainings and then relieving constraints that
both men and women are facing in expanding their businesses. Recommended changes include a new
application form for the training which focuses less on qualities that will implicitly favor men, as well as

26
  See Training Manual, Training Modules, and Standard Operating Procedure for One Stop Shop Sanitation Service at
www.wsp.org/toolkit/toolkit-home

27
     Oberst, Sarah. 2013. Constraints to Female Sanitation Entrepreneurship in Rural Indonesia. Final Report.



                                                                                                                      25
some minor additions to the administrative and financial training offered to entrepreneurs. In addition,
addressing the issue of access to finance is crucial for both men and women in expanding their
businesses. These recommendations will help to increase the number of women running successful
sanitation businesses, thus increasing the size of the supply of improved sanitation in Indonesia since
women play an important role both as customers and suppliers in the sanitation market. Simple changes
are suggested based off of the literature review and the study findings that should work towards
evening the playing field in the application process. The changes include both asking slightly different
questions and weighting the questions differently in the scoring process. 28

A balance between in-class and field experience was used for the actual 4-day participatory workshop,
including:

         Classroom sessions on key topics such as:
              o Basics of sanitation marketing and CLTS, business motivation, and key technical features
                  of healthy latrines.
              o Standard Operating Procedures for the one-stop-shop business process, including
                  communications and product promotions, sales management and selling techniques,
                  production/installation process, order taking and financing options.
              o Business management, including book keeping and financial management, human
                  resource management, and simple business planning.

         Field practice in villages for hands-on practice on:
              o Sales techniques and tactics
              o Latrine construction and installation

Involving alumni of the sanitation entrepreneurship training who had already started a sanitation
business contributed a great deal to the success of the training, because they were able to share their
knowledge and experience first-hand with the participants. It also allowed participants to have practical
experience on the business process since the field session was conducted within the business of an
alumnus.

Post-training support consisted of monitoring and business support as well as peer-learning meetings.
Sanitation entrepreneurship training participants were monitored and supported after they completed
the training to ensure the realization of business plans that participants developed during training. Post-
training interviews with and visit to participants found that they faced many difficulties getting their
businesses up and running. These included personal difficulties, such as lack of self-confidence, lack of
capital, and external difficulties, such as lack of support from the local health authority and village
administration. These are all obstacles to setting up and running a sanitation business, and might even
make the training participants give up the idea completely.

Learning from TSSM project, a systematic coaching process was developed. An on-site coaching session
was conducted following a phone call survey to entrepreneurs who participated in the training. On-site
coaching helped participants to deal with the difficulties they faced. Counselors provided a comfortable
place for discussions, offered the participants advice, guidance and technical support. This should enable

28
  See Training Manual, Training Modules, and Standard Operating Procedure for One Stop Shop Sanitation Service at
www.wsp.org/toolkit/toolkit-home




                                                                                                                    26
the participants to realize their business plans and make profits from the sanitation businesses they set
up. To better serve entrepreneurs in 5 provinces, the cascading coaching process was introduced. Some
experienced entrepreneurs are recruited as counselors. During the training, participants are introduced
to these entrepreneurs, member of APPSANI, for their consultation needs regarding their business
challenges.

The availability of coaching sessions has brought significant conversion of training participants into
active entrepreneurs. The number of participants who successfully launched their sanitation one-stop
shop businesses is doubled in the 5 provinces where the coaching sessions were provided directly by the
TA compare to training participants in other provinces (20% vs 8% conversion rate).

The rural sanitation market development component also initiated a periodical meeting mechanism
inviting several entrepreneurs to come together to share their experiences in running one-stop-shop
sanitation business. Best practices contributing to the success of one entrepreneur can be motivating for
other entrepreneurs who faced similar challenges. Follow up visits were sometimes even organized by
entrepreneurs to learn specific topic from others who shared their experiences at the meetings. These
best practices shared during the meetings were documented and refined the business model
continuously.

    1.3 Fostering Transition from Small-Scale Independent Businesses to an Industry Association

The bimonthly business meetings provided valuable opportunities for entrepreneurs to come together.
Most entrepreneurs who had reached a certain scale of production faced similar challenges on how to
best respond to government demand to accelerate improved access within their localities. An
opportunity emerged from the coming together of a small group of entrepreneurs: they were able to
organize bulk buying from manufacturers or distributors of sanitary supplies such as ceramic squat pans,
which reduced the overall cost.

At the same time, during implementation of the TA, there was growing concern about the sustainability
of a government-led approach to enterprise development. At scale, government simply did not have the
capacity to provide the kind of on-going recruitment, training, mentoring, and other business
development services that would be required to support relatively small-scale enterprises in a fast-
evolving rural sanitation industry. While it was clear that many of the challenges enterprises were facing
could not be solved by an individual business, the government was not in the best position to offer the
kind of external support required to drive further industry development.

It was in this context that the TA explored the potential role and establishment of an industry
association. In January 2012, the Government of Indonesia and WSP brought together a small group of
one-stop-shop enterprises from East Java to discuss the role of a sanitation industry association,
including potential association benefits and areas of collaboration between enterprises and the
Government. The enterprises agreed to establish APPSANI (Asosiasi Pengelola dan Pemberdayaan
Sanitasi Indonesia, or the Indonesian Association of Sanitation Management and Empowerment), with
the vision of partnering with the government to improve household access to sanitation and achieve
Indonesia’s sanitation goals.

APPSANI pledged to support its member businesses to deliver affordable ‘healthy latrine’ products by
playing two core roles: 1) recruiting and training new enterprises to replicate the one-stop-shop
business model, and 2) providing services such as access to finance, bulk purchase and discounts from


                                                                                                       27
suppliers, business mentoring, and other support to help members increase their capacity, scale and
turnover.

Once the core vision and mission were established, the APPSANI Chair and Steering Committee
undertook a number of steps to fully develop the organization:

        Formalizing an Organizational Structure: Through consultations with enterprises and district-
         level government staff, the APPSANI Committee developed an organizational structure with
         major functional areas including business development, R&D/product development, education
         and training, organizational development, public relations and women’s empowerment (figure
         3). The committee developed a roadmap and work plan, and registered the association officially
         with the government.

                                     Figure 3. Snapshot of the APPSANI Association

APPSANI – Asosiasi Pengelola dan Pemberdayaan Sanitasi Indonesia
Indonesian Association of Sanitation Management and Empowerment
Established: 31 January 2012
Vision:
APPSANI becomes a government partner to improve people’s access to sanitation in the context of achieving the MDG 2015
targets.
Mission:
         To help members provide sanitation services to households
         To help members provide a range of healthy and affordable sanitation products
         To improve knowledge and skills of sanitation enterprises
         To empower women to participate in sanitation as a business
Activity Areas:
         Promotion and public relations
         Business development and cooperation
         Technical research and development
         Education and training
         Organizational strengthening
         Women’s empowerment
Membership: Members must:
         Operate a sanitation businesses
         Receive APPSANI sanitation enterprise training and certification of standardized service quality

Number of Members: 210 members exclude Pamsimas




                                                                                                                   28
Logo                   Organizational structure




          Needs Assessment and Members’ Registration: APPSANI developed an initial portfolio of
           services and benefits to members based on enterprise surveys and consultations (table 3). The
           needs assessment also helped APPSANI develop an appropriate fee structure for members’
           registration and training fees. APPSANI then began to attract and register existing one-stop-shop
           enterprises, and later, to recruit and train new members.

          Building Internal Capacity: APPSANI needed to develop its own internal capacity in three core
           areas:
           o Training: APPSANI built up a pool of qualified business trainers and coaches using a ‘training
               of trainers’ approach;
           o Government relations: APPSANI worked with government counterparts to establish roles
               and coordination mechanisms at district level
           o Organization skills: APPSANI developed the core competencies of its own team of
               operational staff in areas such as planning, management and financial accounting

          Building Market Networks: With support from the government, APPSANI began building
           linkages with other private sector players, positioning itself as the main point of contact
           between one-stop-shop enterprises and larger-scale players such as manufacturers and
           distributors of input supplies, local banks and microfinance institutions (MFIs).

                                             Table 3. APPSANI Area of Services

Core Area         APPSANI Services/Member Benefits
New                  Advertises the sanitation business opportunity to prospective one-stop-shop enterprises through mass
Enterprise            media and other channels
Recruitment &        Accepts and vets applications for enterprise training, and collects training service fee from local
Training              government
                     Actively recruits female applicants
                     Delivers 4-day Sanitation Enterprise Training
                     Delivers additional post-training business coaching at enterprise place of business



                                                                                                                      29
Member                Communicates APPSANI member benefits and fees to new trained enterprises
Registration          Registers trained enterprises and accepts APPSANI one-time registration fee

Quality               Develops and delivers training on Standard Operating Procedures for all one-stop-shop business
Assurance &            processes (promotions, order taking, healthy toilet construction, payment mechanisms)
Certification         Keeps Standard Operating Procedures up-to-date and ensures member compliance
                      Coordinates with Government of Indonesia to certify quality of APPSANI members
Government &          Helps APPSANI members develop good relationships with local government officials
External              Acts as key liaison and spokesperson for APPSANI members at national and provincial levels
Relations             Provides technical assistance directly to the government as needed
                      Maintains APPSANI website and blog
                      Provides regular updates and attendance at key events on behalf of APPSANI members
Member                Conducts periodic telephone interviews with APPSANI members to collect details on sales, business and
Surveys      &         financial performance
Performance           Conducts members surveys to get input on member needs and requests (e.g. training topics)
Monitoring            Currently developing digital monitoring system using tablet devices
Access      to        Facilitates access to affordable finance for member businesses through APPSANI-Bank loan guarantees
Finance               Assists enterprises with loan application preparation
                      Signs MOUs with local banks and MFIs and assists partnerships for consumer sanitation loans (small
                       per-latrine fee is paid to APPSANI for each toilet loan, although in practice this has been a challenge)
Access      to        Provides member discounts on custom-manufactured fiberglass mold sets for healthy latrine and septic
Inputs & R&D           tank construction
                      Provides member discounts on ceramic pans, pvc pipes and other materials.
                      Invests in University partnerships and research and development for new lower-cost technical designs
                       and de-sludging mechanisms
Members               Develops and delivers new trainings in specific areas of interest, such as marketing, better coordination
Training,              with government, financial accounting and others
Coaching       &      Provides on-going mentorship and one-on-one coaching to existing members (upon request)
Events                Convenes business-to-business exchanges, study tours and events
                      Provides regular member updates

APPSANI undertook this work over a period of two years, slowly building up momentum and capacity. By
late 2014, APPSANI had developed its role as an industry facilitator, providing both firm-level support
and industry-wide services to 210 active one-stop-shop members in five provinces plus additional
members from 4 other provinces assisted based on request from STBM Secretariat (figure 4). APPSANI
had actively recruited 37 female enterprises, 18% of all members in 5 provinces, in its efforts to increase
women’s participation in sanitation as a business (figure 5). It had built up a pool of 19 qualified trainers,
who have delivered 42 external organizations including government funded trainings to 1,343 potential
new enterprises. The APPSANI network is currently expanding in five provinces, and plans are now
underway to extend to all 34 provinces of Indonesia.




                                                                                                                            30
 Figure 4. Number of APPSANI active members by province, July 2014          Figure 5. Percentage of APPSANI members by gender




                                             77                                            18%




                                 50

                                                                                                      82%
                      33
                                                        24
                                                                       16
           10
                                                                                            Men     Women
           BALI     WEST      CENTRAL      EAST        NTB       OTHERS
                    JAVA        JAVA       JAVA




APPSANI currently has five main sources of revenue:

            Training service fees: Local government is encouraged by the national STBM Secretariat to hire
             APPSANI to conduct 4-day enterprise trainings. The average training service fee is IDR 3 million
             (USD 250)
            One-time registration fee: New enterprises that want to become official APPSANI members
             must pay a one-time registration fee of IDR 50,000 (USD 4)
            Training participant fees which is mostly covered by facilitators including government: at IDR
             200,000 (USD 17) per trainee for 4-day training
            Internal funding support in the form of donations from the board and senior management
             members
            Margins from bulk purchase of materials such as closet, molds, and pipes

       1.4 Working with Banks and MFIs to Introduce Sanitation Financing

Financing options offer greater choice and flexibility to consumers, but care must be taken to ensure
options are scalable, manageable for entrepreneurs, and responsive to the needs of poorer households.
The official 2013 poverty line for rural East Java is IDR 270,000 (USD 23) per capita/month, or 1.350,000
(USD 115) for a household of five people.29 For a household living at the poverty line, the range of low-
cost healthy latrines would be about 4-7% of annual expenditure, or 48%-85% of monthly expenditure.
While some of the poorest households have demonstrated a willingness to prioritize investments in
sanitation, many more will likely require financing support.

To address this need, one-stop-shop enterprises offer options to spread payments over time, such as
installment payments, and revolving savings groups (arisan):

            The most common financing option is the installment payment plan. At first, enterprises offered
             installment payment plans freely, but soon it became clear that installments could be a drain on

29
     Badan Pusat Statistik (Statistics Indonesia), www.bps.go.id/eng



                                                                                                                            31
          working capital and a barrier to continued business growth if not managed properly. Enterprises
          offering installments tend to charge higher prices for sanitation facilities to offset the increased
          risk and transaction cost of the service. The most common payment plan is in two installments,
          a down payment and the balance at harvest time. Most enterprises feel that collecting
          installment payments is difficult and time-consuming, but they offer this option because it is
          frequently requested.30

         The revolving savings group model (arisan) is an attractive alternative financing option for
          enterprises, since it can expand sales without the risk of insufficient working capital. In the
          arisan system, a group of ten households collects daily contributions from each household and
          submits them each week to the sanitation committee in the hamlet. In coordination with the
          committee, the enterprise constructs one healthy toilet each time the group has amassed the
          money, based on an agreed schedule. The enterprise is paid in cash upon completion of each
          construction. At the end of the cycle, each household in the group will have a healthy toilet. This
          method is less risky for entrepreneurs compared to installments, and it can enable poorer
          households who are not eligible for microcredit to self-finance their latrines. However, it
          requires extra work for enterprises, good coordination, and strong leadership from local
          sanitation committees and leaders. For this reason, the arisan option has been adopted only in
          districts where these favorable conditions exist. It is currently in use by just seven enterprises,
          and may not be very scalable, especially in more remote areas.

Under the TA, more recently a pilot was initiated in East Java between July and December 2014. During
this period, four one-stop-shop enterprises partnered with a national bank and three micro-finance
institutions (MFIs) to explore appropriate sanitation lending products and mechanisms. For the pilot,
MFIs made 235 sanitation loans worth more than USD 16,000.

Following the pilot, APPSANI helped to negotiate memoranda of understanding between member-
enterprises and financial institutions. As of December 2014, 11 one-stop-shop enterprises have
partnered with four different local banks and now have made 823 sanitation loans worth more than USD
70,000.

Sanitation sales agents refer interested households to the MFI, which then sends out a loan officer to
conduct a house visit and assessment before signing a loan. Participating banks and MFIs offer varying
loan products and terms, including both group (joint-liability) and individual loans with one to two year
terms and interest rates of about 1.025% to 1.5% flat rate per month. So far, the field results have been
promising, although it is clear that poorer households face significant barriers to access this type of
finance. Poor households lack sufficient assets to stand as collateral for individual loans; they usually
lack a formal financial or credit history to demonstrate creditworthiness, and often lack experience with
the formal financial system. For these reasons, they may have difficulty accessing this type of financing
option even if it is available.

In October 2014, the TA, in collaboration with the National Development Planning Ministry (Bappenas),
Ministry of Health and Water.Org organized a dissemination workshop inviting potential banks and MFIs
from districts in 5 provinces where there are already entrepreneurs running one-stop shops. Besides
identifying potential sources of financing for clients of sanitation entrepreneurs, another upshot of this

30
  Ikeda, J. 2012. APPSANI Member Survey and Focus Groups: Identifying Challenges to Growth and Defining Future APPSANI Services.
Unpublished.



                                                                                                                                   32
outreach was that MFIs became interested in offering sanitation improvement financial services to their
current customers.

     1.5 Systematizing Public-Private Collaboration in Rural Sanitation

As the supply-side strategies continued to evolve, the program moved from a focus on community-level
masons, to a one-stop-shop business model in which enterprises reached a wider market of
communities, offering a range of product choice with full-service installation and financing options.

For their part, the Government of Indonesia was keenly aware of the need to more rapidly and
systematically replicate the one-stop-shop enterprise model to address the growing demand created by
CLTS and behavior change activities. Given the relatively small geographic reach of these enterprises,
the number of sanitation enterprises needed to be dramatically increased, and existing enterprises
needed to scale up production in order to keep pace with government-led demand promotion.

On the other hand, since these enterprises were not confined to a single community, it became
important to consider how consumers and enterprises would interact freely in the market, irrespective
of when a CLTS triggering event had occurred. One-stop-shop enterprises were able to build
relationships with district and sub-district health officials, which opened up more opportunities to
consider how these enterprises could complement CLTS activities beyond the community level. At the
same time, the roles and mind-sets of government officials and other stakeholders needed to evolve to
accommodate this new private sector participation.

In practice, striking a balance between demand generation and supply strengthening activities proved to
be challenging in the field for a number of reasons.31 The market research, product and business model
development, and marketing and supply chain strategy development required substantial lead-time to
develop. Within the East Java program, CLTS triggering was underway for two years or more before local
marketing and supply interventions began. These start-up problems led to a mismatch between demand
creation and supply strengthening activities. In the initial years of the program, increased demand for
sanitation improvements generated by CLTS was not adequately met by the supply of sanitation
products and services. An action research study in eighty triggered communities in 2011 found that a
lack of affordable pour-flush latrines was a contributing factor both to poor achievement and poor
sustaining of Open Defecation Free (ODF) status. 32

Learning from the sequencing issues in the East Java experience, the Ministry of Health, with support
from WSP, took a different programmatic approach as it expanded into additional provinces in 2012.
Rather than beginning with CLTS training, to kick-off new STBM activities in these provinces, they first
focused on sensitizing provincial leaders to the market facilitation approach. About five people from
each new province, including two or three potential one-stop-shop enterprises and two provincial
government staff, were invited on an exposure tour to a district in East Java that was considered
successful in all three programmatic aspects of demand creation, supply strengthening and enabling
environment strengthening.



31
   See Pedi and Jenkins, nd, ‘Sanitation Marketing and CATS: How do we link Approaches,’ Guidance Note 10, UNICEF Sanitation Marketing
Learning Series.
32
   N. Mukherjee, 2011. Factors Associated with Achieving and Sustaining Open Defecation Free Communities: Learning from East Java, WSP
Brief.



                                                                                                                                         33
During the visit, the provincial representatives – including government staff - attended the 4-day one-
stop-shop enterprise training workshop. Through the training, they learned about the overall linkages
with CLTS, the market potential, the business model, and the Standard Operating Procedures for a one-
stop-shop sanitation enterprise, including hands-on selling and latrine construction experience. They
also visited and spoke to all the key players in the province – enterprises, health center staff, community
health cadres, microfinance institutions and provincial leaders – to understand for themselves the
different actors, roles and activities and how these interact on the ground. Upon return to their
provinces, enterprises were encouraged to begin setting up ‘pioneer’ one-stop-shop operations as soon
as possible. For their part, provincial staff began the next steps of organizing CLTS facilitator trainings at
provincial and district levels. This involved hands-on CLTS training and triggering practice for sanitarians,
health cadres, mid-wives and others in the community, de-coupled from supply-side activities, using the
national approach.

To fully integrate one-stop-shop activities with local CLTS implementation, in 2013 APPSANI developed a
set of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for each step of the business process.33 Not only did the
SOPs allow enterprises to take a consistent approach to product promotion, order taking, construction
and payment, it also made explicit the linkages between the enterprise’s sales activities and the
governments CLTS and behavior change work. Each SOP includes details on the roles of all stakeholders
and step-by-step guidance on all interactions at community and household level. This guidance allowed
enterprises, officials, and community-level actors to understand where others fit in to the process, and
how to communicate with each other. Figure 6 provides an overview of the steps in the enterprise’s
business process, and Table 4 maps these steps to the essential pre-triggering, triggering, and follow up
stages of CLTS.




33
  See Training Manual, Training Modules, and Standard Operating Procedure for One Stop Shop Sanitation Service at
www.wsp.org/toolkit/toolkit-home




                                                                                                                    34
Figure 6. The One-stop-shop business process and integration with CLTS                        Table 4. Pre-triggering, triggering, and follow up CLTS

                                                                         Pre-            To kick-start relationships, a representative of APPSANI industry
                                                                         triggering       association goes to the district health office and sub-district offices to
                                                                                          introduce the one-stop-shop approach, explain the products, the value
                                                                                          proposition, and how they can support the government’s sanitation
                                                                                          goals
                                                                                         The local one-stop-shop and sanitarian or other health center staff agree
                                                                                          on a schedule of community visits to do product presentations.
                                                                                          Depending on whether villages have been triggered already, this can be
                                                                                          done after CLTS triggering on the same day, or at a later date.
                                                                                         The sanitarians and the one-stop-shop work with community-level health
                                                                                          cadres to invite households to the triggering event and/or product
                                                                                          presentations. The one-stop-shop often enters into an agreement with
                                                                                          the health cadre, offering them training and the opportunity to become
                                                                                          a commission-based sales agent.
                                                                                         Together, the one-stop-shop and the health cadre develop a social map.
                                                                                          These maps are used to prepare for CLTS triggering, and as a source of
                                                                                          market information on potential customers and the overall market size.
                                                                         Triggering      The CLTS facilitators, typically sanitarians or other health officials,
                                                                                          conduct CLTS triggering according to the Ministry of Health guidelines.
                                                                                         One-stop-shops are invited to attend these events if they are new
                                                                                          triggering events. If triggering has already occurred in a community, one-
                                                                                          stop-shops arrange a separate visit just for product promotion.
                                                                         Post-           If communities are ignited, they will usually begin to ask practical
                                                                         triggering       questions about how they can change their sanitation situation – and
                                                                                          specifically about the costs and materials involved - during the action
                                                                                          planning.
                                                                                         It depends on the dynamics of the event, but this is generally the cue for
                                                                                          the one-stop-shop to get up and make the product presentation,
                                                                                          including answering questions from community members about prices,
                                                                                          product features, payment options and other services.
                                                                                         In follow-up visits, the health cadre works with households who are
                                                                                          interested in purchasing by taking orders and coordinated with the one-
                                                                                          stop-shop.
                                                                                         Once an order is placed by a household, the one-stop-shop will arrange
                                                                                          to deliver the materials, set the mason work plan, construct the latrine,



                                                                                                                                                            35
and settle the payment with the customer directly.




                                                     36
     1.6 Evolving roles for different actors and identifying capacity development needs

In the initial phases, one of the most challenging aspects of program implementation was identifying,
understanding and communicating the roles of key government, private sector, external agency and
other stakeholders. STBM learned and adapted core roles for different actors during the East Java
experience, based on existing organizational structures and experience with on-ground implementation.
Although it was clear that roles might evolve over time, these experiences enabled the national team to
develop a map of the core roles and functions at each level.

Within Ministry of Health and line agencies, it was necessary to develop coordinating mechanisms
across different departments and units, in particular the Health Promotions and the Environmental
Health units. In general, the Health Promotions unit is responsible for public education activities
including mass media related to health and sanitation. The Health Promotions Unit takes the lead to
decide on the mix of media that will be used to communicate messages effectively to the target
audience, with input from the Environmental Health Unit during message design. Improving access to
sanitation is mainly the task and responsibility of the Environmental Health Unit. They take the lead on
supply-side strengthening activities and work to identify, train and support one-stop-shop enterprises,
masons, microfinance institutions and facilitate linkage with demand generation activities.

External support is often required to build capacity of each of these units to plan, budget and implement
sanitation promotion activities together at sub-national level. The experience in East Java has enabled
the Ministry of Health and WSP to develop and refine the tools and systems required to implement a
capacity building strategy and financing plan, including:

          A systematic skills gap and training needs assessment for each level of sub-national governance
          The curriculums, materials and methods for developing capacity in different functional areas
          Systems for identifying training participants, provider organizations and trainers
          Institutionalized indicators and evaluation methods for measuring training effectiveness
          A basic implementation planning package, which can be used as the basis for annual planning
           and budgeting

By using these tools and the basic role mapping, the Ministry of Health and WSP can enable
coordination across the program activities and actors, whilst simultaneously building their capacity to
manage their roles.

     1.7 Delivering at Scale through PAMSIMAS Project

As the successes of TSSM were being documented and as government support for the approach grew,
the approach was taken up and adopted as national strategy of STBM which should be integrated to a
range of new projects that were being planned including PAMSIMAS. PAMSIMAS is a national
Government of Indonesia (GoI) program partially funded by a World Bank loan. Through community-
driven approaches, PAMSIMAS aims to increase access to low-income and underserved rural and peri-
urban populations to improved water and sanitation facilities and improved hygiene behavior34.


34
  PARTNER-LED Investment Design Summary for PAMSIMAS-2. PAMSIMAS is the fourth phase of the Water and Sanitation for Low Income
Communities Project (WSLIC). In the first two phases, the project was called by its English acronym - WSLIC (Phase 1: 1993-1999; Phase 2: 2000-



                                                                                                                                           37
PAMSIMAS was initially designed and implemented at the village level which is different with STBM at
the district level. Feedback from village heads soon showed that this was not effective. Facilitators hired
by PAMSIMAS were replicating the work of sanitarians on the ground, causing confusion and sometimes
frustration.35

Starting in FY13, as agreed with the Government, the STBM implementation approach of PAMSIMAS has
been revised towards a district-wide approach36 which allows STBM implementation not only in those
villages selected for the project but also across all villages in one district. PAMSIMAS provides one STBM
consultant each at provincial and district levels, while at community level PAMSIMAS expects sanitarians
and health cadres to undertake CLTS triggering, sanitation supply coordination, and monitoring.37 There
are 32 provinces and 218 districts covered by the project. Within the government there are
approximately 50 – 60 staffs working on PAMSIMAS to provide the project with critical support.

During the PCN review meeting, it was agreed that while keeping the focus of intervention in the five
provinces, all three TAs under the SURS thematic including this TA will also be expanded to provide
support to government on the implementation of STBM program nationwide specifically provinces
under PAMSIMAS. The PAMSIMAS project intends to support MoH in implementing the STBM program
in 32 provinces, starting in 2013. To ensure complementarity of support provided to MoH, one focal
person from WSP has been assigned to engage with MoH to coordinate the World Bank support to
STBM implementation, representing both PAMSIMAS and WSP’s work. The TA implementation in the
five selected provinces were endorsed as a model for replication in the remaining 27 provinces under
PAMSIMAS support and the role of WSP provincial coordinators and WSP consultants supporting the
STBM secretariat were adjusted to cover PAMSIMAS goals. This arrangement is in line with MoH’s
request to formalize WSP’s support to MoH as an advisory body for the overall STBM implementation in
Indonesia. For the supply strengthening activities component in particular, it was clear that PAMSIMAS
provinces will receive assistance through mechanism established based on the design of corresponding
TA-143167 with an explicitly expressed demand and willingness from government to co-finance, and
conditions to be agreed by the PAMSIMAS project team.

Regarding supply improvement, taking up the learning from TSSM and STBM in five provinces
implementation, the first milestone that need to be achieved as 27 provinces of PAMSIMAS just started
the supply improvement initiative is to establish one-stop shop sanitation entrepreneurs serving within
the project area. PAMSIMAS project accommodates this process by allocating budget for the
entrepreneurship trainings involving participants of potential entrepreneurs from 32 provinces. By
working closely with capacity building team of PAMSIMAS, WSP supported the design of the training
curriculum and modules which was basically adopted from the materials developed by the TA. WSP also
supported the implementation of the trainings by providing trainers to some key topics such as
promotion, simple book keeping, and construction process based on the request from PAMSIMAS. A
small number of pioneer active entrepreneurs as the output from the trainings would be enough as
evidence to build local government confidence to the approach. It is expected that these pioneers would
trigger more government resources allocated into trainings for replication of entrepreneurs within their
provinces or districts.

2008) and since the third phase, the project has been called by its Indonesian acronym - PAMSIMAS (Phase 3: 2008-2012; Phase 4: 2013-2016).
AusAID refers to Phase 4 as PAMSIMAS-2.
35
   From Subsidy to Behavior Change. Scaling up Rural Sanitation Services in Indonesia. A Case for the Science of Delivery Team. Sarah Glavey.
2014
36
   See annex-1 for more comprehensive explanation on district wide approach
37
   Indonesia SURS update 10 Jan 2014



                                                                                                                                          38
As described previously, the TA builds the capacity of APPSANI to provide pool of trainers to anticipate
any government requests in 5 provinces to support their entrepreneurship trainings. These trainers are
mainly active entrepreneurs serving their local market while also providing services to local government
as trainers. To create similar mechanism to another 27 provinces of PAMSIMAS which have no active
entrepreneurs (APPSANI members) yet in this early stage, the design was then modified. A training of
trainers (ToT) was planned as part of the PAMSIMAS project main activity. The projected trainers are
PAMSIMAS consultants at provinces and districts level. A curriculum and modules were developed in
collaboration of PAMSIMAS and WSP team based on the existing guidance to meet this purpose.

During project monitoring period December 2013 to September 2014, about 18% out of 1,000 potential
sanitation entrepreneurs that have been trained have become sanitation entrepreneurs.38 There are
good numbers of active entrepreneurs who are still maintaining their business. For example, in
Kabupaten Barru, since early 2014, the sanitation entrepreneurs have sold 300 units of toilets out of a
target 500 and in Kabupaten Pelalawan, the sanitation entrepreneur works with local governments to
provide toilets in a government program called ‘safe and adequate housing’, and try to work with
private companies to tap CSR fund for sanitation. After receiving training of trainers, about 250 project
consultants qualifies as trainers to support local governments with entrepreneurship training.

Although several good examples are promising, there are some issues that have to be addressed.
Trained entrepreneurs were having some success but facing their own challenges of scaling up and
sustainability. Local adaptations took place as entrepreneurs figured out themselves what was needed
to grow their businesses. The key challenge is to develop a support mechanism at local level, and ensure
seamless business support for the entrepreneurs as WSP has with APPSANI initiative. PIU of the Ministry
of Health needs to discuss the strategy to support the sanitation entrepreneurs initiative with the Bank’s
task team and WSP-EAP, mainly to remove the critical constraints at local level such as creating
sufficient support mechanism, linking with financial institutions or other possible financing mechanism,
and increasing local governments’ ownership and initiative.

Current project monitoring mechanism of supply related activities is still limited for the project
implementers only. There is limited local government involvement in the monitoring process. Even
though all of the changes of the project methodology in PAMSIMAS have been formally agreed and
stated in the project documents, understanding and experience on sanitation supply strengthening
activities among the project implementers is still limited which affects government ownership to these
activities including the capacity to conduct monitoring process to entrepreneurs’ progress. Learning
from implementation of STBM in 5 provinces, this will affect replication of sanitation entrepreneurs
which relies on local government investment to facilitating entrepreneurship trainings.

The strategy and activities conducted in this TA were basically influenced and determined by the target
area market characteristics of those 5 provinces where the market infrastructure is considered well
developed. The one-stop shop business model promoted in this TA, for example, would not solely be
sufficient to fill the gap of sanitation supply chain for certain PAMSIMAS area with specific
characteristics such as area with poor market infrastructure and difficult to reach. In the broad sense of
the rural sanitation market approach, identification or understanding on target area characteristics is
the most critical initial phase. Therefore, mapping or categorizing these area based on their different
market condition is required in advance before designing the strategy and activities to be implemented.

38
     Pamsimas Project Aide Memoire, Implementation Support Mission for Pamsimas. October 2014



                                                                                                       39
     2. Analyzing the Effects of Sanitation Firms and CLTS Triggering to Improved Sanitation

While a growing body of evidence indicates that CLTS is an effective method for increasing access to
improved sanitation, to date there has been minimal research on the impact of sanitation firms on
access to improved sanitation. In part, this is due to the fact that this approach is still emerging, and
there has not been sufficient time to collect the data needed for rigorous evaluation. However, there
are also significant methodological challenges in evaluating private sector approaches to development,
due to the limited control over where the firms will work – making it difficult to establish a
counterfactual.39

To find out whether there is a positive relationship between the presence of one-stop-shop
entrepreneurs and access to sanitation in the communities where they work, a comparison by
propensity score matching on villages from 3 provinces (East Java, Bali and West Nusa Tenggara) was
conducted under the TA.

     2.1 Comparison by Propensity Score Matching

Experimental impact evaluation methods are often difficult to implement when assessing interventions
involving the private sector. Implementers have limited control over where firms can choose to operate,
making it difficult to randomly assign treatment and control locations – a prerequisite for a randomized
control trial. However, quasi-experimental techniques can be used to estimate a counterfactual when
randomization is not possible.

To compare the estimated impact of the presence of an APPSANI-supported sanitation business on
villages that have also had CLTS triggering activities, three separate data sets were merged:

           PODES 2011 – a national census of the main demographic, economic, social and geographic
            characteristics of all villages in Indonesia.
           APPSANI Member Data – List of villages in Java, Bali and West Nusa Tenggara where APPSANI-
            supported businesses have worked. Between 2009 and 2013, APPSANI members had worked in
            a total of 137 villages.
           TSSM Project Data – Population and monthly sanitation coverage data for all villages in Java,
            Bali and West Nusa Tenggara, including those that have had CLTS triggering activities and those
            which have not.




39
    For an impact evaluation to effectively determine whether the intervention being tested had a causal effect on the change observed, there
must be a counterfactual – in other words, what would access to improved sanitation be in a given village if it had not had CLTS triggering or a
sanitation firm active in the village. Since it is impossible to answer this question using a single village, various statistical techniques attempt to
establish identical treatment (ie: CLTS or sanitation firm in the village) and control groups (ie: no CLTS or sanitation firm in the village). In a
randomized control trial, the treatment and control groups are chosen randomly, making the two groups perfectly identical for evaluation
purposes. In many cases it is impossible to assign treatment randomly. In the cases, matching and regression-based techniques can be used to
estimate a counterfactual.



                                                                                                                                                    40
Using propensity score matching40, villages with CLTS triggering (control, n=9,958) were compared with
villages that had also had an APPSANI firm present at some point in the previous three years (treatment,
n=92). It was hypothesized that having a firm present in the village would strengthen the ability of the
private sector to respond to the increased demand for improved sanitation generated by CLTS activities,
increasing the overall rate of coverage in the treatment villages in November 2014.

Based on the analysis, controlling for other effects, villages with both CLTS triggering and an APPSANI
firm present have improved sanitation coverage rates (as of November 2014) 5 percentage points higher
than villages with only CLTS activities.

These findings are statistically significant at the 5% level. Due to the limited sample size of treated
villages (n=92), future analysis based on updated data on APPSANI activities should provide additional
insights. For example, the subset of villages with APPSANI firm present (n=137) included 92 villages that
also had CLTS triggering activities and 45 villages with no CLTS triggering. Due to the small sample size, it
was not possible to compare the incremental treatment effect of CLTS triggering in this case.

In addition to the quasi-experimental evaluation of APPSANI activities, the same dataset was also used
to compare villages that have had CLTS triggering activities (treatment, n=9,958) versus villages that
have not (control, n=11,840), using the same propensity score matching approach.

     Table 5. Propensity Score Matching to Estimate the Impact of CLTS and Sanitation Firms on Access to Improved Sanitation

                              Village with Sanitation Firm                                                                              Difference
Method                 (Includes Villages with and without CLTS Triggering)       Villages with CLTS Triggering Only                  (Percentage Points)   p-Value
                       % Improved Sanitation         Number of Villages       % Improved Sanitation         Number of Villages
Nearest Neighbor                   60%                         137                      55%                         21,798                       5          0.025
Kernel Matching                    60%                         137                      52%                         21,798                       8          0.000
Caliper                            60%                         137                      52%                         21,798                       8          0.000

                              Village with Sanitation Firm
Method                    (Includes Only Villages with CLTS Triggering)           Villages with CLTS Triggering Only                    Difference          p-Value
                       % Improved Sanitation         Number of Villages       % Improved Sanitation         Number of Villages
Nearest Neighbor                   61%                           92                     56%                           9,958                      5          0.064
Kernel Matching                    61%                           92                     55%                           9,958                      5          0.005
Caliper                            61%                           92                     55%                           9,958                      6          0.004

                             Villages with CLTS Triggering                         Villages with no CLTS Triggering
Method                (Includes Villages with and without Sanitation Firms)   (Includes Villages with and without Sanitation Firms)     Difference          p-Value
                       % Improved Sanitation         Number of Villages       % Improved Sanitation         Number of Villages
Nearest Neighbor                   55%                       9,956                      51%                         11,840                       4          0.000
Kernel Matching                    55%                       9,956                      51%                         11,840                       4          0.000
Caliper                            55%                       9,956                      50%                         11,840                       5          0.000



Based on the analysis and controlling for other effects, CLTS villages have improved sanitation coverage
rates (as of November 2014) 5 percentage points higher than villages that have not had CLTS triggering
activities.

40
   Unlike regression analysis, propensity score matching is a quasi-experimental method that uses an algorithmic approach to pair treated and
non-treated units based on observable characteristics (for this case, characteristics included village population, proximity to bodies of water,
province, access to basic services, child mortality rates, etc..). Once paired, the units can be evaluated using similar techniques as randomized
control trials. To test for robustness, several algorithms were tested, including nearest neighbor matching, radius matching and kernel
matching.



                                                                                                                                                                    41
The findings are highly statistically significant at the 1% level. The results are in line with the findings
from a randomized control trial of 168 communities and 2,100 households previously conducted by WSP
(Cameron, Shah and Oliva 2013), which found that CLTS-triggered villages have improved sanitation
coverage 3 percentage points higher than the control villages. This study also found that CLTS-triggered
villages had rates of open defecation 6 percentage points lower, and a 30% decrease in incidences of
diarrhea.

While the two analyses cannot be directly compared, it appears that efforts to improve access to
improved sanitation in rural Indonesia are more effective when interventions include both a demand-
side approach (CLTS) and supply-side approach (support to develop sanitation enterprises).

    2.2 Analysis of Improved Sanitation Adoption Since Triggering

Using 2014 TSSM project data on village population and improved sanitation coverage by month, CLTS-
triggered villages were disaggregated into four cohorts, based on the number of months that had passed
since the first CLTS triggering event in the village. While villages that have not yet had triggering
activities experienced modest growth in coverage over the preceding year, CLTS cohorts all saw
increased levels of coverage. However, increases in coverage rates were higher for older cohorts (those
that had first had CLTS triggering activities 40-80 months ago, or more than 80 months ago).

The analysis does not control for differences in characteristics between villages. However, it does
suggest that adoption of improved sanitation may not happen immediately after the initial CLTS
triggering activities. Instead, villages may see a gradual increase in access to improved sanitation over
time, with the rate of access accelerating over time. This implies that multiple triggering events over a
long time period are required to shift norms around defecation practices, suggesting areas for future
research.

                              Figure 7. Households in Village with Improved Sanitation




                                                                                                         42
    3. Summary Results and Lessons Learned

The rural sanitation market development TA to Indonesia started off with the premise that providing
access to sanitation at scale requires much deeper involvement from the private sector, due to the
significant gap between the funding available for service provision and the investment needed to
expand coverage. The private sector can bring the resources to help fill this gap. Additionally, the private
sector is potentially better positioned to provide efficient, innovative and sustainable service delivery.
However, sustainable private sector services must be profitable. Currently, too few products and
services desirable to the poor are offered at prices they can afford, due to limited competition,
innovation, and the high costs associated with serving these market segments.

WSP’s market development approach sought to eliminate barriers that result in lower private supply of
services and higher costs to the poor. These barriers might be related to balancing financial viability of
businesses and the low ability to pay of poor customers or the limited ability of investors to identify
market opportunities and address non-commercial risks. WSP supports governments in the reform of
policies that crowd out or restrict participation from the private sector. By engaging new market
entrants, supporting appropriate public policies and addressing the key barriers driving up costs, WSP
assists in improving the confidence of market actors and creating a “Pathway to Scale.” To understand
the key factors influencing market development and build evidence for the theory of change, a set of
critical success factors had been identified that are needed for pro-poor sanitation markets to work at
scale. (See figure 8).

                                    Figure 8. DPSP Theory of Change Diagram




                                                                                                         43
First, a supportive business environment is required. Unless a reasonably supportive macroeconomic
environment, stable political situation and favorable public attitudes towards private provision of
services are in place, a private sector approach is unlikely to succeed. If the necessary business
environment is in place, the first step is to test the market – building confidence for buyers, sellers and
the public sector through smaller, hands-on trials.

Testing the market requires an opportunity: If there is not a sufficiently large potential market willing to
pay for water and sanitation services, few firms will be interested in entering the market. If a potential
market exists, firms need to have appropriate products and business models that can profitably meet
the needs of low income market segments. Firms also require a sufficient level of managerial and
technical capacity to serve this market efficiently. Industry-level capacity and public sector support is
also critical. Finally, both households and firms must be able to access financing if needed.

Of these seven factors, the most relevant ones for Indonesia’s Rural Sanitation Market Development are
discussed below.

    3.1 No short cuts in sanitation entrepreneur and business model development

The presence of a sanitation entrepreneur is associated with a higher achievement of improved
sanitation outcomes than community-led sanitation demand creation alone. However, this TA found
that in fostering the development of a sanitation industry, there are no short-cuts. Initially, the initiative
focused on training masons who were omnipresent in the Indonesian countryside. Training masons
proved to be an overly narrow approach that did not address the range of market gaps faced by low
income households. The TA re-designed the nature of how sanitation services and products are
delivered, introducing a turnkey solution and innovations in construction that lowered the cost of
installation. This markets-based approach to rural sanitation may initially take more time to establish a
foundation for scale, but the TA has shown that once the demand and supply-side constraints have been
addressed there is much greater potential for scale and long-term sustainability.

    3.2 Wanted: entrepreneurs who can sell sanitation



                                                                                                           44
In the early stages of the TA, training tended to attract many district health sanitarians who were
familiar with the topic of sanitation. However, sanitarians often had other commitments and did not
have the entrepreneurial drive often found in successful business-owners. On average, non-sanitarian
enterprises spend five to eight hours per day on their sanitation businesses, compared to just three to
four hours per day among sanitarian enterprises. Due to their greater time commitment and business
experience, non-sanitarians tend to have stronger business performance.

APPSANI now encourages a much broader range of potential businesses and the explicit recruitment of
non-sanitarians. Despite the shift towards non-sanitarians, APPSANI enterprises are encouraged to
maintain close relationships with local health workers and village leaders as an essential ingredient for
success.

APPSANI also relies on the government to support local recruitment of potential candidates, but uses
tools such as a short video that explains the one-stop-shop business opportunity and encourages
businesses to apply. A range of criteria (Box 1) and standardized assessment tools are used to assess the
training candidate’s motivation and experience.

                                   Box 1. Selecting high-potential applicants for enterprise training

 Enterprises must apply to attend the Sanitation Entrepreneur Training, and applications are scored based on a
 number of key criteria:
      Educational background and work experience
      Communication skills
      Business management experience and planning, including experience running one’s own business and
          articulation of a clear business idea
      Funding sources and financial capacity to start up a sanitation business
      Work demands, including overall health and willingness to be ‘looked down on by others’ for working
          in the sanitation industry
      Financial and time commitment to the training itself (payment of training fees)
      Motivation

Despite improvements, the current process for recruitment and training has seen a relatively low
conversion rate from trainee to active business.41 Of the 1,026 participants trained by APPSANI in five
provinces, only about one-fifth of them (210 enterprises) went on to become active APPSANI
enterprises. This relatively lower figure had been anticipated since the TA also allow a shorter version of
training to be conducted. This shorter version (about 20% of the overall trainings), the 2.0 training
version, was designed merely to meet the most common budget available within the local governments
that is for two days of training. The objective of this training was adjusted. It emphasizes on promotional
and sales management aspect of one-stop shop business model. It is expected that by seeing evidence
that there are demand from households for the product it will generate local government interest to
conduct the complete set of the training.

While many one-stop-shop entrepreneurs are now in business, there is a growing need to maintain the
quality of the services by standardizing the way the entrepreneurs operate their business. When the
one-stop-shop business model was introduced, not all members had the same ability to apply the

41
   Compare to ILO (International Labor Organization)’s Start and Improve Your Business (SIYB) entrepreneurship model conducted in Indonesia
between 2008 – 2011 at 40% of start-up business rate with training and after training support,
http://blog.stikom.edu/nunuk/files/2012/11/3B3-Nicki-Ferland.pdf



                                                                                                                                       45
business process according to what they received at the training or even made necessary adjustment
and compromise the business model. Based on the 2012 assessment, most respondents felt that they
have technical skills they need to be successful. However they were less confident that they have
managerial and financial skills necessary to run their businesses. Only 35% of the members surveyed had
financial statements.42

This suggest that further work is needed to improve the process. Some of the identified success factors
for converting participants into enterprises include:

          Quality of the training: qualified and experienced facilitators including local entrepreneur, good
           support from local health offices and village heads where practical trainings take place, training
           venue and equipment/tools, etc.
          Mentoring support post-training: After initial training, further mentoring support is provided by
           the trainers through periodic visits to the enterprise for one-on-one support. Enterprises are
           also networked through regular exposure visits and bi-monthly APPSANI meetings to share
           experiences. This helps the entrepreneurs to access and build relationships with local health
           center staff especially for market data and promotion activities; access suppliers for mold and
           other building materials, financing for working capital and consumer loans, and information of
           best practices from other entrepreneurs.
          Market readiness: i.e. the degree of existing consumer awareness and demand in the given
           location. This is related with the enabling environment of STBM implementation where the
           entrepreneur operates.

     3.3 Better viable business through sales territory recruitment and franchising

Although servicing a much wider market than masons, one-stop-shops still operate in a relatively small
catchment area, selling an average of ten units per month and servicing a relatively small geographic
area, typically comprised of 200 to 1,000 households. A June 2012 survey of enterprises noted that all
exhibited a similar pattern of strong initial growth, followed by a gradual decline in sales per month.
Since each enterprise works in a small number of villages within a sub-district, once the bulk of the
potential market has been served, there is limited opportunity for new sales within a village at the
current price points, and with current sales tactics.

To grow their sales, enterprise must expand into other villages or sub-districts, implying increased travel
time and cost. Because most entrepreneurs spend only about one-third of their time managing their
sanitation businesses, they may not have sufficient resources or interest to manage large numbers of
installations simultaneously, to supervise larger sales territories or to pre-finance their costs, particularly
where they offer installation through amortized payments.

These significant scale barriers must be better understood and addressed if entrepreneurs are to remain
profitable and expand their operations. 43 From their perspective, enterprises noted that critical barriers
such as lack of consumer and business finance, lack of support from some villages and districts, and lack


42
   Ikeda, J. 2012. APPSANI Member Survey and Focus Groups: Identifying Challenges to Growth and Defining Future APPSANI Services.
Unpublished.
43
   Ikeda, J. 2012. APPSANI Member Survey and Focus Groups: Identifying Challenges to Growth and Defining Future APPSANI Services.
Unpublished.



                                                                                                                                    46
of business knowledge were holding them back from expanding their sanitation activities.44

The APPSANI association is also facing size and scale challenges. The TA initiative supported APPSANI’s
small secretariat to recruit and train new enterprises, support existing members, and play other roles
previously undertaken by the government and external consultants. Although it has been able to expand
its membership base and its services, its current business model is heavily reliant on government and
grant-based sources of funding. Many member businesses are too dispersed and far away and do not
have the time to fully engage with the association, for example, attending its bi-monthly meetings. The
small-scale, geographically confined nature of the one-stop-shop enterprises themselves make it
difficult for APPSANI to sustain and scale. APPSANI needs to consistently grow its member base in order
to cover its costs. Yet as membership grows, marginal costs to deliver member services rise.

In light of these challenges, APPSANI and its members began a pilot to explore the opportunity for
changes to the business model. In March 2014, APPSANI began working with 8 one-stop-shop
enterprises in four districts in East Java to test a ‘social franchise’ model whereby APPSANI would take
on a much stronger role within the business network. This model has several key features:

     1) APPSANI will emphasize a standardized service delivery model and more strictly enforce its
        Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for enterprises operating under the APPSANI brand.

     2) APPSANI manages the sales force directly: In the new pilot, APPSANI trains and recruits sales
        agents, and centrally takes all orders directly from these agents. APPSANI then distributes the
        orders to enterprises based on their geographic proximity to the customer. This is quite
        different to the current model in which each enterprise is responsible for training and recruiting
        their own sales agents, and managing their orders independently. APPSANI recovers some of the
        costs related to sales force management by retaining a percentage of the sales commission fee.

     3) APPSANI utilizes a mobile app and IT platform: Centralized order taking is enabled by the use of
        a mobile app. When a sales agent gets a new order, she/he sends an SMS text with the
        household and village details to APPSANI. APPSANI then sends these orders out to enterprises
        equipped with smart phones. Each enterprise regularly updates information using the mobile
        app, so that APPSANI can monitor progress on orders, deliveries and constructions for each
        enterprise, and ensure that they pay their sales agents the appropriate commissions. The mobile
        app enables the enterprises to better track costs and revenues, and to monitor the performance
        of the sales agents. The system provides this information to APPSANI in real time through an on-
        line dashboard that can be shared with government.

                                                  Figure 9. Dashboard of APPSANI Web-based




44
  Ikeda, J. 2012. APPSANI Member Survey and Focus Groups: Identifying Challenges to Growth and Defining Future APPSANI Services.
Unpublished.



                                                                                                                                   47
    4) APPSANI members do not compete with each other: By centralizing the sales and order
       management functions, APPSANI effectively eliminates market competition among the
       enterprises involved in the pilot. APPSANI assigns a designated sales area (usually one or two
       sub-districts) to each enterprise, and arranges agreements to ensure that they will not actively
       compete with each other.

In the pilot, no social franchise fee was charged. So far, APPSANI has trialed this system with 11
entrepreneurs, and has directly trained about 291 sales agents from 7 districts. The first pilot ran for 6
months from March to August 2014. Preliminary data indicate that participating enterprises have sold
16 latrines per month, a 44% increase in monthly sales average, coming from 6 entrepreneurs who are
actively using the system during the pilot. However, the remaining 5 entrepreneurs faced difficulties in
using the IT system mainly due to their limited experience in using a smartphone. As of the time of
writing this report, the pilot is being reviewed, in particular to synchronize the business process with the
web-based system/application.

By standardizing services and centralizing some core business functions, APPSANI can move towards a
new social franchise model that generates operating efficiencies over a larger service area.
Standardization has been a key element of this evolution, since it enables APPSANI to build its brand
through more consistent quality in product and service delivery.

At present, however, it is still unclear how much enterprises will be willing to pay for these benefits, for
instance, through franchise fees. APPSANI can recover some costs by retaining part of the per-latrine
sales commissions, and there are other potential sources of revenue, such as the per-latrine fees linked
to microfinance loans. Nonetheless, the financial viability of this model will need to be established. Even
if this new model cannot achieve full financial sustainability at first, compared to the current industry
association the social franchise may be more scalable due to its improved operating efficiencies.

    3.4 Industry associations form and evolve organically

The formation and growth of APPSANI did not happen overnight. The initial concept grew slowly out of
discussions among enterprises themselves, after they had practical experience running one-stop-shops.


                                                                                                         48
Learning from experience elsewhere, the opportunity for success was deemed to be higher if it were
initiated and led by the members themselves. While the project did in fact initiate the idea of forming an
association, the TA carefully created an environment and momentum for this to happen ‘organically’
from members. The key to this process was to create common/shared values of members to achieve
certain goals in relation to rural sanitation development. The TA then provided access to resources
needed and facilitated the process for this association to develop and grow to perform their role.

Once established, it took a couple of years for APPSANI to put all of its systems in place and begin to
build up momentum and membership. The key to APPSANI’s membership growth so far has been the
fact that its services address specific member needs. Members have identified access to finance,
business support and government linkages as the main reasons why they chose to join APPSANI.
Services themselves have come on-line over time, usually by piloting with a small group of members
before expanding to the entire network. For example, APPSANI is currently trialing an MFI partnership
model with selected enterprises, which will soon be expanded to all members. This approach to service
roll-out has allowed for progressive learning among APPSANI staff and members, and step-by-step
improvements to service provision.

The potential evolution of the APPSANI model from a network of independent businesses to a more
centralized social franchise is a recent development in the life of the association, and may yet evolve in
different directions. Arguably, the social franchise model has emerged through the process of industry
development itself, and may not have been possible at the outset when the viability of a rural sanitation
business model was still unproven. The decision to work together in a franchise-style model has grown
from a bottom-up process whereby sanitation enterprises have grown to trust one another and to see
increasing benefits for themselves through deeper dependency and collaboration. While external
facilitation support by WSP and others had a role to play, the process and evolution of APPSANI
demonstrates that industry development can be facilitated but does not happen in a directed, top-down
approach.

    3.5 Symbiotic relationship between entrepreneurs and local health officers

To follow the sanitation ladder, the role of government through local health officers is key for the
success of enterprises in delivering sanitation supply. They are the key actors in generating demand for
better sanitation behavior change which results in demand for sanitation products offered by these
enterprises. One-stop-shop entrepreneurs report the most success when they build close working
relationships with government health staff and link their sales efforts to broader CLTS and demand
promotion activities. One of the critical barriers for sanitation entrepreneurs is the conversion of
potential demand to real consumer demand; that is, from a generally felt need to stop open defecation,
to the actual purchase an improved latrine product. The investment required to change sanitation
behaviors and establish new social norms is significant, and it may not be realistic to expect that the
private sector alone can fully bear this cost. The TA recognizes the primary responsibility of the
Government of Indonesia to support communities to end open defecation and promote household
investment in improved sanitation, and recognizes the value of a partnership with the private sector to
achieve their public policy goals.

In focus groups conducted in 2012, enterprises with the highest volumes of sales identified partnerships
with sanitarians, district health center staff, health workers, and village heads as the most important
contributing factors to their success. Entrepreneurs that have good relationships with health staff have
greater access to market intelligence and potential customers. As part of the CLTS process, district


                                                                                                       49
health centers play a major role in gathering and updating a social map with details of each household
and their sanitation status. Entrepreneurs re-purpose this data as market intelligence on prospective
customers, and use it to set daily and monthly sales targets and door-to-door sales routes. Under STBM,
promoting the adoption of better sanitation practices is the job of primary health center staff,
sanitarians, midwives and other local leaders. People trust them as credible source of information.
Entrepreneurs that successfully tap into the primary health center network are able to obtain referrals
and introductions to communities, gain greater credibility with potential customers, and access to up-to-
date market information.

The learning and experience from East Java point to the critical role the local private sector can play in
both achieving and sustaining open defecation free communities. The initial program logic assumed that
households within triggered communities would climb a ‘sanitation ladder’ from very low cost,
homegrown innovations inspired by the community triggering process, to increasing levels of service as
communities seek to maintain their ODF status over time. This logic implies that CLTS triggering should
therefore happen first, followed by other efforts that emphasize the available sanitation facilities. In
fact, the market research clearly identified specific sanitation product preferences and perceptions that
exist across the population, even before triggering. Households did not simply change their
dissatisfaction with ‘basic’ lower-cost dry pit latrines, and in many cases opted to jump directly to the
desired pour-flush latrine types or delay construction until they could afford this option.

Coupled with the shift away from mason-led business models, these findings among households led the
program to shift to a more integrated and flexible approach, in which one-stop-shop enterprises are
present at triggering events and able to introduce available products and services at the post-triggering
stage, and to follow up with potential customers afterwards. In some cases, where CLTS has not yet
occurred, one-stop-shops take the initiative to organize their own community product presentations,
paying for marketing events at village level which include information about the products and behavior
change messages. District-level staff responsible for CLTS triggering see one-stop-shop enterprises as
partners, and as additional channels of important sanitation information. For their part, high-performing
enterprises identify good relationships with community and district governments as one of the most
critical success factors for achieving high sales volumes. This experience challenges the notion that there
is a fixed or rigid order to ‘sequencing’ and product/service promotion. In any community, people play
different roles: they are both community members working for the collective good, and consumers
seeking the right products that suit their needs and taste. These roles and drivers are not mutually
exclusive. In fact, they are mutually reinforcing, difficult to separate, and in the field the distinctions can
blur into insignificance.

The clearer differentiation of roles between entrepreneurs and local health officers on the ground
ensures that the process of CLTS triggering is not compromised. Private sector enterprises are able to
complement and support the community-led process, but are still free to operate and reach as many
customers as possible to fill sanitation needs.

    3.6 Beginning program supply-side strengthening activities before CLTS can help build
        momentum, government buy-in and enterprise capacity so that demand generation activities
        can have the most impact

The strategic decision to kick-off new provincial activities with the enterprise training and exposure visit
was taken for two primary reasons. The evidence and experience from East Java indicated that
developing private sector capacity can take time, and that it is most effective to begin this process as


                                                                                                            50
early as possible so that adequate supply is available to meet the consumer demand unlocked by CLTS
and behavior change activities. Thus, one important goal and expected outcome was for the two or
three enterprises from each province to go back to their homes and set up pioneer one-stop-shop
enterprises straight away. These pioneers could then be the provincial-level proof of concepts, leaders
and examples to other potential enterprises at provincial level. This ‘seeing is believing’ approach
appears to be working in the scale up provinces. By October 2014, there are more than 560 potential
entrepreneurs participated in the trainings facilitated by government with more than 150 are now in
business.

On the public sector side, the national program team recognized that the ‘demand’ components of CLTS
and behavior change in the STBM strategy was more well known and easier for government health staff
to understand, compared to unfamiliar activities related to market and enterprise development. In
Indonesia, CLTS has been embraced as the core national approach to rural sanitation, but how this
‘demand generation’ can link with ‘supply-side strengthening’ is much less understood. The team
wanted sub-national health staff to see for themselves how the one-stop-shop business model works,
but more importantly, how it is integrated within the broader STBM framework. This serves to
emphasize the linkages between ‘demand’ and ‘supply’ as the critical area of focus. By showing positive
examples of how the whole system functions, the aim was to get provincial and district staff excited and
ready to commit resources to all the necessary activities. The intensive enterprise training and exposure
helped them to clearly understand what their role would be in market facilitation – not just in a vague
sense of ‘improving local production’, but specifically in terms of the concrete steps and actions, and
investments in funds and people, that are required to build a market. The expected outcome was that
health staff would be ready to go back to their provinces and allocate funding not just for CLTS, but also
for enterprise training and support activities.

    3.7 Mapping the expected roles and capacities of different stakeholders is essential to the process
        of strengthening rural sanitation markets

To effectively scale up, actors and institutions need to understand their different roles, and what
resources are required to fulfill them. This takes strong buy-in and ownership from each level of local
government. In Indonesia, provincial and district governments make funding decisions for the majority
of health activities. Health authorities have many competing priorities and only limited funds. The
national team at the STBM Secretariat has worked with the provincial governors and health
coordinators to make sure that the STBM is a line item in every budget. This is an important first step,
but it is not enough to ensure the allocated or actual level of funding, or that activities will take place
with quality. Even in East Java, where political will was high, many districts were allocated only a fraction
of their proposed budgets for their sanitation plans.

The easier it is for local government to understand the entire STBM concept, the more likely they will be
to develop concrete tasks, steps, and roles that can be used as the basis for budgeting and planning.
Role mapping and additional planning resources have made it possible to streamline the scaling up
process, while creating ownership among local authorities. In the case of market facilitation, many of
the roles are new and require additional support and capacity development. Once the overall concept is
clear, however, most local health authorities can see the benefits of working with the private sector.
They recognize that enterprises are willing to spend their own resources to market and sell their
products, which effectively means that they are absorbing some promotional costs. More importantly,
when households that can afford to pay invest in their own sanitation facility, the government can more
effectively target support to those most in need. The emergence of the APPSANI industry association


                                                                                                          51
allows the government to understand the key points of contact and roles of the private sector, and helps
to improve and centralize coordination.

Despite the progress, significant challenges still remain. Budgeting and planning cycles and bureaucratic
processes differ from one local government to another. Annual planning and mid-year budget revisions
do not always happen as planned, and this affects local government ability to execute its CLTS,
promotions, and training plans. In addition, high turn-over and staff rotation within the line agencies
means institutional knowledge is frequently lost. Lack of capacity and skill remains a constant issue.
Roles for different actors evolve over time as institutions and individuals gain confidence, exposure,
capacity, and as the market itself changes. These dynamic forces requires a constant feedback loop and
revisiting the role mapping exercise to ensure that different actors are doing what they can do best.

    3.8 Facilitating collaboration between one-stop shop enterprises with potential finance
        institutions is crucial in providing consumer with credit to purchase toilet

Despite local-level collaboration between enterprises and local finance institutions (FI) emerging, they
have not yet scaled up. Lessons identified that might cause this are:
    - Low awareness of potential FIs on sanitation financing. The TA addressed this issue by
        conducting a dissemination workshop inviting potential FIs to learn and share experiences.
        Following the workshop, some of these have conducted visits with more experienced ones.
    - A more systematic support and technical assistance is crucial for FIs to start their sanitation
        financing product. The TA developed collaboration with the international NGO Water.org to
        provide these FIs with the technical support.
    - Limited availability of low-cost of finance has hindered them to finance customers as requested
        by enterprises who now have hundreds of pending orders waiting to be served.
    - In the case of BRI Bank – one of the biggest national banks in Indonesia – the challenge is on
        how to mainstream sanitation consumer financing product across all branch offices. Some
        collaboration between enterprises and BRI Bank has happened locally but remains at the
        discretion of the corresponding unit manager.
In most of the cases, facilitation between enterprises with potential FI partner was crucial to be
provided. APPSANI played crucial rule in this process.




                                                                                                      52
Annex-1
District-Wide Approach is:
An approach that positioned district’s government as the coordinator of the whole STBM
implementation, with characteristics as follows:
      Location; the program is gradually implemented in all villages in the district.
      Implementation; by optimizing existing institutional structures in local government’s coverage
       and partnerships.
      Funding; by optimizing various source of funds, particularly local budget, health operational
       fund, sub-district’s, village’s and private’s budget, including community contribution.
      Partnership with external agencies; external agencies such as projects provide technical
       assistance and initial fund for inception activities to demonstrate implementation strategy,
       while private sector can act as the partner in the implementation.

                                Project Based                       District-Wide Approach
Intervention          Selected villages                    Gradually in all villages in districts and
Location                                                   cities
Triggering Team       Projects’ community facilitators Community cadres led by the
                                                       sanitarians
Intervention Type     Emphasized in CLTS                   Comprehensive and holistic
                                                           intervention in Demand, Supply and
                                                           Enabling Environment
Monitoring and        Projects’ community facilitators Sanitarians, district health offices,
Evaluation            and consultants through data     through STBM website.
Mechanism             management assistants
Consultants’ Role     Projects’ implementer                Implementing partners and enabler
Implementation        Projects’ fund                       From various sources, including local
Budget                                                     government’s budget, health
                                                           operational budget, and other sources.
Institutions’         Focus in health offices and their Coordinated by health offices and
Engagement            immediate networks.               involves other related offices at local
                                                        level that have potential to support
                                                        rural sanitation development program,
                                                        such as local planning board office,
                                                        information and communication office,
                                                        health promotion office, public work
                                                        office, marketing sanitation, and
                                                        financing institutions.




                                                                                                    53
Annex-2


Applying Value Engineering to the Development of an
Economic and Hygienic Latrine Design (Case Study:
Sanitation Entrepreneurs in East Java)
Muhammad Jefi Nur Cahyono
Department of Industrial Engineering, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember
Kampus Keputih, Sukolilo, Surabaya, 60111
Tel: 031-5939361, Fax: 031-5939361
Email: jefinurcahyo@gmail.com

Lantip Trisunarno
Department of Industrial Engineering, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember
Kampus Keputih, Sukolilo, Surabaya, 60111
Tel: 031-5939361, Fax: 031-5939361
Email: lantip@ie.its.ac.id


Abstract. Sanitation is a problem that requires serious attention. One of the causes of poor sanitation in Indonesia is
the large number of people who practice open defecation. Difficulty accessing hygienic toilets exacerbates the
situation. And the high-costs involved makes hygienic toilets unaffordable to the majority of people. This research,
therefore, will attempt to analyse existing latrine designs and develop new latrine designs that meet the criteria for a
hygienic latrine and are also economical. This research uses value engineering to analyse and develop latrine design
alternatives. The stages involved follow those of the value engineering job plan, which are information, creation,
analysis, development and presentation. The research produced three alternatives of improved latrine designs. The
value and affordability of each of the alternatives was then compared to select the best alternative, i.e. the one that is
of the highest value and the most economical. Thus, a hygienic and economic latrine design is produced that does
not sacrifice the quality of the latrine.

Key Words: Sanitation, Value Engineering, Latrine, Design




INTRODUCTION

     Indonesia has an urgent need for clean water supply and hygienic sanitation. But Indonesia faces enormous
challenges in meeting this need. A 2006 study by the Indonesia Sanitation Sector Development Program (ISSDP)
indicated that 47% of people still defecate in the open, in rivers, fields, ponds, gardens, and open spaces. This
behaviour causes the contamination of water sources by Eschericia coli bacteria. Eschericia coli bacteria in human
faeces will eventually enter and contaminate water sources that people use for drinking water. A Basic Human
Service (BHS) survey of household water management behaviour found that 99.20% of households boil water for
drinking, but that 47.50% of this water still contained Eschericia coli bacteria. This is the cause of the high
incidence of diarrhea in Indonesia. In 2006, 423 per thousand population of all ages from 16 provinces suffered
diarrhea outbreaks, with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 2.52%. Another study, by the World Bank, found that poor
sanitation is a cause of death in children under 3 years, with a mortality rate of 19% or around 100,000 children
dying from diarrhea each year, and an estimated economic loss of 2.3% of gross domestic product (World Bank,
2007).
     According to the Phase 1 ESI study by the Water and Sanitation Program, the economic cost of poor sanitation



                                                                                                                      54
in Indonesia amounts to USD 6.3 billion (IDR 56 trillion) annually, at 2005 prices; the equivalent of 2.3% of gross
domestic product. The Phase 2 ESI study conducted by WSP in 2012 found links between sanitation and tourism and
the economy in Indonesia. Of the 15% of foreign tourists who said they did not want to return to Indonesia, 40%
cited poor sanitation in Indonesia as the reason for not wishing to return.
     A key component, and one of the main pillars in the implementation of this program, is sanitation providers.
The task of these providers is to provide and meet consumer demand for hygienic latrines. Before setting up shop,
these providers were given training. After three years of implementing the program, with regular monitoring and
support, there has been an interesting finding among the providers: latrine designs and production processes vary
from one provider to another. These design differences have had negative impacts on latrine production costs and
meeting the criteria for hygienic latrines. These two aspects are of particular concern to sanitation providers, because
as well as being profit-seeking entrepreneurs, they also have a social responsibility to contributing to the eradication
of open defecation.
     Therefore, latrine design standards are needed so that low production cost latrines can be produced which are of
a quality that meet the criteria for a hygienic latrine. One method of designing a product, in this case a latrine, is
value engineering. Value engineering is the method of choice because it has advantages in terms of controlling cost
by using an approach that analyses the value of its function without compromising on the desired quality and
reliability.

THE CONCEPT OF VALUE ENGINEERING

     Following is an explanation of value engineering, which is used as the basis for this research.

Definition of value
      Value has a subjective meaning, particularly where moral, social and aesthetic values are concerned (Fanani,
2006). Value in engineering, meanwhile, has much to do with economics. This makes value difficult to differentiate
from price, because a value is largely determined by function, and function by the price of the components that make
up a product.
      With regard to the development of a project or product, value is also closely related to cost which makes it
difficult to differentiate value from cost. This is because:
              Value is measured by use, while price or cost is determined by the price of the components that mak
                  e up the product.
              Measurement of value tends to be subjective, while cost is determined by the expenditure made to cr
                  eate the product.
      Value is defined as the possible financial return on a product or service. In other words, value is the use or
benefit provided by a product or service. Economic value consists of 4 types:
              Use value: refers to the extent to which the general attributes of a product enable it to perform its fun
                  ction.
              Esteem value: refers to the extent to which a product can attract consumers.
              Cost value: refers to the cost of the materials, labour, equipment and other costs of producing the pro
                  duct.
              Exchange value: refers to how much consumers want to sacrifice or spend or exchange in return for
                  something they want.

                The value engineering definition of value is as follows:


                                                                                                                      (1)

                Where :
                              Worth              = The benefit from use of function, or benefit of a project or product
                           Cost               = The cost of producing a project or product


                Or, can be written as follows:


                                                                                                                    55
                                                                                                                  (2)

               Where :
                           Performance       = Performance of a project or product
                            Cost                 = The cost of producing a project or product

     There is no unit of measure for value. If cost is measured in rupiahs, then performance should be measured in
rupiahs as well, which means that performance score need to be converted to performance in rupiahs. This
conversion assumes an initial value of 1. The resulting equation is as follows:

     Value

                                                            0                                                   (3)
                                                     0              1
                                                            0

     The formula for comparing the initial design value of alternative products is:
                                                      V0 = Vn                                                     (4)
                                                      0 
                                                      0                                                      (5)
                                                      ’
                                                            .0                                               (6)
                                                              0
     C’n is a rupiah measure of performance Pn. So:

                                                         Cn = Pn                                                   (7)

                                                               ′
                                                                                                           (8)
     Where :
       Vo         = Initial value (design value)
       Vn         = Value of alternative product n
       Po         = Initial design performance
       Pn         = Performance of alternative product n
       Co         = Initial design cost
       Cn         = Cost of alternative product n
       C’n        = Performance of alternative in rupiahs

Definition of Value Engineering

     Value engineering is defined as a systematic and organised method of analysing the functions of systems,
products and services for the purpose of achieving or providing essential functions that achieve the lowest life cycle
cost and are consistent with performance, reliability quality and safety standards. As explained above, several terms
are commonly used to describe value engineering (Dell’isola, 1975) The Society of American Value Engineers
International (SAVE International) uses the broader term value methodology for value engineering.

Value Engineering Job Plan

     Value engineering follows a systematic step-by-step methodology known as the value engineering job plan.
With the aim of reducing costs without sacrificing the quality of work, the value engineering job plan has a number
of organised, systematic and focused stages based on Dell’Isola’s theory (1975). These stages are:

Information
     During this stage, as much information as possible is gathered about the design, background, constraints, and
projected cost of the project or product. Then function analysis is carried out to rank relative product cost as a
system or sub-system to identify potential high cost areas.



                                                                                                                   56
     The function analysis aims to classify the basic functions and secondary functions, and to compare cost and
worth, in order to classify these functions. This stage also generates the critical criteria that will be used as the basis
for creating alternatives in the next stage.

Creation
     The aim of this stage is to create ideas for alternative designs that fulfil the basic functions of the chosen item.
This stage involves brainstorming ideas, without any decisions or analysis being made.

Analysis
     The aim of this stage is to analyse the alternatives identified during the creative stage in order to select the best
alternative as the proposed design in the recommendation stage. The techniques and methods used in the analysis
and selection of alternatives thrown up in the previous stage are cost analysis, evaluation matrix, criteria weighting
and performance evaluation.

Development
      After analysis of the alternatives, the final stage in the value engineering job plan is development. In this stage,
criteria are applied to select the best alternative. According to Dell’Isola (1975), in this stage all alternatives should
be considered carefully and in detail to ensure that the highest value and most economical alternative is offered.

Presentation
     Presentation is the final stage in the value engineering job plan. This stage involves presentation of the best
alternative, recommended based on the outcome of the development stage. The presentation must explain all aspects
in detail, including benefits and costs, performance achieved, and cost savings achieved.

CASE STUDY

      The purpose of the case study is to answer essential questions about how value engineering can be used to help
provide a standard hygienic latrine design and calculate the cost saving from applying value engineering to select
latrine design alternatives. The object of the study is sanitation entrepreneurs who are members of Asosiasi
Pengelola dan Pemberdayaan Sanitasi (APPSANI), an association of sanitation entrepreneurs in East Java. The
steps, stages and methods applied include: information, creation, analysis, development and presentation.

Information
     The information stage was used to explore in more detail the knowledge and understanding of the
products/projects to be discussed, and to define the functions of these products. During this stage, data were
collected. The cost of producing the existing latrine design was IDR 1,331,000. Figure 1 shows the existing latrine
design, which uses a stack of reinforced concrete rings as the septic tank.




                                                                                                                       57
                                      Figure 1: Existing latrine design type 3-3-1

      To identify the root causes, a root cause analysis (RCA) was performed, using a fishbone diagram. This was
followed by a failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) to identify the effects of the problems and to determine the
risk priority number (RPN).
      From field observations and interviews with sanitation experts, the following advantages and disadvantages of
latrine design type 3-3-1 were identified:
Advantages:
     1. Construction of the latrine does not require much equipment
Disadvantages:
     1. The septic tank is susceptible to leaks
     2. Constructing the latrines is costly
     3. Installing the reinforced concrete rings is time consuming
     4. Installing the reinforced concrete rings in a small space is difficult
     5. The slab is not level (sloping)
      From the root cause analysis and failure mode and effect analysis, it was possible to identify criteria that would
be used as the basis for developing and selecting latrine designs. These criteria are:
     1. Cost efficiency
     2. Practicality of the latrine construction process
     3. Resistance of the reinforced concrete rings to leaks
     4. The speed of the construction process
     5. Practicality of the equipment used
     6. Flexibility in the space for installing the latrine

Creation

    The aim of this stage was to develop a maximum of alternatives that would address the existing problems and
meet the criteria identified in the information stage. The design development was divided into two parts:
development of the construction design and the latrine construction process.
    The slab dimensions of length = 0.6 m, width = 0.5 m and depth = 0.27 m were chosen because these are the
dimensions of the standard slab currently used.




                                                     Figure 2: Slab


      Construction stability calculations found that reinforced concrete rings of 0.07 m thickness offered good
stability. Because the weight of the construction is below the soil bearing capacity, the construction stability standard
is met. A thickness of 0.07 m is the minimum, and of 0.08 m is the maximum. A thickness of 0.07 m was selected for
materials cost efficiency purposes. If the reinforced concrete rings were thicker than 0.08 m, the soil would not be
able to support the load and the reinforced concrete rings would sink. If the thickness of the reinforced concrete
rings were less than 0.07m, they would not be able resist the soil pressure from the sides and the rings would move
or slip to the side, causing breakage or cracking. The overall dimensions of the rings used were: inner diameter =
1m, outer diameter = 1.14m, thickness = 0.07 m, depth = 1.5 m. The diameter of the inlet pipe matched the diameter
of the septic tank (outer diameter = 0.14 m, inner diameter = 1m, and thickness = 0.07 m). The dimensions of the
ventilation were in accordance with National Standard 03-2398-2002; the air pipe used was 50 mm (2 inches) in
diameter, with a minimum height of 25 cm from the surface of the soil, and positioned on the second septic tank.
      Figures 4, 5, and 6 show the revised hygienic latrine design.




                                                                                                                     58
                                  Figure 4: Top view of the revised latrine design




                                Figure Error! No text of specified style in
                             document.: Side view of the revised latrine design




                                   Figure 6: ISO view of the revised latrine design
     Having created a design that meets the hygiene and construction criteria, latrine construction alternatives were
explored. The alternatives differ in the process of construction of the septic tank and inlet pipe, because the main
problem with the existing design is in the septic tank and inlet pipe. The problem with the slab was more to do with
human error when measuring. Following are the alternative methods of constructing the septic tank:
    1. Alternative 1


                                                                                                                 59
         Rather than using a stack of three reinforced concrete rings, this alternative uses one reinforced concrete
ring which is then placed in a hole that has been made in the ground.
     2. Alternative 2
         This alternative involves casting inner and outer moulds on site, of the following dimensions:
                   a. Outer septic tank mould : diameter = 1.14 m, height = 1,5 m
                   b. Inner septic tank mould : diameter = 1 m, height = 1.5 m
                   c. Outer inlet pipe mould: diameter = 1.14 m, height = 0.5 m
                   d. Inner inlet pipe mould: diameter = 1 m, height = 0.5 m
     3. Alternative 3
     This alternative involves casting inner moulds only on site. The soil performs the function of the outer moulds.
The dimensions are:
                   a. Septic tank mould: diameter = 1 m, height = 1.5 m
                   b. Inlet pipe mould: diameter = 1 m, height = 0.5 m

Analysis

    This stage began with an evaluation matrix analysis to analyse and rank the alternatives, the results of which
were as follows:
                               Table 1: Final Evaluation Matrix Analysis Results
                                                                                           Criteria
            No           Alternative
                                              Criteria-1        Criteria-2        Criteria-3      Criteria-4       Criteria-5       Criteria-6
             1            Baseline                11                9                 10              15               15               17

             2               1                   13                 7                19               12               9                9

             3               2                   17                15                23               18              20               18
             4               3                   24                23                24               25              22               24


    The next step was to weight each of the criterion using an analytic hierarchy process matrix, the results of
which were as follows:
                                         Table 2: Criteria Weighting
                                                                        Criteria Weighting

                              Criteria-1        Criteria-2        Criteria-3        Criteria-4      Criteria-5       Criteria-6

                                 0.183            0.232             0.35              0.068           0.102            0.065


     Then the performance value was calculated by multiplying the total scores in the evaluation matrix by the
weighting for each criteria, for each alternative and the baseline. The resulting overall performance scores were as
follows:




                                                              Table 3: Performance Scores
                                                                          Criteria Weighting

  No       Alternative           Criteria-1       Criteria-2        Criteria-3        Criteria-4      Criteria-5       Criteria-6        Performance (P)

                                     0.183            0.232              0.35             0.068            0.102           0.065

   1        Baseline                   11              9                  10                 15             15              17                   11.256

   2             1                     13              7                  19                 12             9               9                    12.972

   3             2                     17              15                 23                 18             20              18                   19.075

   4             3                     24              23                 24                 25             22              24                   23.632




                                                                                                                                                           60
Development

     In the development stage, cost analysis and value calculations were preformed based on the performance scores
obtained from the analysis using the evaluation matrix for each alternative and the baseline. The total cost of
alternative 1 (total cost of materials plus total wages) was IDR 1,177,171; the total cost of alternative 2 was IDR
1,028,770, and the total cost of alternative 3 was IDR 978,770.
     In the previous stages, performance scores and total cost for each alternative were calculated. These figures
were then compared to obtain a value for each alternative, which were as follows:

                                               Table 4: Values of the Alternatives
                                                                             Monetary conversion
               No    Alternative      Performance (P)        Cost (C )                              Value     Ranking
                                                                             of performance score

                1      Baseline           11.256             IDR 1,331,000          IDR 1,331,000   1.00          4

                2         1               12.972             IDR 1,177,171          IDR 1,533,914   1.30          3

                3         2               19.075             IDR 1,028,770          IDR 2,255,581   2.19          2

                4         3               23.632               IDR 978,770          IDR 2,794,438   2.86          1


     Based on the total cost of each alternative, the cost savings are as follows:

                                                            Table 5: Cost Savings
                        Baseline                    Alternative #                Cost Saving         Percentage

                                          1                  IDR 1,177,171            IDR 153,829             12%
                      IDR 1,331,000       2                  IDR 1,028,770            IDR 302,230             23%

                                          3                    IDR 978,770            IDR 352,230             26%




Presentation

      This stage is the presentation of the selected alternative, which was alternative 3, casting the inner rings of the
septic tank and inlet pipe on site. The main problem with the existing latrine design is leaking of the joints between
the rings used for the septic tank, which causes bacterial contamination of the environment. It is essential, therefore
that the design of the septic tank be watertight. Thus, joint free septic tank is the best alternative for resolving this
problem.
      Also, given that the main target market for these latrines is poor consumers, the latrines produced must not only
meet the environmental health standards (not contaminate the environment), but also be affordable yet perform to
the standard of existing latrines or better.
      The results of data processing performed in this case study indicate that alternative 3 is the best design. At
23.632, the performance score of alternative 3 is higher than that of the other alternatives. Also, compared with the
baseline, the cost savings of alternative 3 are the best, at 26% or IDR 352,230. Finally, the septic tank in alternative
3 would not need emptying for 10 years, against 6 years 3 months for the baseline.

CONCLUSIONS

     Applying value engineering to create a hygienic and economical latrine design, it can be concluded that the best
design is alternative 3, the specifications for which are:
    a. Slab: 0.6 m x 0.5 m x 0.27 m
    b. Septic tank: inner diameter = 1 m , thickness = 0.07 m, height = 1.5 m
    c. Inlet pipe: inner diameter = 1 m, height of ring = 0.5 m, sitting on the soil without a bottom lid. Depth of the
        hole below the ring = 0.25m
    d. The casting is done on site, using only one mould (inner ring)
    e. Ventilation: pipe 50 mm (2”) in diameter, and minimum height of 0.25 m from the surface of the soil.
    f. Pipe gradient: 2% of the length of the pipe.


                                                                                                                        61
     In terms of cost efficiency, the cost saving of alternative 3 is 26% or IDR 325,230 compared with the existing
latrine design.



REFERENCES

BKSDA. (2006) Statistik Balai Ksda Jawa Timur I IN: ALAM, B. K. S. D. (ED.). Jawa Timur: Kementerian
         Kehutanan Republik Indonesia.
Chairani, L. (2010) Proposal Tugas Akhir. Fakultas Teknik Universitas Indonesia
Chandra, B. (2007). Pengantar Kesehatan Lingkungan. Jakarta: Penerbit Buku Kedokteran EGC
Daryanto. (2005) Kumpulan Gambar Teknik Bangunan. Jakarta: PT. Rineka Cipta
Dell’isola, A.J. (1975) Value Engineering in the Construction Industry, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company.
Fanani, Z. (2006) Pengembangan Altenatif Desain Mesin Perontok Padi "Multi Fungsi" Berdasarkan Pendekatan
         Rekayasa Nilai. Sarjana, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember Surabaya.
Isnomo, B. (2010) Penerapan Rekayasa Nilai Pada Pembangunan Gedung Poliklinik Rsud Sutojayan Kabupaten
         Blitar. Sarjana, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember.
Jing GG. (2008) Digging for the Root Cause. ASQ Six Sigma Forum Magazine 7 (3) : 19 – 24.
Kesehatan, K. (2010) Tujuh Syarat Membuat Jamban Sehat . Available at: http://www.sanitasi.or.id [Accessed 18
         April 2012].
Latino RJ, Kenneth CL. (2006) Root Cause Analysis : Improving Performance for Bottom – Line Results. Florida :
         CRC Press.
Notoatmodjo, S. (2003) Ilmu Kesehatan Masyarakat (Prinsip-prinsip Dasar). Jakarta: PT. Rineka Cipta
PBS-PQ250, (1992) Value Engineering Program Guide for Design and Construction . General Services
         Administration, Public Buildings Service.
Ramadhani M, Fariza A, Basuki DK. (2007) Sistem Pendukung Keputusan Identifikasi Penyebab Susut Distribusi
         Energi Listrik Menggunakan Metode FMEA.
Saaty, Thomas. (1993) Pengambilan Keputusan. Translated by Liana Setiono. Jakarta
Soeparman dan Suparmin. (2002) Pembuangan Tinja & Limbah Cair (Suatu Pengantar). Jakarta: Penerbit Buku
         Kedokteran EGC
Wiarta F. H. (2011) Perencanaan Jalan Tol Kertosono – Mojokerto Sta 18+000 – Sta 21+450 Menggunakan
         Perkerasan Kaku Dikabupaten Jombang-Jawa Timur. Diploma, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember.
Yakin, Y. A. (2004) Penerapan Rekayasa Nilai pada Cold Reheated Support dalam Pembangkit Tenaga Tipe HRSG
         untuk Meningkatkan Daya Saing Pasar (Studi Kasus di PT Alstom Power Energy System Indonesia).
         Sarjana, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember.




                                                                                                                62
Annex-3

Entrepreneur Application Form
(Revised Based on Female Entrepreneur Study)


Sanitation Entrepreneur Training Application Form

   A. GENERAL INFORMATION

   1. Name: _____________________________________

   2. Gender:                 Male                  Female

   3. Marital Status:         Married               Unmarried         Widowed

   4. Address:




   5. Telephone: ___________________________________

   6. Date of Birth: __________________________________

   B. EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND

    7. What are your educational qualifications?
Program        Name of Educational Institute         Qualifications        Year
Primary
Junior
Secondary
Senior
Secondary
Level 1
Diploma
Level 2
Diploma
Bachelor
Master




                                                                                  63
   8. How many total years of education do you have in a sanitation-related field? (i.e. community
      health, environmental health)
          a. 0
          b. 1-2
          c. 3-4
          d. 5 or more

   C. WORK EXPERIENCE

    9. What work experience do you have?
Position                                          Duration (years)           Dates




   10. How many total years of work experience do you have in a sanitation-related occupation?
          a. 0
          b. 1-5
          c. 6-10
          d. 11 or more

   D. ENTREPRENEURIAL SKILLS (choose one answer)

   11. What are your communication skills like?
         a. I have difficulty expressing ideas
         b. I can express ideas to others
         c. I can express ideas to and convince others
         d. I can express ideas to, convince, and teach others

   12. Do you enjoy talking to new people?
           a. Yes, I am very comfortable approaching new people
           b. I am somewhat comfortable approaching new people
           c. No, I do not enjoy approaching new people




                                                                                                     64
13. I am willing to take risks in order to succeed at new endeavors.
        a. Very true
        b. Somewhat true
        c. Not true

14. I am happy to try new things and be an example for my peers.
        a. Very true
        b. Somewhat true
        c. Not true

E. BUSINESS EXPERIENCE

15. Have you ever been involved in a business?               Yes         No

16. Do you currently have a business?                        Yes         No

17. Why did you start your business and what type of business is it?




F. SANITATION BUSINESS

18. How do you perceive opportunities in the healthy latrine business?
       a. Interesting products/services
       b. Uninteresting products/services

19. Are you interested in starting a sanitation business?
        a. Yes, will definitely start business
        b. Yes, but need training first
        c. Unsure
        d. No, because I do not have interest in a sanitation business

20. Please elaborate:




21. Have you taken any steps to start this business?         Yes         No


                                                                              65
22. If yes, what steps have you taken?




23. Would you be comfortable overseeing masons or other employees?
      a. Very comfortable
      b. Somewhat comfortable
      c. Not comfortable

24. Have you ever suffered a serious illness that would prevent you from working in the field
    (locations where healthy latrines are being constructed?)
        a. Yes
        b. No
            If yes, please explain plan for fieldwork supervision (i.e. hiring supervisor, family
            member): __________________________________________________________

G. FUNDING SOURCES

25. From what sources do you plan to finance your business?

    Family           Money Lender             Friends          Bank             Other            Unsure

    Please state:




    If you intend to take out a loan, can you provide a guarantee or collateral?     Yes         No

26. Are you willing to take on financial risk to have a business, either by taking out a loan or by
    committing your own household funds?
                                                       Yes                       No

H. COMMITMENT
27. Are you attending the training in order to gain the skills to start a business, or for another
    reason?
        a. Yes, to start a business
        b. No, for another reason




                                                                                                      66
            If no, please elaborate on reason:
            ______________________________________________________

28. Are you prepared to participate fully in this training?   Yes     No

I.   ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT YOU FEEL IS RELEVANT TO YOUR APPLICATION




     Name and Signature of Applicant



     _______________________________________________




                                                                           67
Annex-4

Appendix 6: Entrepreneur Selection Criteria
(Revised Based on Female Entrepreneur Study)

GUIDELINES FOR EVALUATING THE SANITATION PROVIDER TRAINING APPLICATION FORMS

Scores are given for each of the following criteria:

B. Educational background
C. Work experience
D. Entrepreneurial skills
E. Business experience
F. Sanitation Business
G. Funding sources
H. Commitment

The scores given for each criteria are weighted, because each criterion has a range of indicators.

B. Educational Background

Maximum score of 8 for this criterion.

Educational Qualifications                                                          Score
Level 1/Level 3 Diploma/ Degree                                                     4
Senior secondary                                                                    3
Junior secondary                                                                    2
Primary                                                                             0


Years of education in sanitation-related field                                      Score
5 or more                                                                           4
3-4                                                                                 3
1-2                                                                                 2
0                                                                                   0


                                                                         TOTAL:

C. Work Experience

Maximum score of 8 for this criterion.

Total years of work experience                                                      Score
11 or more                                                                          4
6-10                                                                                3
1-5                                                                                 2



                                                                                                     68
0                                                                           0




Total years of sanitation-related experience                                Score
11 or more                                                                  4
6-10                                                                        3
1-5                                                                         2
0                                                                           0


                                                                   TOTAL:



D. Entrepreneurial Skills

Maximum score of 8 for this criterion.

Communication Skills                                                        Score
Excellent (can communicate ideas, and persuade and teach others)            2
Good (can communicate ideas, and persuade others)                           1
Fair (can communicate ideas)                                                1
Poor (cannot communicate ideas to others)                                   0


Talking to new people                                                       Score
Yes, I am very comfortable approaching new people                           2
I am somewhat comfortable approaching new people                            1
No, I do not enjoy approaching new people                                   0


Taking on new challenges                                                    Score
Very true                                                                   2
Somewhat true                                                               1
Not true                                                                    0


Happy to try new things and be example                                      Score
Very true                                                                   2
Somewhat true                                                               1
Not true                                                                    0


                                                                   TOTAL:



                                                                                    69
E. Business Experience

Maximum score of 8 for this criterion.

Indicator                                                                         Score
Has run a sanitation business in the past                                         8
Currently has own business (non-sanitation related)                               6
Has been involved in a business in the past                                       4


                                                                         TOTAL:

F. Sanitation Business

Maximum score of 8 for this criterion.

Perception of opportunities in healthy latrine business                           Score
Interesting products/services                                                     1
Uninteresting products/services                                                   0


Interested in starting a sanitation business                                      Score
Yes, will definitely start business                                               3
Yes, but need training first                                                      2
Unsure, but open to possibility                                                   1
No, because I do not have interest in a sanitation business                       Reject Application
**If have taken legitimate steps to start the business, plus 3 points.

Comfortable overseeing masons/other employees                                     Score
Very comfortable                                                                  2
Somewhat comfortable                                                              1
Not comfortable                                                                   0


Illness that would prevent you from working in field                              Score
No                                                                                2
Yes, but has plan for overcoming                                                  1
Yes, and no plan for overcoming                                                   Reject Application




                                                                                                       70
G. Funding Sources

Maximum score of 10 for this criterion.

Indicator                                                                              Score
Has the financial capacity to start up a sanitation business without any               4
financial support or loans
Hopes to get the startup funds from family friends or other sources                    2
Has no guarantee or hope of financial support from others                              0


Willing to take on financial risk                                                      Score
Yes                                                                                    4
No                                                                                     0


If the entrepreneur scores 0 on both questions in this category, reject application.

                                                                           TOTAL:

H. Commitment

Maximum score of 8 for this criterion.

Attending the training                                                                 Score
Yes, to start a business                                                               5
No, for another reason                                                                 Reject Application


Prepared to participate fully                                                          Score
Yes                                                                                    3
No                                                                                     Reject Application


                                                                           TOTAL:



TOTAL SCORE FOR APPLICATION:




                                                                                                            71
Annex-5
One-stop Shop Business SOP Pocket Book




                                         72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
Annex-6




          88
89
90
91
