  Report No: ACS18595



  Republic of Djibouti
  Improving Youth well-being and opportunities in
  Djibouti by reducing Qat consumption
  Completion Summary


  June 30, 2016




  GSU05
  MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




Document of the World Bank
This note is intended to present the final status of implementation of the project. The project was
approved in May 2015 and launched in Djibouti in June 2015 with support of the two counterparts
namely the State Secretariat of Youth and Sports (SEJS) and the Djiboutian Agency for Social
Development (ADDS). The budget allocation is 363.000 dollars. Project implementation in the three
selected regions (Djibouti Ville, Ali Sabieh and Obock) has gone very well and activities were
completed on time. The project will close August 31, 2016. Disbursement has been steady and is
expected to be completed fully as well. The response from young women and men, project
beneficiaries, has been tremendously positive and motivating.


Objective

The grant aims to improve youth wellbeing and opportunities through reducing Qat
consumption by (a) raising awareness of youth on the negative impacts of Qat thru information,
education and communication, (b) building capacity of young women and men in employable and life
skills and (c) seeking internships/jobs for a selected number of youth. These development objective tie
into (1) the 2008-2017 national youth policy of the Ministry of Youth and Sports, (2) Djibouti 2035, the
government vision and program which considers youth as a transversal component of society which
requires employable skills and training for better opportunities (3) the findings and recommendations of
the 2011 World Bank Qat study, which aimed to assess the social, economic and health dynamics of
Qat and (4) the 2014-2017 Djibouti Country Partnership Strategy’s first pillar of reducing vulnerability.

The beneficiaries of the project are young women and men (including drop outs, illiterate, unemployed
and youth at risk) customers of the three selected community development centers located
respectively in Quartier 7 (in Djibouti Ville), Ali Sabieh (south of the country) and Obock (north). Many
are consumers of Qat. They are typically aged 12-30 years. These youth lack access to adequate
training, job opportunities, recreational activities, youth friendly environment and staff for
counseling/peer advocacy.


Context:

Young people are a very vulnerable group in Djibouti for a combination of factors including: high
poverty levels, high rates of class repetition and school drop outs, soaring unemployment rates with
very low access to job opportunities, lack of adequate training and limited access to cultural and
recreational activities. The 2011 World Bank Qat ESW identified youth as the most sensitive group as
they constitute already a large portion of Qat consumers and an increasing number of new consumers.
A household questionnaire informed the ESW with startling data: 78% of Qat consumers are 25 years
old or younger. 40.5% of those interviewed are either unemployed or students and 57.9 % of
interviewees are educated only up to middle high school.


Qat, widely popular and consumed, is a national institution referred to as ‘her majesty’ which is deeply
entrenched in all areas of life in Djibouti. Considerable time and resources are devoted to chewing Qat.
Qat consumption has various negative impacts.
Health wise, research shows a list of direct and indirect potential negative effects including dental
decay, anorexia, insomnia, hyperactivity, excitement, euphoria, high blood pressure and constipation. It
is particularly noteworthy that Qat usage also leads to various risk behaviors especially if it is combined
with other substances such as unsafe sexual behavior leading to teenage pregnancies. It is said that
lack of money to buy Qat may push girls into transactional sex.
On the economic front, Qat eats deeply into the household budget to the tune of an estimated 20% to
30% of the household budget. Qat expenditure comes second in the household expenses, after food
but ahead of health and education. Poor families are reported to consume more than better off families.
Qat is believed to have an impact on labor productivity, in a country where labor costs are already high
and unemployment rates soaring.

On the social front, it is claimed that Qat is the cause of conflict within the household leading to an
increasing number of divorces. Furthermore, family and cultural values are affected when usage of Qat
reduces time spent with family. Children’s education is adversely affected by the father’s and
sometimes, mother’s absence.

Qat creates also some positive outcomes namely in terms of tax revenues for the state, estimated in
2012 at 15% of fiscal revenues and income generating in retail trade, especially for about 20.000
women estimated to be involved in Qat sale in the capital and peripheries1,

Components and achievements

The grant financed four components in the selected regions of Djibouti Ville, Ali Sabieh and Obock. In
addition to the active partnering role of SEJS and ADDS, the project team was composed of three
regional consultant facilitators and 5 specialized consultants (one in life skills, 3 job insertion and one
story teller).

Information, education and communication (IEC) activities were organized in selected community
development centers of the three regions to raise awareness against Qat consumption. The target
group was 3000 youth among which 40% of girls. By end of June, nearly 9500 youth (about 300% of
the target) among which 3865 young women (40%) have participated in IEC activities. The activities
range from participatory debates with Qat consumers, medical practitioners, parents and religious
leaders to theatre plays with Qat related themes, story-telling for children, sport competitions and
dictations. Over 300 debates were organized in the three regions, 10 theatre plays were produced by a
neighborhood association and played in public while 12 interactive story telling sessions have been
organized for children below thirteen in the past 2 months. 54 handball games were held among girls’
teams versus 61 soccer games for boys and 20 dictations sessions offered to younger children. All
competition (sport and dictation) were awarded usefully with sport and/or school material.

Vocational training and life skills of young men and women in employable and life skills have been
provided in order to improve youth work opportunities. The target number was 200 young persons,
including 80 girls (40%) across the 3 regions. At the end, 175 young men and women stayed enrolled
till the end in vocational training among whom 82 women (46%). Originally over a 1000 candidacies
had been received however the target had to be kept based on budget previsions. The selected
sectors of learning were carefully chosen to be market oriented in order to give as much chance as
possible to the trainees to find internships and/or jobs. The sectors include mechanics and driving of
heavy engines, electricity, hotel restauration and food services. Classes began in November 2015 in
state owned centers and ended in April 2016, including an in house month long practical internship.
The trainees have also benefited from periodic group and individual life skills training which gave them
an added advantage in terms of writing a CV, preparing for an interview, searching for jobs and so on.

Job/internship insertion: The target number was to insert about 20 to 30% (40 to 60 young trainees)
out the 200 VT trainees including 40% of women. This target was set based on the very low
employment rate at national level and much more limited opportunities in regions. A team of three
professionals (among whom two employed in the private sector) was contracted to seek one to three
months internships and ideally jobs for the trainees once they graduate from vocational schooling.
Each consultant had a specific group and region of focus. By 20 June, 157 trainees had been

1
    The World Bank, 2011 Qat ESW
proposed an internship hence nearly 90% of insertion rate among which 77 girls (49%) and 80 boys.

Monitoring and Evaluation: ADDS and SEJS played a key role in project implementation given their
community based presence and experience and being government entities which can be an additional
facilitating factor in the Djiboutian context. For example, the second component (vocational training)
was sub contracted to ADDS at the request of the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training with
which ADDS has a long partnership.

All components have been completed this fiscal year.

Outcomes and deliverables

   -   An interactive short documentary has been prepared to listen and record voices of youth beneficiaries of
       the project and showcase selected individual stories,
   -   Monthly reports were prepared by team members,
   -   Interactive activities such as sport competitions, theatre plays and debates have been captured in pictures,
   -   Vocational training diplomas were delivered to trainees,
   -   Internships certificates may be delivered depending on the enterprises.


Disbursement

To date (June 20), about 317.711 dollars (87%) have been disbursed.

To date, the impacts noted are: (1) increased awareness of Qat negative impacts (2) increased
motivation and self-confidence of young women and men who received training, (3) reduction of Qat
consumption among some targeted youth.

In terms of ownership, sustainability and scalability, at least 2 NGOs have actively participated in
the IEC activities in each of the three regions, along with the numerous youth, parents, community
leaders and members.

Lessons learned: Some of the lessons include the importance to include actively since the
preparation stage, local champions and stakeholders with large community presence (i.e. SEJS, ADDS
and neighborhood youth associations) as their engagement gives credibility to external and
international donors. The team was keen to involve the partners even in the elaboration of ToRs and
the selection process of local consultants. Secondly, it is important to not stigmatize or condemn the
consumption of Qat (or the sensitive issue being targeted by the project) but rather work with a
sensitive and objective eye.
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
