Report No: ACS10181




Kyrgyz Republic Conflict Filter
Enhancing Sensitivity to Conflict Risks in World Bank-funded Activities:
Lessons from the Kyrgyz Republic
July 2014

GSURR


EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA




   Standard Disclaimer:


   This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
   interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
   Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
   boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
   The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


   Copyright Statement:




   The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
   violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
   of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly

   For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
   Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
   http://www.copyright.com/.

   All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
   Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                                 1
Enhancing Sensitivity to Conflict Risks in
     World Bank-funded Activities:
   Lessons from the Kyrgyz Republic




               Bishkek- July 2014

                Kyrgyz Republic




                                             2
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS


I. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES OF CONFLICT FILTER......................................... 4
II. METHODOLOGY FOR CONFLICT FILTER ROLLOUT IN FY14 ................................. 5
III. EVOLUTION OF KEY CONFLICT STRESSORS............................................................ 5
IV. CONFLICT FILTER ACTIVITIES IN FY14 .................................................................... 6
V.SELECTED PROJECT EXAMPLES .................................................................................... 7
   THIRD VILLAGE INVESTMENT PROGRAM (VIP3)-(PREPARATION) ...................... 8
   ELECTRICITY SUPPLY ACCOUNTABILITY AND RELIABILITY IMPROVEMENT
   PROJECT-(PREPARATION) ............................................................................................... 9
   PASTURE AND LIVESTOCK IMPROVEMENT PROJECT-(PREPARATION) ........... 10
   CENTRAL ASIA ROAD LINKS (CARS1/CARS 2) AND OTHER FUTURE REGIONAL
   PROJECTS RELATED TO BORDER AREAS (PREPARATION) .................................. 10
   BISHKEK OSH URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT-(IMPLEMENTATION) ...... 12
   ON-FARM IRRIGATION PROJECT (OIP-2)-(IMPLEMENTATION) ............................ 12
VI. LESSONS LEARNED .................................................................................................... 14
VII. GOING FORWARD: RECOMMENDATIONS AND NEXT STEPS .......................... 15




                                                                                                                              3
I. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES OF THE CONFLICT FILTER

The Kyrgyz Republic is a landlocked mountainous country of 5.5 million and home to several ethnic
groups. Since gaining independence in 1991, the Kyrgyz Republic has introduced far-reaching
economic and political changes, gaining a reputation as a reformer in Central Asia. Nevertheless,
economic stagnation, rising corruption, and inter-ethnic tensions have posed risks to the country’s
stability. Opposition protests led to the ouster of the country’s leadership in March 2005 and again in
April 2010. The country was also rocked by a large-scale interethnic unrest in the South in June
2010.

Following the revolution and ethnic disturbances in 2010, the World Bank introduced a Conflict
Filter for its Kyrgyz Republic operations in 2011 as a screening tool to ensure that Bank projects do
not exacerbate conflict risks.1 The assumption behind the Conflict Filter approach is that providing
useful information and guidance about risks in a timely manner and in practical formats can help
improve the design of projects to mitigate conflict-related risks and, where possible, strengthen
social cohesion.
The objectives of the Conflict Filter were:

        Assisting task teams to be cognizant of the context in which they operate in the Kyrgyz
         Republic;
        Assisting task teams in identifying and managing the conflict and fragility risks in the World
         Bank-supported activities;
        Supporting task teams and the client in identifying measures to help strengthen trust, social
         inclusion and social cohesion in the context of World Bank supported activities and in
         targeted project areas;
        Assisting task teams and the clients in applying good practices for conflict management and
         citizen engagement in fragile environments.

The application of the Conflict Filter has evolved over time in three distinct stages: In the first stage,
a country-wide conflict analysis was undertaken and a matrix developed. The matrix guides
reflection around such themes as geographical scope, beneficiary selection, inclusiveness,
communication, and accountability aspects of projects.2 In the second stage, the Conflict Filter Team
applied the Conflict Filter matrix in a comprehensive manner, covering all projects in the portfolio.
In the third stage (July 2014-June 2014), the Conflict Filter adopted a more selective and practical
approach by focusing primarily on projects under preparation. It also expanded its scope to a few
AAA activities.

This note summarizes the application of the Conflict Filter to the Bank’s Kyrgyz Republic portfolio
during its third year of implementation. After describing the methodology and process for applying
the Conflict Filter in 2014, the note provides a brief update on recent conflict and fragility dynamics
in the country. It then provides a summary of the activities with a focus on selected projects where
the application of the Conflict Filter influenced project design and implementation. Finally, the note
shares some lessons learned to guide future Conflict Filter application in the Kyrgyz Republic and
elsewhere.



1
  For more information on the Conflict Filter used in the Kyrgyz Republic portfolio, please contact: Asli Gurkan, Social
Development Specialist, World Bank, (agurkan@worldbank.org).
2
  See Annex 2 for a sample Conflict Filter matrix.

                                                                                                                           4
II. METHODOLOGY FOR CONFLICT FILTER ROLLOUT IN FY14

Feedback from the previous application of the Conflict Filter prompted a number of revisions to the
FY14 approach. The new approach has incorporated the following principles:

     Adopt a streamlined and selective approach. In FY14, the Conflict Filter Task Team
      abandoned the approach of trying to target every project in the portfolio. Instead, the Conflict
      Filter Team focused on those activities, be it projects or AAA, with direct beneficiaries and/or
      with potential for conflict-related risks and impacts.

     Focus on the design stage. The Conflict Filter Team found that its advice was most influential
      when engaging with task teams at the earliest stages of project or AAA design. Therefore, during
      FY14, the Conflict Filter Team focused prioritized pipeline projects..

     Apply a tailored Conflict Filter matrix. In FY14, the Conflict Filter Team used tailored
      versions of the matrix to allow for a more targeted review of individual projects. When
      determining the length and format of conflict-sensitivity assessment for individual projects, the
      Conflict Filter team took note of task teams’ priorities, demands, and time pressure to ensure the
      practical use of assessments and avoid additional burden on task teams.
The team has applied the Conflict Filter in three ways:
          Country and region-level assessment of conflict risks/tensions (as a short note or a longer
           note depending on the demand from task teams)
          Sector/project specific conflict assessment (as a short note)
          Project-level Conflict Filter matrix (matrix/checklist format). The matrix consisted of four
           columns: questions related to conflict stressors; responses about the project’s attention to
           stressors; risk appraisal; and proposed or ongoing project level conflict sensitivity measures.3

The methods for collecting information consisted of:
          Desk review of project documents, research reports, print and online media screening, and
           other existing materials to determine the conflict and fragility stressors relevant to the
           activity.
          Direct consultations, focus groups discussions with key stakeholders and informants in major
           cities such as Bishkek and Osh.
          Direct consultations, focus groups discussions with key stakeholders and resource people in
           the project areas either as part of joint missions with task and project teams or during separate
           missions by the Conflict Filter Team.


      III. EVOLUTION OF KEY CONFLICT DYNAMICS

The Conflict Filter team held discussions with individuals representing various sectors to gain an
understanding of changing stressors in the country. These discussions have highlighted the
following:

Four years after the 2010 upheaval, the country’s leaders and citizens have demonstrated progress in
tackling a number of conflict stressors. There has been a general stabilization of the political
3
    See Annex 2 for a sample matrix.

                                                                                                          5
situation in Kyrgyz Republic. While still new and fragile, the parliamentary system has grown in
strength as key government officials and leaders of coalition parties have exhibited the capacity to
compromise with each other and resolve disputes relying on the current constitutional arrangements.
Since 2010, the Kyrgyz Republic has witnessed the resignation and formation of several coalition
governments, and the change in coalition governments has been peaceful.

Authorities have taken measures to address some of the country’s pressing problems. Seeking to
quell ethnic tensions, the government has adopted a blueprint on
national cohesion and established an agency to oversee national
policies on interethnic relations. While the effects of the new policies
and institutional arrangements are yet to be seen, the policies and
organizational efforts signal a constructive and reconciliatory
approach. Kyrgyz law enforcement agencies have strengthened their
capacity to react to social disorder. The handling of community
disturbances in the Batken region throughout 2013 and early 2014
demonstrated the enhanced ability of Kyrgyz law-enforcement
agencies to handle outbreaks of public disorder in a timely and
effective manner. The authorities have also been engaged in
systematic negotiations with Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Kazakhstan
                                                                                    W.Frey, Faces of Batken
on border demarcation and delimitation through intergovernmental
commissions which are active and functioning, despite occasional bilateral disputes. Nevertheless,
some key challenges persist. The central government has had difficulties in reasserting control over
the country’s remote regions. Elite rivalry over state positions and resources, particularly in the
extractive industry continues to be an issue. The October 2013 Parliamentary resolution threatening
to nationalize the Kumtor Gold mine has negatively affected the country’s investment climate. Inter -
elite rivalry flared up in Bishkek in late November 2014 following the arrest of a former Parliament
speaker and a senior member of opposition party on corruption charges. While officials claim that
anti-corruption measures are yielding results, many observers conjecture that the measures have
exacerbated rivalries among well-positioned elites seeking to undermine financial interests of their
rivals.
The country’s diplomatic relations with immediate neighbours such as Tajikistan and Uzbekistan
remain tense as a result of unresolved border disputes and competing visions for regional economic
development. In early January 2014, the tensions over a bypass road near the Kyrgyz-Tajik border
gave way to an inter-state military confrontation with Kyrgyz and Tajik border guards exchanging
mortar fire and rocket-propelled grenades. This military confrontation has brought a chill in
diplomatic relations between Dushanbe and Bishkek. Following the violence, Kyrgyz Republic has
unilaterally closed the borders with Tajikistan, hampering the shipment of food products and fuel
from Russia and Kazakhstan to Northern Tajikistan.4 Such developments highlight the continuing
risks for conflict in the Kyrgyz Republic and the need for the World Bank task teams to be acutely
aware of the conflict and fragility dynamics.

IV. CONFLICT FILTER ACTIVITIES IN FY14
As an initial step to enhance conflict sensitivity in the Kyrgyz portfolio, the team organized a
consultation with the task team for each activity. Such informal discussions allowed the Conflict
Filter Team to determine the key issues that could be the target of conflict filter analysis and identify


4
 “Dogovor       o     stroitel’stve    dvuh   mostov   vzamen   na   otkrytie   granits,”   RFE/RL,   April   1,   2014,
http://rus.ozodi.org/content/article/25316541.html.

                                                                                                                      6
the best timing and format for integrating the analysis into the design of any given activity, be it
project or AAA.
By May 2014, the Conflict Filter Team has completed sensitivity reviews for eleven tasks and
assisted two Task Teams in completing the Conflict Filter Matrices for two new projects. The tables
below list the activities undertaken by the Conflict Filter Team I FY14. The activities fall under three
categories: a) projects under preparation (pipeline projects); b) projects under
implementation/supervision; and c) analytical and advisory activities

           Pipeline Projects                                Conflict Filter Activity
     Third Village Investment     The Conflict Filter Team filled out the Conflict Filter matrix and completed
                                  a sensitivity review note.
     Program (VIP3)
                                  The Conflict Filter Team prepared a conflict sensitivity brief and helped
     Electricity Supply           obtain data on the socioeconomic conditions in three locales: Bishkek,
     Improvement Project          Chui, and Talas.
     Pasture and Livestock        The Conflict Filter Team filled out the Conflict Filter matrix and completed
     Improvement Project          a conflict sensitivity review.

     CASA 1000                    The Conflict Filter Team prepared a conflict sensitivity review to be
                                  updated further in the next few months.
     Central Asia Road Links      The Conflict Filter Team prepared a twenty-page conflict sensitivity report
     (CARS1/CARS 2)               focusing on border regions. It is currently being finalized for wider
                                  distribution within the World Bank.
     Projects under                                         Conflict Filter activity
     Implementation/Completion
     Bishkek Osh Urban            The Conflict Filter Team conducted ex-post review to assess whether the
     Infrastructure Project       Conflict Filter recommendations were applied in the project areas;
     (BOUIP)                      The team joined a BOUIP implementation support mission in May.
     On-farm Irrigation Project   The Conflict Filter Team prepared a conflict sensitivity review and assisted
     (OIP-2)                      the project implementation unit (PIU) in preparing Terms of Reference and
                                  a manual for Conflict Management training for Water User Associations
     Emergency Recovery Project   The Conflict Filter Team completed a five-page note highlighting the latest
                                  conflict and fragility situation in the country; the input was requested as
                                  part of the introductory/background sections of the ICR.
      Analytical and Advisory                                 Conflict Filter activity
              Activities
     Mining Sector Studies-       The Conflict Filter Team provided inputs to three mining sector studies: i)
                                  Decision note on Mining Sector Needs Assessment, ii) Concept Note for
                                  Kyrgyz Republic EITI Post-Compliance II, and iii) final output of
                                  “Improving Civil Society Engagement in EITI in Kyrgyz Republic”
                                  project.
     Electricity Tariff Study     The Conflict Filter team provided inputs to the Project Concept Note and
                                  the Terms of Reference for a Qualitative Assessment of Energy Reforms;
                                  the Electricity Tariff Study team took these inputs into account for revising
                                  the Terms of Reference and for consultation methodologies in different
                                  parts of the country.
     Forestry Economic and        The Conflict Filter Team’s provided comments that were incorporated into
     Sector Work                  the Concept Note.


V. SELECTED PROJECT EXAMPLES

The case summaries below highlight several projects under preparation and implementation where
the Conflict Filter findings influenced the design or implementation. Impacts on the overall portfolio
are summarized in matrix form in Annex 1.

                                                                                                                  7
Third Village Investment Program (VIP3)-(preparation)
Process:
As part of the VIP-3 consultation and beneficiary feedback process, the team spent one week in
Bishkek and several days in Osh oblast in November 2013. The team held discussions with local
authorities, experts, NGO representatives, human rights activists, peacebuilding specialists,
representatives of international organizations and community members in order to gather relevant
information at the local and regional level. Findings from these meetings helped the team in applying
the Conflict Filter matrix to the VIP-3 project documents. The team also joined the VIP3 preparation
mission in May 2014 and assisted the PIU in developing selection criteria for identifying
communities that would be eligible for funding of local-level investments, including criteria on
inclusion and social cohesion.
Summary Findings of Conflict Filter:
      The state’s low capacity to provide for public goods (roads, electricity, healthcare services,
       education) is causing discontent of citizens.
      Perceptions of inequality between self-sufficient and subsidized local governments regarding
       participation in VIP-3. Residents of low-income/subsidized municipalities perceive that only
       wealthy/self-sufficient municipalities have the human and material resources to meet VIP3
       requirements for sub-projects.
      Socio-cultural obstacles for particular groups to participate collectively in decision-making
       processes. For example, women have difficulties attending community meetings because of
       household and childcare duties.
      Shortage of social infrastructure (health clinics, kindergartens, sports halls, youth centers etc.)
       especially in remote highland areas.
      Sensitivities of communities about the geographical distribution of donor-funded programs
       (Southerners feeling that northern regions receiving the bulk of international assistance;
       northerners feeling that southern regions obtaining large portion of international development
       assistance).
Conflict-Sensitive Design Elements Adopted:
      PIU adopted procedures for engaging local Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and
       NGOs to facilitate social mobilization and information sharing
      In order to prevent tensions at the local level, PIU agreed to include both subsidized and self-
       sustaining municipalities as eligible for VIP-3 funding.
      The PIU agreed to adopt detailed selection criteria with a scoring methodology to ensure
       fairness and inclusion when it comes to selecting communities for investments under VIP3.
       To create a “level-playing field” for subsidized local governments that will compete with
       self-sufficient and wealthier local governments, the PIU adopted “wellbeing” as a key
       consideration in the selection criteria. The category “wellbeing” will include such indicators
       as level of poverty, degree of subsidization, and geographic remoteness. The PIU will
       conduct a series of meetings for residents and local officials to ensure that these criteria are
       well-understood by participating municipalities. In addition, the PIU will provide a series of
       training to members of project selection committees to make sure that these criteria are
       applied in a transparent and consistent way.
      In some selected conflict-prone geographic areas, the PIU will engage in targeted social and
       conflict assessments to account for risks and opportunities before the selection and
       implementation of projects.



                                                                                                        8
Electricity Supply Accountability and Reliability Improvement Project (preparation)
Process:
The Conflict Filter Team assisted the project task team in obtaining data on the socioeconomic
conditions in three locales: Bishkek, Chui, and Talas. The team also prepared a five-page brief on
political and conflict risks that can potentially impact the electricity sector. In addition, the Conflict
Filter Team joined the task team in selected NGO meetings. The meeting allowed the Conflict Filter
and project task teams to take stock of grievances of various stakeholders and brainstorm on
potential citizen engagement activities that could be supported under the project.

Summary Findings of Conflict Filter:

      Public sensitivities over utility tariffs and fears that
       a rise in utility tariffs can lead to social discontent
       and protests. A common perception is that the price
       for electricity that the Kyrgyz Republic exports to
       other countries is much lower than the electricity
       tariff for Kyrgyz nationals. A sudden spike in utility
       tariffs was one of the factors that sparked the April
       2010 unrest.
      Public discontent with low quality services provided
       by the state-run electricity supply system.
      Community sensitivities over perceived and real corruption in the electricity supply sector.
      A common perception among citizens that payments of consumers are plundered by supplier;
       a related belief that a tariff increase will make it even worse.
      A widely-held belief that only ordinary consumers pay their bills on time; and that richer and
       more politically-connected customers and high-level officials do not pay their bills at all.
      Low level of civil society and community participation in the electricity sector reform
       process.
      Migratory trends causing influx of residents into urban areas, taxing the resources of
       electricity service providers.

Conflict-Sensitive Design Elements Adopted:
      Recognizing the importance of customer perceptions, the project will include consumer
       satisfaction surveys to be conducted three times over the course of the project. The consumer
       satisfaction survey will serve two purposes: to assess the rate of consumer satisfaction
       (perception) with electricity services and satisfaction on the interaction of the Severelectro
       (the main electricity distribution company) staff (controllers, Quality Service center staff etc)
       with customers.
      The consumer satisfaction survey will capture disaggregated satisfaction rates of male and
       female customers, and the strengthened complaints handling system for the Service Quality
       Centers will favourably benefit women as the majority of customers using the utility’s hotline
       are elderly women according to customer statistics.
      The project will also support additional social accountability measures such as: (i) setting up
       a system for Service Quality Centers in the project area for documenting, categorizing and
       resolving complaints; and (ii) strengthening information-sharing and communication
       techniques of the company via various media outlets.



                                                                                                        9
Pasture and Livestock Improvement Project-(preparation)

Process:
The Conflict Filter team met with the Pasture and Livestock Project task team regarding the potential
                                                stressors and triggers that could impact project
                                                activities and outcomes. Discussions highlighted that
                                                pasture reform could possibly fuel conflicts
                                                regarding internal and external pasture boundary
                                                demarcation, usage rights allocations, re-negotiation
                                                of prior leases, and secondary users of pasture. The
                                                Conflict Filter Team teamed up with an international
                                                expert and conducted field visits in Chui and Naryn
                                                regions in February 2014. These inputs from the
                                                field visits were incorporated into the social
                                                assessment and other project documentation.


Summary Findings of Conflict Filter:

      Underuse of remote pastures due to poor access and insufficient infrastructure and overuse of
       pastures closer to living areas.
      Conflicting maps on boundaries among pastures unions
      Minimal opportunities for community members to participate collectively in decision-making
       to address local municipal priorities.
      Weak dispute resolution mechanisms in Pasture User Unions
      Migratory trends fostering disputes between local residents and newcomers (new settlers).
       The migration trend is particularly pronounced in Chui oblast, a region known for its
       economic attractiveness to migrants. Old residents believe that they should have privileged
       access to pastures;
      Community sensitivities regarding user fees (belief that pasture fees threaten centuries-long
       patterns of pasture usage)
Conflict-Sensitive Design Elements Adopted:
     The Pasture project will use grant money from the ECA Region Capacity Development Trust
      Fund (ECAPDEV) to review the past dispute resolution experience under pasture committees
      on external boundary demarcation and develop similar dispute resolution guidelines for
      internal boundary demarcation under the project.
     PIU agreed to undertake assessments of Pasture User Union (PUU) citizen engagement
      measures. (using ECAPDEV funding)
     Based on the findings of the assessment, the Project will fund training of selected PUU where
      community engagement and representation of vulnerable groups needs to be improved.

Central Asia Road Links (CARS1/CARS 2) and other future regional projects related
to border areas/enclaves-(preparation)

Process:
The Conflict Filter Team prepared a comprehensive Conflict Sensitivity Review (20 pages) with a
specific focus on disputed border regions. The review is not only relevant for Central Asia Road

                                                                                                  10
Links (CARS) Phase 1 and 2 covering Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan; but it aims to also benefit other
current and future projects that may involve activities around the borders. The review focused on the
dynamics in and around eight internationally-recognized enclaves in the Ferghana Valley, a region
populated by nine million people and divided by three countries – Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and
Uzbekistan. It explored opportunities and challenges at the institutional, national, and local levels. In
addition, the review explored how the existing conflict stressors and conditions of resilience set the
stage for and interact with World Bank-funded operations in the region and it highlighted ways in
which the Bank can aid efforts to mitigate conflicts and reinforce social cohesion.

Summary Findings of Conflict Filter

      Demographic growth and migration in the border regions strain resources of local
       municipalities.
      Poorly-defined boundaries and the presence of enclaves complicate the demarcation of
       borders and cause strains in inter-state relations.
      Competition for scarce resources (such as arable land, water, and pastures) exacerbates pre-
       existing inter-ethnic tensions among communities.
      Harassment of residents by ill-trained border guards contributes to citizens’ growing
       discontent about corruption in law-enforcement agencies.
      Low quality of services in the border
       areas (worn-out roads infrastructure,
       poor quality healthcare, shortage of
       schools and day-care facilities)
       deepen      citizens’    distrust    in
       government.
      Years-long isolation from mainland
       countries and distant capitals
       strengthen a sense of injustice and
       exclusion among residents of the
       border regions.
   Conflict-Sensitive     Design     Elements
   Adopted:
      In the Kyrgyz Republic, the PIU
       hired a communications specialist to assist the project in numerous ways. The
       communications specialist will engage in the following activities: conduct stakeholder
       analysis in project areas, assess social risks in project areas; organize outreach campaigns;
       work with contractors to ensure fair labour practices and broad labour participation; set up
       and maintain inquiry hotline; serve as a liaison between PIU, communities and local
       governments
      The team is working with Ministry counterparts in both countries in developing a
       communication strategy. The strategy is expected to be a guiding/unifying communications
       document in Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic. It will reflect existing differences in terms of
       key stakeholders involved, means of accessing those stakeholders and timing within the
       larger scope of the country level project implementation.




                                                                                                      11
Bishkek Osh Urban Infrastructure Project-(implementation)

Process:
During FY12-FY13, BOUIP task team incorporated various recommendations from the Conflict
Filter assessment. These focused on expanding opportunities for disadvantaged communities from
residential suburbs and areas of a high concentration of social problems. A community investment
component was added to the project. The Conflict Filter team selected this project in FY14 to
conduct an ex-post review and assess whether the Conflict Filter recommendations were being
applied in the project areas. The Conflict Filter team joined a BOUIP implementation support
mission in May 2014 and visited a number of randomly selected sites. The mission concluded that
BOUIP demonstrated considerable progress in the implementation of the community investments
component. The project operated as a partnership between local authorities, communities and NGO
representatives. The social mobilization phase where communities identify their priorities was well
implemented by the implementing agency. Beneficiaries were vocal in describing their positive
experience and participation in the project and were knowledgeable about the project
implementation. Attempts were made to target specialized interventions to communities at risk and
to areas demonstrating specific.
Summary Findings of Conflict Filter:
       Tensions exist between the communities that are direct beneficiaries of the project versus
        communities that are not benefiting from the community
        level investments.
       The implementing agency has poor interactions with local
        CSOs;
       Community involvement in implementation and
        monitoring aspects of the project is limited, compared to
        the priority identification process.

Results: Conflict-Sensitive Design Elements Adopted                                               Tokmok, 2014

       The PIU agreed to distribute information more widely to non-beneficiary communities as
        well in order to avoid misperceptions about why some communities are included and others
        are excluded;
       Community development framework5 was improved to include screening and monitoring
        questions, to ensure that the community investments financed by the project as responsive
        and relevant to the immediate and emerging needs of the participating communities
       The PIU adopted community survey as a part of focus group discussions

On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP-2)-(implementation)
Process:
The Conflict Filter Team provided support to the PIU in preparing a ToR and a training manual for a
Conflict Management Training targeting Water User Associations (WUAs) to be financed under the
project. In April 2014, the Conflict Filter team joined the OIP-2 project mission to Chui and Talas.
The mission included both the OIP-2 Bank team and officials from the Ministry of Agriculture. The
team conducted focus group discussions and semi-structured interviews with members of water user
associations, local and regional authorities, Oblast support units, and community members.

5
 The framework is elaborated and described in the Operational manual of the BOUIP, and it includes procedural details
of community mobilization work and prioritization, communication and interaction with the communities.

                                                                                                                  12
Discussions focused on gaining an in-depth understanding of the social tensions and conflict
stressors affecting WUAs, decision-making, participation and conflict management methods applied
within WUAs, and to assess whether the “dispute resolution” committees under WUAs are in fact
functioning.

Summary Findings of Conflict Filter:

The perception of the OIP-2 task team was that water conflicts are a key issue only in the southern
region because of ethnic diversity and previous conflicts experienced in the south. Conflict Filter
findings showed that tensions among water users are also present in the northern regions and one has
to think about “conflict” in broader terms not only conflict between the Uzbeks and Kyrgyz ethnic
groups. The conflict analysis identified the following types of stressors in the north around
irrigation:

      Shortage of water during irrigation season. Majority of disputes arise in late May and early
       June when WUAs are in need of water and in seasons when water supply is low.
      Shortage of arable land and growing demand for arable land among farmers.
      Perceptions of corruption and favouritism among WUA users.
      Weak dispute resolution mechanisms
       in WUAs.
      Community sensitivities regarding
       user fees.
Based on the field visits, the Conflict Filter
team has made the following
recommendations:
      Support formation of and strengthen
       trainings for Dispute Resolution and
       Audit committees within WUAs;
       improve documentation and reporting within these committees.                         Oxfam

      The criteria for dispute resolution committee members should be less about technical skills
       (irrigation expertise) and more about social skills and integrity and respectable status of the
       individuals in the community.
      Consider a community campaign targeting respected elders, aksakals and involve them in
       dispute resolution trainings in order to increase their involvement in WUA dispute resolution
       functions.
      As part of nation-wide exchange visits, WUA should also share experiences on the work of
       dispute resolution committees.

The inputs were incorporated into the project Aide Memoire as part of the recommendations and
next steps for the PIU.

Conflict-Sensitive Design Elements Adopted:
      The project implementation unit (PIU) will hire a firm to conduct conflict resolution trainings
       for water user associations both in the northern and southern regions of the Kyrgyz Republic.
      PIU agreed to conduct a needs assessment before the training in order to adjust the program
       to the needs of participants.




                                                                                                   13
      The PIU agreed to strengthen trainings for Dispute Resolution and Audit committees,
       including documentation and reporting. (PIU agreed to conduct before and after evaluations
       to test knowledge and skills obtained by participants)
      The PIU agreed to consider a community campaign targeting aksakals (local elderly) and
       involve them in dispute resolution trainings in order to increase their involvement in WUA
       dispute resolution functions.


VI. LESSONS LEARNED
The Conflict Filter activities in FY14 have revealed the following important lessons:

      It is essential to closely link Conflict Filter work with broader social development work.
       The fact that the TTL of the Conflict Filter activity was also the country social development
       specialist for the Kyrgyz Republic and the social development specialist providing safeguards
       support for the Kyrgyz portfolio proved to be critical for the implementation of the Conflict
       Filter. The TTL was able to forge relationships with TTLs/task teams through entry points
       such as safeguard and citizen engagement work and was able to use this access to make
       reference to the Conflict Filter analysis where relevant. When other larger pieces of social
       analysis were being undertaken, the Conflict Filter questions were integrated into these
       analyses, in order to enhance the comprehensiveness of findings and to maximize the
       influence of project design. This flexible model is highly recommended for other teams
       planning to implement similar filters.
      It is key to bring Conflict Filter support at the earliest stages of project or AAA design.
       Engaging projects at very early stages, such as the Project Concept Note reviews or
       identification/preparation missions makes a big difference for the ability and the incentives of
       TTLs to integrate Conflict Filter findings into project design.
      It is important not to overburden task teams. The filter is a free resource for the TTLs.
       The matrix is prepared by the Conflict Filter Team, not TTLs. While doing this work, it is
       important not to bring additional time or resource burden to the busy teams, which increases
       TTLs’ receptivity for this work. Having separate resources to finance consultant time also
       allowed Conflict Task team members to join some field missions, which would not have been
       possible otherwise.
      AAA proved to be a great entry point for the Conflict Filter activity. Of particular
       relevance were those TAs and ESWs that inform the sector portfolios and provide upstream
       screening for broader social risks and impacts. The Conflict Filter Team will continue to
       target selected analytical work as well as pipeline projects as the focus of the Conflict Filter
       going forward.
      Problem-driven, specific, and practical recommendations lead to more receptivity from
       TTLs as compared broad and general social analysis and recommendations. Some TTLs
       were sceptical of this work, mainly because they found the recommendations to be too
       generic and not immediately relevant to their projects. Going forward, it is imperative to
       move away from more general analysis to sector specific analysis that would better resonate
       and be adapted by the teams.
      The support of the Country Management Unit (CMU) is invaluable. The CMU backing
       of the activity was key, and has enabled the Conflict Filter Team to approach Bank TTLs pro-
       actively. For similar activities across the Bank portfolio, it is important to get CMU backing
       and inputs before the implementation of the activities.

                                                                                                    14
    VII. GOING FORWARD: RECOMMENDATIONS AND NEXT STEPS
   While the Kyrgyz Republic has come a long way in terms stabilization, the dynamics of
    conflict and fragility still remain salient, especially in specific sectors such as mining,
    energy, pasture and natural resources, as well as water and irrigation. In terms of
    geographical attention, the country has witnessed several clashes in the border areas that
    require particular attention from the task teams going forward. The Conflict Filter Team will
    also pay attention to the areas located close to mining sites in Issyk Kul, Talas, and Naryn
    regions where various foreign and local mining companies operate. Since 2010, tensions
    between local communities and mining companies have been on the rise, and the number of
    violent confrontations has increased.

   Going forward, particular attention needs to be paid to incorporating social inclusion,
    cohesion and accountability related indicators as part of the results frameworks. The
    Conflict Filter could be designed to better contribute to the results framework in the future.
    This approach could also help with the implementation of the new requirement for
    beneficiary feedback activities and results indicators in every project with direct
    beneficiaries.

   The Conflict Filter Team will continue to target key analytical work that would inform
    multiple operations, particularly as questionnaires, scope and coverage of these studies are
    being designed.

   The Conflict Filter Team will also bring particular attention to the conflict risks and
    impacts of regional projects that involve Kyrgyz Republic both during project design and
    implementation.

   As part of providing conflict analysis, the team will strive to help task teams better
    understand citizen rights and entitlements pertaining to their projects. Where
    appropriate and feasible, the conflict filter team will work with task teams to design and
    implement risk mitigation strategies which promote respect of rights (including land rights,
    gender rights, entitlements for compensation, livelihood restoration etc.) as designated under
    the national law or safeguards provisions.

   The Conflict Filter Team will engage early with the TTLs of pipeline projects to identify
    opportunities to conduct a conflict filter analysis and to integrate these findings into project
    design: The projects under preparation during FY15 are already identified by the team. These
    projects are: Forestry project (TTL: Andrew Mitchell), Governance Development Policy
    Operation (TTLs: Kamer Karakorum/Evgenij Najdov), VIP3 (TTL: Asli Gurkan/Mark
    Woodward), Urban Project (TTL: Mena Ionkova) and Justice Sector Project (TTL: Klaus
    Decker). The team will convene a meeting with these task managers and the country
    management unit in early FY15 to inform them about the objectives of the Conflict Filter,
    and receive their feedback on how to best use this work to mitigate the conflict risks and
    enhance the positive impacts of these projects.




                                                                                                 15
Annex 1. Summary of Projects and Activities Covered by the Conflict Filter


   Project/
   Activity/          TTL            Status of CF           Justification for the selection of the project for CF analysis                            Action Taken
    Stage
                                                                     Investment Lending Operations
                                    Completed       The Conflict Filter team focused on this project because of two key reasons.        Matrix prepared, suggestions are
Third Village                                       First, as a community-development project, it has greater potential for citizen     included in the Project Concept Note
                       Asli
Investment                                          engagement/social accountability activities. The VIP-3 will have the                (review held on March 17)
                   Gurkan/Mark                      opportunity to strengthen the link between citizen engagement, community
Program- VIP- 3
                   Woordward                        driven development, and local governments. Second, the project design differs
(preparation)
                                                    significantly from VIP1 and 2, thus needs a fresh look, especially in terms of
                                                    the impact of the competitive selection of micro-projects.
Electricity       Ani Balabanyan    Completed       The upgrading of electricity distribution infrastructure and the reform of the      The CF team has prepared 5- page
Supply                                              electricity sector governance will be instrumental in helping to relieve            conflict sensitivity review during PCN
Accountability                                      unreliable electricity supply affecting the entire country, and help to boost       stage and assisted the team in obtaining
and Reliability                                     productivity. At the same time, energy reforms are a highly politicized and         background info on the beneficiary
Improvement                                         contentious issue in the country. Thus, the project requires a high level of        composition in the project areas.
Project                                             attention to conflict sensitivities and potential tensions between those covered
(preparation)                                       by the project (in Bishkek, Chui) and those who will not

Pasture           Peter Goodman     Completed       Reforming the management of pastures is critical for reviving the agricultural      The CF team member has accompanied
management                                          sector. Nevertheless, the reform of the pasture management is fraught with          an international consultant working with
(preparation)                                       numerous risks. It could fuel conflicts within and between communities              the Pasture Project in field visits to
                                                    regarding pasture boundaries, usage rights allocations, re-negotiation of prior     Naryn and Chui oblasts. Findings from
                                                    leases, and secondary users of pasture. Given these concerns, the project needs     these field visits were reflected in the
                                                    to be highly sensitive to conflict potential.                                       finalization of project documentation

CASA1000          Sunil Koshla      In progress     The project fits the three preliminary criteria for being placed under the          The CF team prepared Sensitivity
(preparation)                                       category of “enhanced conflict analysis” category: a) project has greater           Review for the CASA 1000 in February
                                                    potential for more in-depth citizen engagement/social accountability activities;    2014 as the initial screening to alert the
                                                    b) project activities interact directly and indirectly with conflict stressors      team on potential issues.
                                                    identified in the 2012 conflict analysis, c) the potential risks/ impacts of the
                                                    community benefit sharing program needs to be better understood.
CARS1/CARS2       Cordula Rastogi   In progress     The road sections to be financed under CARs-2 prioritize connectivity between       The team prepared a detailed note on
(preparation)                                       the Sugd Oblast in Tajikistan and the Osh and Batken Oblast as they build           conflict risks related to border area,
                                                    lateral spurs from the Osh-Isfana axis to the Tajik border. The recent clashes in   including but not limited to the areas


                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                    the KR-TJ border that occurred in January 2014 were an indication that border       related to CARS.
                                                    areas remain tense and unpredictable and investment operations that take place
                                                    around the border areas need to be adequately be informed of the conflict-          The findings are being integrated into
                                                    related risks, and potential impacts.                                               the communication strategy of the
                                                                                                                                        project.

On-farm               David           Completed     Irrigation is a key sector for poverty reduction and livelihood. Irrigation/water   The Conflict Filter team visited several
Irrigation Project    Meerbach                      resource management is among the priority sectors for citizen engagement            Water User Associations (WUAs) to
(implementation)                                    strategy for central Asia. Given the importance of the sector, a thorough           gather information on conflict
                                                    analysis is needed to understand the conflict sensitivities and political-          sensitivities/as well as related social
                                                    economy dynamics among various groups.                                              accountability arrangements related to
                                                                                                                                        the irrigation sector, and in particular
                                                                                                                                        the functioning of WUAs

Bishkek Osh           Anna Cestari    Completed     During FY12- FY13, BOUIP was significantly adapted based on the Conflict            The CF team joined a BOUIP
Urban                                               Filter assessment. The team selected this project this FY to conduct an ex-post     implementation support mission in May.
Infrastructure                                      review and assess whether the Conflict Filter recommendations were being            The findings were incorporated into the
Project                                             applied in the project areas                                                        BOUIP mission Aide Memoire.
(implementation)
                                                          Non-lending- Analytical and Advisory Assistance
Forestry ESW         Malcolm          In progress   The sustainable and balanced use of natural resources, such as forestry, are        The team provided comments to the
(Concept Note)       Childress                      challenged by the lack of an integrated governance strategy and the lack of         Concept Note of an upcoming study-
                                                    policy clarity about the objectives of resource management and the intended         “Understanding Communities' Role in
                                                    beneficiaries of resource use, particularly among local populations. Significant    the Governance of Forests and Pastures
                                                    reforms are underway to promote local natural resource management;                  in Kyrgyzstan' The team will follow up
                                                    however, the track record for forest reforms has been particularly uneven.          in FY15 as this ESW will feed into new
                                                                                                                                        investment project design

Electricity          Ani Balabanyan   Completed     Electricity tariff is a highly sensitive issue in the country with strong public    Team commented on the TOR and
Tariff Study-                                       opposition. The previous reform attempts have led to protests and societal          inputs were incorporated into
preparation                                         tensions in the recent years                                                        questionnaires and focus groups
Mining Sector        Gary McMahon     Completed     Mining is a highly sensitive issue in the country with strong                       The CF team provided inputs to three
Studies                                             public/media/Parliament opposition to the profit margins of international           mining sector studies: i) Decision note
(completion and                                     companies operating in the country. The previous reform attempts have led to        on Mining Sector Needs Assessment, ii)
CN)                                                 protests in 2013.                                                                   PCN for Kyrgyz Republic EITI Post-
                                                                                                                                        Compliance II, and iii) final output of
                                                                                                                                        “Improving Civil Society Engagement in
                                                                                                                                        EITI in Kyrgyz Republic” project.


                                                                                                                                                                       17
          Annex 2. Sample Conflict Filter Matrix

          Project: Third Village Investment Project Task Team Leader: Asli Gurkan/Mark Woodward
          Project Objective: The overarching aim of the project is alleviation of rural poverty. The objective of the project is building local capacity for participatory
          development planning and improving access to quality community infrastructure in targeted project areas.
          Current Preparation Stage: Identification         Board Date: March 2014                       Overall Rating of Conflict Risks: Low/Medium

   Questions                                 Conflict Risks and Impacts Identified by stakeholders                           Risk      Project-level Conflict-Sensitivity Measures
                                                                                                                           Appraisal    or Peacebuilding Opportunities Planned



1. Inclusion/Equity/ Participation

How are project              The project provides direct benefits to the following groups: a) residents of towns and       Medium      Under VIP3, all local governments are eligible
beneficiaries                villages in 347 communities (which were already participating in VIP1) and 126                            for community investment financing.
selected?                    communities (which participated as part of the VIP2); b) ARIS will continue to benefit
                             from institutional strengthening and skills development of its staff. VIP3 will support
                             those communities that have been left behind in a more systematic fashion. Indirect
                             beneficiaries include: a) the population of the country that stands to gain from improved
                             physical and social infrastructure; and b) the local municipalities across the country that
                             will draw benefits from the project’s capacity- building activities.

How do different             There is overwhelming support for VIP3 from different stakeholders. Nevertheless, some        Low         ARIS will work closely with municipal
stakeholders at              communities have voiced complaints about perceived disparities in the distribution of                     authorities, Territorial Councils, and
national, oblast,            benefits under the block grant approach. They were not able to address their urgent needs                 community representatives to bring them up to
and local levels             because of small sizes of grants under VIP1 and VIP2.                                                     date on the stage of the project.
perceive the
project? How did             Representatives of some central government agencies (Ministry of Agriculture and                          Under VIP3, there will be no longer per
non-beneficiary              Melioration), have suggested that they are capable of serving as a PIU for some                           capita-based grants allocation. The PIU will
groups respond?              components of VIP3 (thus, they implicitly questioned the fact that ARIS is chosen as the                  organize meetings and briefings on the two
                             PIU for VIP3).                                                                                            options (sub-projects and micro-projects) for
                                                                                                                                       representatives of local governments and
                             One frequent complaint is that the quality of ARIS-supervised infrastructure varies.                      community-based groups.

                             The options for channeling of funds for projects have caused mixed reactions.                             ARIS has agreed to work with an independent
                             Representatives of some local development agencies (based in Bishkek) and AOs said                        supervision firm for sub-projects to enhance

                                                                                                                                                                                   18
                               that the local governments can handle funds on their own. A number of local officials                infrastructure quality.
                               said that AOs do not want funds to be channeled through them citing risks that such
                               funds could be frozen for reasons not related to VIP3. Meanwhile, citing numerous                    The project team will be systematically
                               administrative hurdles faced by AOs, and successes of VIP2- Additional Financing,                    engaging local communities as well as local
                               ARIS believes that it is best to retain control over the process of channeling funds.                on the selection criteria, size of grants,
                               Meanwhile, some members of Village Investment Committees (VICs) and Local                            contracting, employment opportunities, cost of
                               Investment Committees (LICs) showed their ambivalence about the possibility of losing                services, distributions under scarce resources,
                               their mandate to manage projects and funds directly.                                                 grievance mechanisms to promote
                                                                                                                                    transparency in the management of VIP3.
                               Some national and local level NGOs implementing community-level development
                               activities have complained that ARIS exhibits ‘an arrogant attitude’ when dealing with               ARIS representatives have acknowledged that
                               communities and partners (complaints were as follows: ARIS does not collaborate with                 they need changes in their outreach work to
                               local NGOs; ARIS’ style of work reminds them of top -down approach favored by Soviet                 improve relations with both NGOs and local
                               development authorities; ARIS takes credit for all accomplished work).                               communities as part of Component 1 of the
                                                                                                                                    project.
2. Geography/Project Targeting

How are the                    The selection and geographic targeting of communities can cause social frictions.           Low      Under VIP3, funding will be distributed
geographic target              Residents in Naryn oblast, for example, complained that donor projects have traditionally            through a competitive process based on a
areas selected?                favored more developed urban areas in Chui and Osh oblasts. In Yssyk Kul, residents of               transparent selection criteria. The criteria
How does the                   highland areas voiced concerns that VIP3 funding may provide disproportionate benefits               includes the level of wellbeing of
project contribute             to self-sufficient municipalities located in lowland areas near urban centers.                       municipalities, their geographic remoteness,
to reducing real                                                                                                                    beneficiary types, gender equality, and
and perceived                                                                                                                       conflict sensitivity. These criteria will be
geographic                                                                                                                          weighted to emphasize certain aspects of the
inequalities?                                                                                                                       competition (such as poverty) over other
                                                                                                                                    factors.

What is the                   The security situation across the country has been stable though inter-elite, inter-         Medium   The project team is engaged in systematic
security situation            community and inter-ethnic tensions are still notable in some geographic areas (Bishkek,              monitoring of political situation and in,
in the targeted               Issyk Kul, and Osh). Thus far, the Kyrgyz law enforcement agencies have demonstrated                  particular, monitoring of any localized
areas? Is there a             their capacity to maintain law and order. The police’s handling of the recent opposition              activities that can affect project activities in
recent history of             protests (including the closure of roads by supporters of a jailed opposition politician)             particular communities.
violent conflict,             indicate the higher level of preparedness of the Kyrgyz law-enforcement agencies to
disturbances,                 respond to outbreaks of public disorder incidents in a timely and effective manner.
mass protest etc?
3. Interaction with Conflict Stressors

What kind of                   There is a risk that VIP3 will provide few or no benefits to residents of conflict-prone    Low      VIP3 will work in the entire country,

                                                                                                                                                                                       19
benefits, if any,    regions and victims of violence.                                                                  including the conflict affected South. The
will the project                                                                                                       three southern oblasts will be financed by
create for           There is a risk that VIP3 projects may contribute to flaring up community tensions in             KFW whereas the Bank financing will cover
residents of         conflict risk areas.                                                                              the 4 northern oblasts. The Bank is
conflict-prone                                                                                                         considering a $1.4 million grant from State
regions and          Community contributions required as part of projects may exacerbate difficulties for low-         and Peace Building Fund to provide training
victims of violent   income households and victims of violent conflicts.                                               on conflict-management and grievance redress
conflicts?                                                                                                             mechanisms.

                                                                                                                       Majority of interviewed community residents
                                                                                                                       had positive view of community contributions,
                                                                                                                       saying that they increase community stake in
                                                                                                                       projects. Nevertheless, the Task Team and
                                                                                                                       ARIS are currently reviewing community
                                                                                                                       contributions to micro-project financing to
                                                                                                                       ensure that they do not exacerbate difficulties
                                                                                                                       for low-income households.
What benefits        There is a risk that VIP3 will exacerbate tensions caused by high youth unemployment.       Low   The project’s components and sub-
will the project     Under VIP1 and VIP2, ARIS paid insufficient attention to gender equality. The majority            components are expected to create a variety of
create to reduce     of people working for VIP1,VIP2, and ARIS (as members of staff or hired labor) were               jobs. Though some of the jobs will require
                     Kyrgyz men. This condition can cause dismay of members of other social groups                     technical expertise, labor-intensive
stresses created
                     (women, member of ethnic minority groups, development NGOs, and human rights                      infrastructure-building activities can promote
by high youth        groups).                                                                                          greater use of unskilled labor of youth and
unemployment                                                                                                           women. ARIS is required to ensure that the
and gender                                                                                                             overall profile of hired labor (sub-contractors,
inequality?                                                                                                            consultants, technical experts, construction
                                                                                                                       workers, etc.) is inclusive.

                                                                                                                       The ARIS management shows commitment to
                                                                                                                       increase the number of female field staff. One
                                                                                                                       of the field officers for the Yssyk Kul region
                                                                                                                       is a local woman. Given the fact that nearly of
                                                                                                                       field officers are men, the increase in the
                                                                                                                       number of female field officers will be a step
                                                                                                                       forward.




                                                                                                                                                                    20
How will the                                                                                                              Low
                           All World Bank-financed projects are now required to include grievance redress                          Component 1 of VIP3 as well as the
project contribute         mechanisms. There is a risk that VIP3 will pay insufficient attention to the grievance                  complementary SPF grant is devoted to
to strengthening           mechanisms. (The grievance mechanisms were not clearly explained in detail in the                       training project beneficiaries, including on
project                    Operational Manual of VIP2).                                                                            conflict management and grievance redress
beneficiaries’                                                                                                                     mechanisms. The dispute resolution and
capacities to                                                                                                                      grievances resolution mechanisms will be
resolve disputes                                                                                                                   embedded into the current institutional
                                                                                                                                   arrangement within ARIS, and its subsidiaries
and concerns
                                                                                                                                   at the regional levels.
arising from               Land acquisitions might be required under some projects, which may exacerbate local
project-related            tensions.                                                                                               Acknowledging that land acquisition may be
                                                                                                                                   possible under some projects, VIP3 triggered
activities?
                                                                                                                                   the Bank’s safeguard on involuntary
                                                                                                                                   resettlement. ARIS will prepare and utilize
                                                                                                                                   Resettlement Policy Framework.

4. Accountability and Transparency

What is the                Under VIP1 and VIP2, ARIS engaged in intensive social mobilization. Nevertheless,              Medium   ARIS’ communications strategy will be
consultation and           local communities in several municipalities located in highland areas of Naryn and Chui                 refined during implementation of VIP3 to
communication              oblasts reported difficulties in access to and shortage of information about the objectives,            enhance communication between ARIS, Ail
strategy for the           design and implementation procedures of VIP1 and VIP2.                                                  Okmotu, and participating communities.
project? How
does the project                                                                                                                   ARIS will continue to widely publicize a
engage CSOs for                                                                                                                    Bishkek-based hotline where complaints can
monitoring,                                                                                                                        be lodged. The number will be posted on its
evaluation, and                                                                                                                    web site and will be included in the basic
supporting project                                                                                                                 project information package widely
implementation?                                                                                                                    distributed within all participating
                                                                                                                                   communities. In addition, the hotline number
                                                                                                                                   will be included in all periodic newsletters and
                                                                                                                                   bulletins issued by ARIS. Any complaint
                                                                                                                                   receivedwill be followed up during a field
                                                                                                                                   investigation by a team from the head office.
How does the               The project team recognizes that some formal and informal groups may seek to influence         Medium   Throughout implementation and afterwards,
project ensure             project activities under VIP3 in ways that would serve their needs rather than those of the             community members who suspect corruption
that benefits are          broader community. For example, some municipality officials and local councilors, or                    or who have grievances can contact ARIS
not captured by            members of local informal networks, will seek to acquire greater role in the management                 through ARIS hotline or through ARIS’
unintended                 of project activities and resources under the VIP3. As the experience of VIP1 and VIP2                  community mobilizers.

                                                                                                                                                                                21
groups (elite          shows, some heads of AOs and LICs might attempt to divert funds to personal use.
capture/corruptio                                                                                                               Cross-checking and “peer auditing” by
n)?                                                                                                                             members of other communities used by ARIS
                                                                                                                                under VIP1 and VIP2 were proven to be an
                                                                                                                                effective tool. ARIS plans to utilize these tools
                                                                                                                                under VIP3 as well.
5. Political Economy
How will the           The project activities will provide benefits to sizable voting population. As a result,                  During the previous elections, ARIS organized
project activities     various influential political groups and parties may attempt to boost their political ratings   Medium   extended team-retreat activities in order to
affect distribution    (before scheduled elections) by claiming credit for project activities. This concern is                  minimize exposure of ARIS to political
of power and           especially relevant in light of the parliamentary elections scheduled for October 2015.                  campaigners. ARIS plans to continue this
resources among                                                                                                                 practice during upcoming elections.
stakeholders?          ARIS representatives said that they were previously pressured by individuals MPs
                       seeking to direct investments under VIP1 and VIP2 to their constituent regions. MPs are                  To withstand informal pressure, ARIS
                       likely to continue their attempts influence the process of beneficiary selections under the              representatives utilized measures, such as
                       VIP3, and ARIS needs to be prepared to resist such pressure.                                             reminded MPs of violating Kyrgyz legislation.
                                                                                                                                And referring MPs to internal ARIS
                       Under the VIP3, the potential transfer of the mandate of VICs and LICs to AOs                            procedures.
                       (preparing and approving projects) can cause resistance from members of VICs and LICs
                       in some geographic areas. In some areas, such resistant LICs and VICs may refuse to                      Under VIP3, participating municipalities will
                       collaborate with AOs under VIP3.                                                                         create Project Working Groups. Such groups
                                                                                                                                will include previous VICs and LICs
                       Competitive selection of subprojects and micro-projects may deepen the divide between                    members. The PIU will continue collaborating
                       the so-called “stronger and wealthier AOs” and “weaker and poorer municipalities.                        with VICs and LICs in areas where they are
                                                                                                                                still functioning.

                                                                                                                                The introduction of social criteria (such as
                                                                                                                                wellbeing and remoteness of municipalities) is
                                                                                                                                expected to provide “a level playing field” for
                                                                                                                                all participating municipalities. Moreover, as
                                                                                                                                the example of projects implemented by
                                                                                                                                partner organizations (such as the KfW and
                                                                                                                                the Institute of Development Policy) indicate,
                                                                                                                                competition-based awards are unlikely to lead
                                                                                                                                to violent confrontations between or among
                                                                                                                                communities.




                                                                                                                                                                              22
