                              ACS10004
                              v2




AGRICULTURE GLOBAL PRACTICE



THE FRUIT OF HER LABOR
PROMOTING GENDER-EQUITABLE
AGRIBUSINESS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA

COCOA SECTOR

December 2014
THE FRUIT OF HER LABOR
PROMOTING GENDER-EQUITABLE
AGRIBUSINESS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA
COCOA SECTOR



I. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
The World Bank Group recently completed a study of gender issues in three
agribusiness supply chains in Papua New Guinea (PNG), including cocoa.
It found women to be key to ensuring quality in agriculture. Therefore, it
recommends that if PNG wants to export better quality cocoa it needs to
focus on the contribution of women; improving their skills and capacities, and
giving women a greater share of the benefits.

Agriculture accounts for approximately one-third of GDP in PNG, and the
sector is dominated by smallholder farming systems.




Photos by Conor Ashleigh and World Bank


The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                    2
This document summarizes the main findings and recommendations relating
to the cocoa sector from the joint World Bank-IFC report The Fruit of Her
Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea.


   Cocoa is one of the major agricultural export crops for PNG with an
   estimated 151,000 households and about one million people involved
   in the industry. This accounts for approximately 20 percent of the
   labor force.

   The cocoa sector has been devastated by the emergence of cocoa pod
   borer (CPB), now affecting nine cocoa growing provinces. In East
   New Britain, once the leading cocoa producing region, production is
   estimated to have declined by 80 percent.

   Smallholder productivity is low, estimated at 0.3 tonne/hectare,
   compared with plantation yields under high management of 1.0-2.5
   tonnes/hectare, and research trials which have recorded yields of up to
   2.5 tonnes/ hectare using hybrid clone varieties.

   Poor infrastructure is costly to the industry. The Cocoa Board
   estimates, conservatively, that about 10,000 to 15,000 tonnes of cocoa
   do not reach the markets due to absent or inadequate transportation.



The report and sector summaries were prepared by consultants C. Mark
Blackden (mblackden@comcast.net) and Maxie Makambo Dominic
(makambo020368@gmail.com), under the overall guidance of Anuja Utz
(autz@worldbank.org) and Amy Luinstra
(aluinstra@ifc.org).

For more information visit www.worldbank.org/png.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                      3
II. SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL FINDINGS
The main findings of the analysis are:
   »» Women are key to quality. Women play an important role
      in time-critical and quality-relevant tasks in cocoa production,
      harvesting and processing.
   »» Labor dynamics affect outcomes in the sector. Much labor
      is allocated for “social” purposes and labor shortages exist. This
      has been exacerbated by the advent of CPB, especially at critical
      production and processing times. Labor constraints are especially
      apparent when the gender division of labor is explicitly taken into
      account.
   »» Critical services are lacking. Provision of services including
      inputs, extension, training/capacity-building and finance is limited
      and poorly targeted. Gender-specific tasks and needs are insufficiently
      integrated into the design and delivery of extension and training
      services.

When CPB attacked cocoa, the men got disoriented, but the women
stayed focused. If [the women] don’t do anything, there won’t be any food
 on the table.
−Mrs. Laniete Aus, President,
 Women in Agriculture, East New Britain Province.

The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                     4
III. KEY ISSUES IN THE COCOA SECTOR

A) Quality
Women provide substantial labor in cocoa cultivation as well as undertaking
time-critical and quality related tasks. More important than the amount of
labor women provide, analysis of the cocoa supply chain indicates that the
specific tasks women undertake have a substantial bearing on the quality
of the final product. This includes harvesting, breaking the pods, sorting
of beans, transport of wet beans for fermenting, putting wet beans in the
fermentary, and managing the drying.

  TABLE: KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF WET AND DRY BEAN
           COCOA PRODUCTION STRATEGIES
                      Item                                Wet bean    Dry Bean
 Duration of harvest round (days)                        0.36            2.3
 Laborers per harvest group (avg #)                      1.78            4.4
 Labor days spent on harvest (avg #)                     0.68           10.46
 Labor allocation                                    More women       More men
 Income earned per harvest round                        17.00          374.22
 (PG Kina avg)
 Control of income                                        Harvester   Male HH
                                                                       head
 Transport costs                                          Nil/Low      High
 Share of cocoa in HH income (percent)                       10         77
 HH = household
 Source: Curry et al. 2007:59

These are time-critical tasks: they must be undertaken promptly in relation
to harvesting, and for a specific amount of time. These tasks substantially
determine the quality of the cocoa delivered to the exporter. The labor and
time requirements for cocoa harvesting differ in significant ways, as are the
earnings that can be obtained (Table).

The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                          5
“Typically, families use their Stage 3 [older] cocoa blocks like bank
ATMs: the cocoa block is visited only when cash is required for immediate
consumption. Very little or no time is allocated to block maintenance. This
type of production practice is known as ‘forage harvesting.’ Male farmers
have lost almost all interest in their cocoa block as it enters the Stage 3 senile
phase.”
– (Curry et al. 2007:97).

The different stages of cocoa cultivation, reflecting the age and potential
of the trees, are what gives rise to the distinction between “farming” and
“foraging”.

The failure to adopt good cocoa farming practices leads to a mutually
reinforcing set of negative outcomes: low productivity, low quality,
greater vulnerability to pests and disease, little investment in replanting or
rehabilitating existing gardens, low income-earning and labor absorption, a
missed opportunity to reduce poverty, and inefficient use of land and waste
of resources (Agrifood Consulting International 2009:63-65).

Three inter-related issues affect women’s ability to contribute to improving
the quality of PNG cocoa. These are:
    »» Incentives: The economic incentives for women to allocate
       sufficient labor to these quality-defining tasks, or, equally importantly,
       to do them well, are low. There is a substantial gap between the work
       done by women in the cocoa sector and the benefit they obtain.
       Differences in incentives are not only relevant for women’s labor
       allocation and choices. Younger males (sons of household heads) also
       resist allocating their labor to cocoa cultivation if they feel that they
       are not being sufficiently compensated for the work undertaken.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                          6
     »» Knowledge and Information: Women’s access to the knowledge
        and skills required to carry out these tasks is extremely limited as
        gaps in education, literacy, skills, and participation in extension and
        training activities persist.
     »» Socio-Cultural Dynamics: There are important gender-specific
        dynamics at work in PNG society that differentially affect men’s
        and women’s capacity to exercise economic agency. PNG society is
        largely patriarchal, and, even in matrilineal regions, men are seen as
        household heads and primary decision-makers.


B) Labor
Labor constraints are especially apparent when the gender division of labor
is explicitly taken into account. Labor issues have far-reaching implications
for the performance of the sector. Of particular importance are gender
differences in labor allocation and rewards, and the ways in which social and
economic factors intersect in determining labor use.
     »» Much labor is allocated for social purposes. Social factors
        and obligations, including church and community work, are at least
        as important as economic ones in determining labor use, whether
        for cocoa cultivation or other economic activities. Consequently,
        relationships along the supply chain can be seen to have at least as
        much to do with clan and culture as with product characteristics and
        market dynamics.
     »» Labor shortages persist. Households experience labor shortages
        and do not have enough labor to do all the things they need to do, or
        to do the things at the right time and in the right way. Even before the
        advent of CPB, labor shortages were identified as a critical issue in
        the cocoa sector. CPB exacerbates the labor constraint by requiring
        an even more labor-intensive approach to cocoa block management
        and cultivation, while simultaneously reducing the output from these



The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                           7
        blocks. It is estimated that it takes 2-3 times as much labor to manage
        cocoa blocks effectively since the advent of CPB (Curry et al. 2007).
        However, this is a temporary situation and once CPB is under control
        labor allocation to cocoa cultivation can return to normal, pre-CPB,
        levels.
     »» Smallholders need to adopt a more labor-intensive and
        “business-like” approach to cocoa cultivation. If the industry
        is to survive, smallholders must adopt a much more labor-intensive
        production strategy. This is why labor availability is the binding
        constraint. With adequate labor more work could be put into block
        maintenance and, as needed, into replanting old cocoa stock, which
        would have a positive impact on yields and returns to labor. It is the
        gender-specific dynamic of labor allocation and the disconnect with
        benefits obtained that is perhaps the most important single driver of
        labor constraint in the cocoa production and processing cycles. In
        a “farming” approach to cocoa cultivation, substantial labor (male
        and female) is mobilized, whereas under a “foraging” approach,
        minimum labor is deployed (mostly female), with attendant negative
        consequences for yields and the returns obtained in the sector.


C) Services
Provision of services – including inputs, extension, training/capacity-
building, and finance – is limited and poorly targeted, and gender-specific
tasks and needs are insufficiently integrated into the design and delivery of
extension and training services. In addition to the limited reach and focus of
extension services, other key services are often not available to smallholders.
Input supply is weak and inconsistent. New varieties are not readily available
to farmers and need to be developed to take account of PNG’s specific
climate and agricultural requirements. There is limited access to financial




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                       8
services, and important gender-specific barriers persist, as women tend not
to own the land, fixed assets, or other resources that are needed to meet
collateral requirements.

Beyond these sector issues, broader, systemic issues persist in PNG and affect
sector performance. In addition to the well-documented issues of poor
or non-existent infrastructure, especially transport and communications,
PNG suffers from pervasive insecurity and violence, including domestic
violence, which disproportionately affect women and their ability to
operate as economic agents in the sector. Lack of information, knowledge,
communications and services (including education and health), more
generally, is a further systemic barrier to gender-equitable agribusiness.




IV. PRINCIPAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
STAKEHOLDERS IN THE SECTOR
All stakeholders have a role to play in improving outcomes for women in the
sector. Key actions identified include:
     »» Incentives: Improve the capacity of women to benefit directly
        from the income earned in the cocoa sector by facilitating direct
        payment systems, by aggregating production through cooperatives,
        and by supporting training and sensitization efforts (including through
        personal viability−PV−training) aimed at shifting cultural norms
        relating to women’s economic contribution.
     »» Inputs: Raise yields by improving the functioning and economic
        viability of nurseries and bud gardens, while focusing on developing
        CPB-resistant strains and improving the overall quality of plant
        material−focus specifically on developing women’s technical skills and
        capacities in these areas.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                       9
     »» Knowledge: Improve quality through better training in production
        and processing techniques. Re-focus extension and training messages
        toward the quality-enhancing tasks for which women are responsible.
        Adopt a specific target (30-40 percent) for female participation.
        Consider establishing quality protocols at each step of the supply
        chain, outlining the critical steps (and who does them) involved in
        maximizing quality. Ensure that these protocols are integrated into
        extension and training packages. Analyze labor dynamics in the
        sector, through commissioning time use surveys and research on the
        gender division of labor for key tasks, including domestic work and
        returns to labor.
     »» Certification: It is widely believed that by 2020 all cocoa bean
        products will be marketable only if they are certified under any of
        the certification labels currently known, and this is an important
        entry point in the sector. It is critical to examine the extent to which
        certification schemes in the cocoa sector (Rainforest Alliance, 4C,
        UTZ, Fair Trade, Organic) include gender equality provisions
        in capturing “social” co-benefits, how these provisions are being
        implemented, and how compliance is monitored.




References

Agrifood Consulting International, 2009. Preparation of a Strategic Plan for the Cocoa
Sector in PNG. Final Report. Funded by Mars, Incorporated to assist the preparation of
the World Bank Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP), 29 May, Bethesda,
Maryland.

Curry, George N., Gina Koczberski, E. Omuru, and R.S. Nailina, 2007. Foraging or Farming:
Household Labor and Livelihood Strategies Amongst Smallholder Cocoa Growers in
Papua New Guinea, Black Swan Press, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Western
Australia.

The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable Agribusiness Development in Papua
New Guinea, World Bank Group, Port Moresby and Sydney, 2014.


The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Cocoa Sector Summary                                10
