    Report No: ACS11434
.




    Republic of the Philippines
    Support to Post-Yolanda (Haiyan) Reconstruction
    and Recovery Planning
    Summary of Knowledge Briefs

.
    October 2014


.
    GSURR
    EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
.




Document of the World Bank
.
.


.
    Standard Disclaimer:


    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
    The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
    of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
    Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
October 2014
www.worldbank.org/eapdrm

Disclaimer
This report is a product of the staff of the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge,
this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is
given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Table of Contents
Acronyms............................................................................................................................................	v
Acknowledgements.............................................................................................................................	vii
Preface................................................................................................................................................	ix
Background.........................................................................................................................................	xiii
Summary.............................................................................................................................................	xv

Chapter 1	 Rapid Damage Assessments
           Using Remote Sensing Technologies and Risk Information
           to Support Identification of Preliminary Reconstruction Needs..................................	1
Chapter 2	 Public Buildings and Infrastructure
           Good Practice for Resilient Reconstruction..................................................................	7
Chapter 3	 Housing
           Lessons Learned from Large-Scale Housing Reconstruction Programs.......................	15
Chapter 4	 Building Back Better
           Restoring Key Sectors, Local Economy, and Livelihoods..............................................	23
Chapter 5	 Roads and Bridges
           Enabling Operational Continuity of Lifelines for Evacuation
           and Post-disaster Response...........................................................................................	31
Chapter 6	 Institutional Structures
           Good Practices and Options for Effective Planning for Reconstruction
           and Recovery..................................................................................................................	37
Conclusion	.........................................................................................................................................	47
References	.........................................................................................................................................	49


List of Boxes

Box 2.1           Damage Observed in the Visayas from the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Haiyan...	8
Box 2.2           Structural Design Codes in the Philippines...................................................................	10
Box 3.1           Housing Recovery after the 2006 Yogyakarta Earthquake in Indonesia.....................	17
Box 3.2           1999 Colombia Earthquake in Coffee-Growing Region (Armenia)...............................	18
                       Box 3.3          Pakistan Rural Housing Reconstruction Program after the 2005 Earthquake............	18
                       Box 4.1          Lessons Learned from Aceh, Indonesia, after 2004 Tsunami......................................	29


                       List of Figures

                       Figure 1.1 	 National Road Network Maintained by the Department of Public Works
                                    and Highways, Overlaid on OpenStreetMap..................................................................	2
                       Figure 1.2 	 OpenStreetMap Basemaps for Tacloban City, Before and After
                                    Volunteer Efforts.............................................................................................................	3
                       Figure 1.3 	 Sample Remote Damage Assessment in Tacloban........................................................	3
                       Figure 1.4 	 Post-Disaster Aerial Imagery Extents for Tacloban City...............................................	4
                       Figure 1.5 	 Available High-Resolution Satellite Images from Digital Globe for Post-Haiyan
                                    Response.........................................................................................................................	5
                       Figure 1.6 	 Landslide Hazard Map of the N1 Road Network with Project READY Output..............	6
                       Figure 6.1 	 Aspects of a Coherent Reconstruction Plan..................................................................	37
                       Figure 6.2 	 Organizational Chart of NDRRMC..................................................................................	39
                       Figure 6.3	 Map of the Philippines with Administrative Regions....................................................	45


                       List of Tables

                       Table 2.1        Recommended Priority Actions for Reconstruction of Public Infrastructure ............. 12
                       Table 3.1 	 Options and Considerations When Determining the Scope of a Housing Recovery
                                   Program..........................................................................................................................	16
                       Table 3.2 	 Proposed Roles of Stakeholders Involved in a Community-Based Housing
                                   Recovery Program..........................................................................................................	20
                       Table 4.1 	 Recommended Actions for Recovery and Reconstruction in the
                                   Education Sector............................................................................................................	26
                       Table 5.1 	 Recommended Actions for Enhancing the Resilience of Roads and Bridges...............	34
                       Table 6.1 	 Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Options for Institutional
                                   Arrangements.................................................................................................................	40
                       Table 6.2 	 Advantages and Disadvantages of Models Led by Recovery and Reconstruction
                                   Agencies versus National Economic Planning Agencies...............................................	42
                       Table 6.3 	 Responsibilities of Recovery and Reconstruction and Planning Agencies
                                   during Reconstruction....................................................................................................	42




iv Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Acronyms
ADB        Asian Development Bank
AGDI       Agency Geospatial Data Infrastructure
BAPPENAS   National Planning Agency (Indonesia)
BRR        Reconstruction Agency (Indonesia)
BSP        Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
CCT        Conditional cash transfer
CDD        Community-driven development
CSCAND     Collective Strengthening on Community Awareness on Natural Disasters
DBM        Department of Budget and Management
DEM        Digital elevation model
DepEd      Department of Education
DOH        Department of Health
DOST       Department of Science and Technology
DPWH       Department of Public Works and Highways
DSWD       Department of Social Welfare and Development
DRM        Disaster risk management
DRRM Act   Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act
EAP        East Asia and Pacific
EDC        Electronic data capture
ERRA       Earthquake Reconstruction and Recovery Agency (Pakistan)
EU         European Union
FOREC      Fund for Reconstruction and Social Development of the Coffee Region (Colombia)
GDP        Gross domestic product
GFDRR      Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GIS        Geographic information systems
GoP        Government of the Philippines
HOT        Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team
IT         Information technology
IFC        International Finance Corporation




                                                                                            Summary of Knowledge Briefs v
                        JICA               Japan International Cooperation Agency
                        JTWC               Joint Typhoon Warning Center
                        LGU                Local government unit
                        MGB                Mines and Geosciences Bureau
                        MMDA               Metropolitan Manila Development Authority
                        MMEIRS             Metro Manila Earthquake Impact Reduction Study
                        NAMRIA             National Mapping and Resource Information Authority
                        NBCP               National Building Code of the Philippines
                        NDMA               National Disaster Management Authority (Pakistan)
                        NDRRMC             National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council 
                        NEDA               National Economic and Development Authority
                        NGO                Nongovernmental organization
                        NOAH               Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards Project
                        NSCP               National Structural Code of the Philippines
                        OpenDRI            Open Data for Resilience Initiative
                        OSM                OpenStreetMap
                        PAGASA             Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration
                        PDNA               Post-disaster needs assessment
                        PERRA              Provincial Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (Pakistan)
                        PHIVOLCS           Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
                        RAY                Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda
                        SERRA              State Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (Pakistan)
                        UAV                Unmanned aerial vehicle
                        UNDP               United Nations Development Programme
                        USAID              United States Agency for International Development




vi Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by the World Bank Disaster Risk Management East Asia and the Pacific
Team, based on contributions of the World Bank Group staff and consultants involved with providing
technical assistance to the government of the Philippines (GoP) in the aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan
(local name Yolanda).

Technical assistance was provided under guidance of Abhas K. Jha and Ousmane Dione, and was
led by Jolanta Kryspin-Watson. The extended team included Vincent M. Abrigo, Agnes Albert-Loth,
Anissa Amador Tria, Christopher C. Ancheta, Leonora Aquino Gonzales, Joselito R. Armovit, Jorge
Avalos, Abigail C. Baca, Geraldine Visitacion Bacani, Melba D. Baltasar, Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat,
Henrike Brecht, Caryn Bredenkamp, Anne Brockmeyer, Jaeeun Chung, John R. Crowley, Victor Dato,
Vivien Deparday, Lynnette Dela Cruz Perez, Marianna Alfa Fernando-Pacua, Carolina V. Figueroa-
Geron, Victoria Florian S. Lazaro, Chisako Fukuda, Claudia Gabarain, Maria Teresita Galauran
Lacerna, Edkarl M. Galing, Mildred Gonsalvez, Rashmin Gunasekera, Xuemei Guo, Mary Kathryn
Hollifield, Amelia Johnston, Kai-Alexander Kaiser, Chiyo Kanda, Matthew James Keir Stephens,
Justine Espina Letargo, Paula Maria Leynes Felipe, David Llorico Llorito, Charles Lor, Maria Loreto
Padua, Phyllis Danielle Malek, Wael Mansour, Stephanie Anne M. Margallo Paul A. Mariano, Eduardo
Martinez-Miranda, Kristine May S. J. Ante, Gia Mendoza, Deepak K. Mishra, Nadine Mortola, Nataliya
Mylenko, Ariel Mauricio Nunez Gomez, Reinaluz Ona, Christopher T. Pablo, Gerardo F. Parco, Ayaz
Parvez, William Paterson, Priscilla Mary Phelps, Aleksandra Posarac, Maria Theresa G. Quinones,
Hanif Anilmohamed Rahemtulla, Liana Zanarisoa Razafindrazay, Raja Rehan Arshad, Demilour
Reyes Ignacio, Geralyn Ani Rigor, Roberto Antonio F. Rosadia, Aileen Theresa Ruiz, Hoon Sahib Soh,
Hamzah Saif, Keiko Saito, Artessa Saldivar-Sali, Hans Shrader, Ferdinand Sia, Alanna Leigh Simpson,
George Soraya, Zuzana Stanton-Geddes, Joop Stoutjesdijk, Maria Consuelo Sy, Karl Kendrick Tiu
Chua, Marinela Cecilia Tolenti Pascua, Mari Anne DL. Trillana, Rogier J. E. Van Den Brink, Conrad
Antonius Vasquez De Jesus, Rashiel Velarde, Noel Verdote, Catherine G. Vidar, Maya Gabriela Q.
Villaluz, Felizardo K. Virtucio, Makiko Watanabe, Sayaka Yabuki, Diana Ya-Wai Chung, Yan F. Zhang,
and Maribelle S. Zonaga. Technical editing of the report was done by Zuzana Stanton-Geddes.

During the provision of technical assistance, the World Bank team worked closely with the National
Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) and the Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWH) and consulted with various other departments and agencies in the Philippines, including
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), the Department of Education (DepEd), the
Department of Health (DOH), the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), the Mines and
Geosciences Bureau (MGB), the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA), the National
Mapping and Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA), the National Disaster Risk Reduction
and Management Council (NDRRMC), the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical




                                                                                          Summary of Knowledge Briefs vii
                       Services Administration (PAGASA), and the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
                       (PHIVOLCS), as well as local government units (LGUs).

                       The team would like to thank all the partners that have cooperated with the World Bank and the
                       International Finance Corporation (IFC) team to provide technical support in the various sectors
                       where each organization is actively engaged in the Philippines, including the Asian Development
                       Bank (ADB), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations agencies,
                       the European Union (EU), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the
                       Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and the Australian government, among others.

                       The field assessment of structural damage and impacts of Typhoon Haiyan and the magnitude 7.2
                       Bohol earthquake was conducted together with JICA and PHIVOLCS, whose recommendations were
                       presented jointly to the DPWH. The field assessment was conducted with the financial support of
	 See DPWH and
1
                       the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR).1
  World Bank
  (2014).              Together with the GFDRR’s Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI), the Bank collaborated
                       with the OpenStreetMap (OSM) global network of volunteer mappers through the international
                       nongovernmental organization (NGO) Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT). The Bank–GFDRR
                       team coordinated with the American Red Cross on the development of a data-sharing platform, www.
                       yolandadata.org, with in-kind resources and technical expertise provided by the U.S. Army Corps of
                       Engineers and the U.S. State Department. The GeoNode-based platform facilitated access to results
                       of remote sensing damage assessment and other critical datasets. GFDRR also contributed to the
                       recommendations on recovery and reconstruction institutions and on monitoring and oversight
                       mechanisms.




viii Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Preface
Bringing the Best of the Bank: Supporting the Philippine Government
with Knowledge in a Time of Crisis

On November 6, 2013, the World Bank team followed intently reports of the Joint Typhoon Warning           2
                                                                                                              	 These specialists
Center (JTWC) in Pearl Harbor as it estimated that Typhoon Haiyan had attained Category 5–                      shared expertise
                                                                                                                in shelter
equivalent “super typhoon” status. The JTWC’s unofficial 315 kilometer per hour (195 mile per hour)             and housing
estimate of one-minute sustained winds would make Haiyan the most powerful storm ever recorded                  reconstruction
to strike land. Compounding fears was the magnitude 7.2 earthquake that struck the same region on               and recovery,
October 15, 2013—just three weeks earlier—centered in the island of Bohol in Central Visayas. By                resilient
                                                                                                                reconstruction of
November 9, Haiyan had exited the Philippines, leaving in its wake a path of destruction that affected          roads, buildings,
14 million people and displaced 4 million in the Visayas region. As of December 2013, 5,982 people              and other
were dead, 27,022 injured, and some 1,779 reported missing, making Haiyan the deadliest storm                   infrastructure,
                                                                                                                remote damage
ever to have hit the Philippines. Over 1.1 million houses were damaged or completely destroyed
                                                                                                                assessment, and
(GoP 2013).                                                                                                     disaster risk
                                                                                                                management.
The Bank teams mobilized quickly to gather reconstruction and recovery specialists with experience        3
                                                                                                              	Sectors
of major disasters in Haiti, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Turkey, and elsewhere. One lesson learned         include roads
from years of supporting disaster recovery is that reconstruction begins on day one, and important             and bridges,
decisions made by governments in the early hours have an impact on the success or failure of long-             irrigation,
                                                                                                               water supply
term reconstruction efforts.                                                                                   and sanitation,
                                                                                                               housing and
On the evening of November 11, the World Bank team was in contact with the government of                       settlements,
the Philippines and ready to support its early requests for technical assistance in developing a               livelihoods,
reconstruction and recovery plan. In the week immediately following the typhoon, in response to                agriculture,
                                                                                                               private sector
requests from the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) and the Department of Public                  development,
Works and Highways (DPWH), the team mobilized a group of ten specialists2 to provide “just-in-                 education, and
time” advisory services to the government. These included not only members of the East Asia and                health.
Pacific (EAP) Disaster Risk Management team, but also staff from the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and the Indonesia Country Office and specialists from California,
Japan, and New Zealand.

By November 17, nine days after Haiyan made landfall, these specialists were on flights to join
specialists from the Bank’s Manila office sectors.3 The team outlined critical decision points and
actions and provided specific technical guidance in various sectors, based on lessons learned
from other large-scale disasters. The mission worked almost nonstop for two weeks with NEDA to
develop guiding principles for the government’s Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) plan,



                                                                                              Summary of Knowledge Briefs ix
                       determining priorities for reconstruction and good practices for designing, costing, and financing
                       recovery programs. The government developed RAY in an unprecedented five weeks after Haiyan
                       made landfall, and the timely preparation could become a standard for future disaster events.

                       The team also discussed institutional arrangements, oversight, and monitoring systems for
                       transparent, efficient, and effective reconstruction. Bank staff were embedded in the Department
                       of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) Yolanda Command Center to share best practices in
                       information management, remote damage assessment, resilient reconstruction of public buildings
                       and infrastructure, housing and shelter, and roads and bridges, and reconstruction monitoring and
                       evaluation.

                       To complement global experience with on-the-ground assessments, a small field team was deployed
                       to Bantayan Island, which sustained the highest levels of damage in the entire Haiyan-affected
                       area (over 90 percent of the damage in all three of its municipalities). The field assessment was
                       conducted jointly with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Philippine
                       Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS). Remote sensing and geographic information
                       systems (GIS) specialists on the Bank team contributed to the initial macroeconomic impact
                       estimates by extracting sector exposure data from catastrophe risk modeling carried out as part of
                       ongoing technical assistance to the Department of Finance.

                       In one of the country’s worst times of crisis, the government of the Philippines turned to the World
                       Bank as its trusted partner. It relied on the Bank to provide the best global knowledge and experience
                       to solve a problem almost too massive and difficult to imagine. Since the RAY plan was shared
                       with development partners on December 18, 2013, the Bank has continued to provide support to
                       the Philippine government as early recovery efforts make the transition to reconstruction. New
                       challenges have emerged, and the Bank team works hand in hand with counterparts across sectors
                       to respond to them every day, along with partners including the Asian Development Bank (ADB),
                       JICA, and many others.

                       Every disaster teaches us lessons. More than anything else, Haiyan has taught us that the human
                       spirit—the Filipino spirit—is not easily broken. The residents of Bantayan Island, Tacloban, and
                       other affected communities in the Visayas took the lead in clearing their streets of the wreckage
                       from the worst disaster they have ever lived through. They took wood, bamboo, and anything else
                       they could find to begin rebuilding their homes and rebuilding their lives. They welcomed us into
                       their communities, and their smiles will stay with us for years to come. And we will stay with them,
                       committed to supporting their efforts to recover, no matter how long it takes.


                                                                                                             Motoo Konishi
                                                                                               Country Director, Philippines
                                                                                                East Asia and Pacific Region




x Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Global Lessons for Rebuilding Communities after Haiyan

The World Bank Group and the international community have gained enormous experience with
disasters worldwide, and lessons have emerged that may be useful for the Philippines as it tackles
the challenges of recovery and reconstruction following Typhoon Haiyan.4                                   4
                                                                                                               	 This summary
                                                                                                                 is based on an
First, a long-term commitment is needed. These communities have been devastated, and although                    editorial by van
                                                                                                                 Trotsenburg
the cameras and global attention are still focused here, soon they will drift away. We really have to
                                                                                                                 (2013).
commit ourselves to stand by the people for as long as it takes to rebuild their lives, their homes,
and their communities.

Second, a comprehensive recovery and reconstruction plan is key to providing effective support. The
government of the Philippines has been working hard to develop such a plan, incorporating global
best practices. The World Bank is working closely with the GoP and other development partners in
support of this process and implementation of the plan.

Third, the approach should be inclusive. Reconstruction is best done with very close involvement of
local communities, civil society groups, and the private sector. The government will clearly take the
lead in steering the reconstruction effort, but for investment and the creation of much-needed jobs and
livelihoods, we will need the Philippine private sector as well as communities to be actively involved.

The fourth lesson is that effective coordination and monitoring are needed. An internal monitoring
effort to prioritize and direct investments will be important not only at the central government level
but at the local level. In this context, investment capabilities will need to be built up to manage
the hundreds of millions of dollars of assistance. This will require not only coordination but also
monitoring of the public and the private sectors so people can easily track the progress being made.
Such a monitoring system would also enhance transparency and accountability, reassuring the
affected communities that they will be the ultimate beneficiaries.

Fifth, new investments will be needed to help strengthen disaster risk reduction and preparedness.
Given the increasing frequency of extreme weather events in the Philippines, new investments
should provide more resilience to future mega disasters. As with all countries—more can be done.
Experience shows that investments in mitigation can save lives. For example, Bangladesh has in the
past decades improved its early warning systems and build new cyclone shelters—the benefits of
which have been demonstrated in lower casualty rates.

The World Bank can be an active supporter of an inclusive approach. The institution has valuable
experience with the Philippines in community-driven development, which holds promise that
communities can guide or determine the main features of the recovery effort rather than be told
what to do by outsiders who are not familiar with the realities they face. The Bank can also provide
financial support consistent with the government’s reconstruction plan.

Finally, the Bank has been, is, and will continue to be a long-term partner of the Philippines, and we
will work together with the government, private sector, and communities to help rebuild the future
of the affected Filipinos.

                                                                               Axel van Trotsenburg
                                                                             Regional Vice President
                                                                         East Asia and Pacific Region



                                                                                               Summary of Knowledge Briefs xi
  Super Typhoon
  Haiyan
  8,000
  casualties


  Affected
  some 12.2
  million
  people (in
  2.6 million
  families)

  US$12.9
  billion
  estimated
  losses


  1,192,091
  houses were
  reported
  damaged
  of which
  593,785
  incurred more
  than 50
  percent
  damage


  …an additional
  2.3 million
  people
  now live
  below the
  poverty
  line
                          Photo: © Tigeryan | Thinkstock.com




xii Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
    Background
    Super Typhoon Haiyan (local name Yolanda) is considered one of the strongest typhoons
    ever recorded, with Category 5–equivalent winds and five- to six-meter storm surges at
    landfall. The typhoon caused over 8,000 casualties, affected some 12.2 million people (in
    2.6 million families), and brought damages and losses to the country estimated at PhP571.1
    billion (US$12.9 billion).5 A total of 1,192,091 houses were reported damaged, of which
    593,785 were said to have incurred more than 50 percent damage (GoP 2013). The poor
    were disproportionately affected, and an additional 2.3 million people (nearly half a million
    households) now live below the poverty line, representing an increase in the poverty rate
    from 41.2 percent to approximately 55.7 percent in the areas worst affected (GoP 2013).

	 Amounts are from the GoP (2013). BangkoSentral exchange rate of US$1 = PhP44.135, as of December 12, 2013.
5




                                                                                                     Summary of Knowledge Briefs xiii
                       Three weeks before Typhoon Haiyan, the Visayan Islands (Visayas) in the Central Philippines
                       were struck by a magnitude 7.2 earthquake with its epicenter in Sagbayan, Bohol. The National
                       Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) reported 222 deaths, PhP2.26 billion
                       in damaged infrastructure and public buildings, and 73,002 damaged or destroyed houses (DPWH
                       and World Bank 2014). The earthquake also caused significant damage or collapse to many historic
                       buildings and heritage sites.

                       Immediately after Typhoon Yolanda, the World Bank provided advisory services to the government
                       of the Philippines (GoP) on principles and policies for reconstruction and specific technical
                       guidance in various sectors based on international post-disaster experience (World Bank 2013).
                       The Bank assisted the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) in the development
                       of the Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) plan, which was prepared in an unprecedented
                       five weeks after Yolanda made landfall. RAY is the government’s strategic plan to guide the recovery
                       and reconstruction of the economy, lives, and livelihoods of people and communities to a higher
                       level of disaster resilience.

                       The World Bank also deployed a team of experts to survey the structural damage to housing and
                       other buildings in the Visayas and to support the Philippine government’s long-term recovery and
                       reconstruction efforts. The team surveyed Bohol Island, northern Cebu Island, and Bantayan Island
                       from November 30 to December 3, 2013 (DPWH and World Bank 2014a).

                       Along with the technical assistance, the World Bank provided the GoP with a recovery loan
                       amounting to US$500 million, helping the government to address the human and economic
                       impacts of Typhoon Haiyan through budget support and to bridge the financing gap caused by
                       unbudgeted expenditures and revenue loss due to the disaster and disaster response. Additional
                       support for resilient recovery has been provided through the Philippines National Community
                       Driven Development Program (World Bank n.d.). Launched in June 2014, the program is the
                       second phase of a successful community-driven development (CDD) program implemented by the
                       Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), which the Bank has supported since 2003.
                       Following Yolanda, the program, expanded to a total of US$479 million, was redesigned to be one
                       of the national government’s mechanisms for post-disaster recovery and rehabilitation, covering
                       554 municipalities affected by the typhoon. Recovery assistance has also been provided through
                       existing World Bank–supported projects in the urban, water, and transportation sectors.




xiv Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Summary
This report summarizes the “just-in-time” advice provided by the World Bank to the government of
the Philippines (GoP) immediately after Typhoon Haiyan. The Bank helped the National Economic
and Development Authority (NEDA) develop the Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) plan,
providing recommendations and sharing international good practice on key aspects of recovery and
reconstruction, including institutional arrangements for recovery implementation, use of remote
damage assessment, resilient recovery, and reconstruction of housing, buildings, roads, and other
infrastructure.

The report is divided into six chapters:

    1. Rapid Damage Assessments: Using Remote Sensing Technologies and Risk Information to
       Help Determine Preliminary Reconstruction Needs

    2. Buildings and Infrastructure: Good Practices for Resilient Reconstruction

    3. Housing: Lessons Learned from Large-Scale Housing Reconstruction Programs

    4. Building Back Better: Restoring Key Sectors, Local Economy, and Livelihoods

    5. Roads and Bridges: Enabling Operational Continuity of Lifelines for Evacuation and Post-
       Disaster Response

    6. Institutional Structures: Good Practices and Options for Effective Planning and
       Implementation of Reconstruction and Recovery

International experience shared through the engagement includes lessons learned from community-
driven reconstruction in Indonesia and Pakistan; shelter and housing recovery in Haiti; emergency
reconstruction in Turkey; resilient infrastructure and hurricane contingency planning in Florida;
resilient reconstruction of buildings in California, Haiti, Japan, and Turkey; remote damage
assessment in Pakistan; and resilient road and highway management in East Asia and New Zealand.

The collection of recommendations and global lessons learned was presented to NEDA and the
Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH). The recommendations highlight the importance
of taking into account multiple hazards in the Philippines (that is, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
and landslides, in addition to typhoons) in the recovery and reconstruction process, to bring
communities, buildings, and infrastructure to higher multihazard resilience standards. Some of the
key messages include the following.




                                                                                            Summary of Knowledge Briefs xv
                       Reconstruction policy and plans should explicitly mandate standards for safe and resilient
                       buildings and infrastructure and for risk-informed land use planning. Recovery and reconstruction
                       plans should take into consideration the need to build resilience to the wide range of natural
                       hazards—geological as well as weather related—to which the Philippines is exposed. Information
                       about hazards and risk should be openly shared, in combination with training and capacity building
                       to enable its proper use in risk reduction measures.

                       Construction quality control, enforcement, and training are essential for rebuilding
                       infrastructure that is resilient. A priority should be to develop and oversee during reconstruction
                       mechanisms to ensure construction quality and enforcement of the National Structural Code of the
                       Philippines (NSCP) from 2010. Experience from Turkey (after the 1999 Marmara earthquake) and
                       other countries has shown that, on average, an effective inspection program adds just 1 to 2 percent
                       to overall project costs.

                       The best housing recovery approach is to identify the desired outcome and give households a
                       choice of means and support to speed up normal housing processes. Experience from large-scale
                       disasters around the world, including the 2004 Aceh tsunami and the 2005 Pakistan earthquake,
                       has shown that the in situ household self-recovery and community-driven reconstruction model is
                       highly effective and can cost some 40 percent less than contractor-built housing. This model is also
                       faster to implement, has a significant economic multiplier effect, and leads to changes in behavior
                       and attitudes and increased resilience, as long as proper training and oversight are provided. Even
                       for low-income families, most housing is acquired through the market in normal times, and the goal
                       of recovery should be to get that market working again. Community-based housing reconstruction
                       can expedite the whole recovery process.

                       For schools, hospitals, emergency evacuation shelters, and municipal buildings, reconstruction
                       and repair are opportunities to implement cost-effective resilience measures and a strong
                       quality control and enforcement mechanism. Particular attention should be paid to developing
                       strategies for operational continuity of critical infrastructure during disasters. Roads and bridges
                       serve as lifelines for evacuation and access for post-disaster response, and designs should be
                       sufficiently resilient to ensure key routes remain operational and secondary routes can be quickly
                       restored. Roads and bridges should be assigned strategic classifications based on how critical they
                       are for access.

                       As part of the advisory services, the World Bank, together with representatives from the
                       Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT) and the Philippines-based OpenStreetMap (OSM) team,
                       supported collaboration across GoP agencies on the use of remote sensing and open data during and
                       beyond disaster emergencies. This involved the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), the
                       Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards Project (NOAH), led by the Department of Science
                       and Technology (DOST), the Department of Education (DepEd), and the Department of Public Works
                       and Highways (DPWH), as well as nongovernmental actors in the housing sector.

                       The coordinated effort focused on developing www.yolandadata.org, a data-sharing website with
                       more than sixty data layers shared by at least eight different organizations, both international and
                       Philippines-based. Created to assist the Philippines with reconstruction efforts, the GeoNode-based
                       platform facilitated access to results from remote sensing damage assessment and other critical
                       datasets. The assistance in part involved communicating the availability of remote sensing data
                       products to agencies in need, including, for example, post-disaster satellite imagery released by
                       Digital Globe and building-level damage assessments conducted by HOT, the American Red Cross,



xvi Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
and other partners. Such innovative approaches can contribute to standard damage and needs
assessments.

World Bank technical assistance contributed directly to the development of the Reconstruction
Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) plan. The plan was developed by the GoP and presented to the public
five weeks after Typhoon Haiyan made landfall—an unprecedented compression of the time after a
disaster of this scale. The team’s technical support is reflected in the document’s core principles to
“build back better” and safer and in close partnership with the affected communities:

        Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) is the Government’s strategic plan to…restore
        the economic and social conditions of these areas at the very least to their pre-typhoon
        levels and to a higher level of disaster resilience. RAY will be implemented according to a
        set of core principles based on lessons from previous disasters in the Philippines and other
        countries. The magnitude of the disaster and the large scope of recovery and reconstruction
        call for institutional arrangements that combine strong central coordination and oversight
        with flexible implementation at the local level…to ensure that the response is tailored to
        local conditions and promotes community participation, ownership, and sustainability.

        Government systems will be used for implementation, and will identify ways to manage
        governance risks and ensure transparency and accountability; and develop a robust
        monitoring and evaluation system to track and assess performance.

        The wide geographical scale and large number of affected households warrants
        implementation approaches that emphasize self-recovery and community participation…
        that correspond to varied needs and choices of affected populations. (GoP 2013)

While full recovery from a disaster of this scale will take years to conclude, the importance of
the planning that guides the implementation cannot be overstated. The “just-in-time” advisory
and knowledge briefs documented in this report provided important contributions to the GoP’s
process of post-Haiyan recovery and reconstruction planning. The collection of international best
practices represents a multisectoral approach, both to addressing urgent short-term needs and
taking medium- and long-term actions to increase the disaster and climate resilience of the country
and its communities.




                                                                                            Summary of Knowledge Briefs xvii
Super Typhoon Haiyan as it moved west toward the coast of the Philippines. The image was acquired at 1:25 p.m. local time (4:25
Universal Time) on November 7, 2013. According to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center, Haiyan had sustained winds of 280 kilometers (170
miles) per hour when measurements were taken at 12:00 Universal Time.

NASA image courtesy LANCE/EOSDIS MODIS Rapid Response Team at NASA GSFC. Caption by Mike Carlowicz.
Chapter 1
Rapid Damage Assessments: Using Remote Sensing
Technologies and Risk Information to Support
Identification of Preliminary Reconstruction Needs
This chapter gives an overview of the benefits of using remote sensing to support planning
for recovery and reconstruction, focusing on selected aspects that include baseline data,
accessing of remote sensing imagery, validation, damage reporting, and geotagging, and the
use of multihazard maps. The chapter also shares insights on using open data and participatory
mapping to support early recovery and reconstruction efforts.1



How Remote Assessment Can Benefit Recovery
and Reconstruction Efforts
Remote damage assessment using innovative technologies can overcome some of the challenges
associated with field-based assessments of large-scale disaster impacts across a wide area. Remote
damage assessments rely on satellite or aerial images, crowdsourced mapping, and baseline data
sources to estimate disaster impacts rapidly. This type of assessment is not intended to replace
post-disaster needs assessments (PDNAs) that rely on field observations and discussions with
stakeholders in the affected areas. Instead, the data produced provide quick estimates of damage
to key sectors which can be used in the early stages of disaster recovery and later as an independent
source of validation for any estimates that come out of field-based assessments. In parallel to
conducting damage assessments, expanding the available multihazard risk information is critical
to ensuring resilient reconstruction is possible. In sum, remote damage assessments in large-scale
disasters offer the following benefits:

    ▼▼   Estimating disaster impacts without interfering with humanitarian response efforts.
         The outputs of remote assessments should focus on making initial estimates of damages to
         determine the needs for reconstruction and recovery and inform early resource mobilization
         efforts.

    ▼▼   Complementing and extending data collected during the humanitarian relief phase.
         Such data collection includes the rapidly expanding crowdsourced baseline information
         being created by, for instance, the OpenStreetMap community.

    ▼▼   Helping to estimate the degree of damage in affected areas. Results of remote assessments
         can be used to differentiate among municipalities or areas that have experienced different
         degrees of damage. An example would be a percentage-based assessment of impact—for
         instance, classifying buildings or areas as having high damage (75–100 percent) or low



                                                                                             Summary of Knowledge Briefs 1
                                 damage (0–10 percent). This information can be combined with the existing baseline data
                                 to refine iteratively the assessment of damage and gain an understanding of the spatial
                                 distribution of the damage.

                       New technologies should be used with caution, however. While many new technologies enable
                       remote damage assessment, the government needs to consider whether they are truly appropriate
                       for the identified objective and if corresponding capacity exists for managing the large amount of
                       data and processing them into meaningful information for decision making.


                       Baseline Data Collection
                       After a disaster, it is useful for government agencies to have access to post-event imagery for early
                       validation of damage reports from the field and preliminary assessment of damage in more remote
                       areas. This process is easier if relevant sectoral agencies already maintain a geographic information
                       systems (GIS) database of their own physical assets for regular operations and asset management.
                       In many countries, however, geospatial baseline data are very limited. After Haiyan, baseline
                       datasets from national government agencies in the Philippines—containing information on the
                       location of infrastructure such as schools, hospitals, roads, and bridges—were made available for
                       the impact assessment. For example, DPWH maintains a GIS database on the primary national road
                       network (see Figure 1.1). After Haiyan, these geospatial datasets were used to estimate the impact
                       from the disaster on roads, although the lack of data on local road networks limited the assessment.
                       Similarly, baseline data were needed for both major and local ports in the affected area to develop
                       a full view of the condition of the transportation network.

Figure 1.1                                                                    Output baseline data have many uses within
National                                                                      government workflow in addition to their
Road Network                                                                  application in post-disaster situations, when
Maintained by                                                                 they are urgently needed to allocate resources
the Department                                                                effectively for response and assessment of
of Public Works                                                               recovery needs. As collection of these data is a
and Highways,                                                                 time-consuming activity, it is recommended that
Overlaid on                                                                   these spatial baseline datasets be prepared during
OpenStreetMap                                                                 nonemergency times.
Sources: DPWH and                                                             When addressing their needs for local information,
OpenStreetMap.
                                                                              a number of countries have benefited from baseline
                                                                              data collected and shared by crowdsourcing
                                                                              initiatives, including OpenStreetMap (OSM), a
                                                                              global network of volunteers that is creating a
                                                                              “map” of the world. Data extracted and shared by
                                                                              the OSM community by tracing satellite and aerial
                                                                              images are freely available and can be exported by
                                                                              users in various formats and for different purposes.

                                                                       In the Philippines, the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap
                                                                       Team (HOT) activated over 1,500 volunteers after
                                                                       Typhoon Haiyan to create geographical data that
                       could be freely used by the Philippine government, donors, and partner organizations to support all
                       phases of disaster recovery. Working square by square to add information to the map of the typhoon-



2 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
affected areas, this online community made over 3 million edits, digitizing tens of thousands of
individual buildings and identifying land use, roads, and structures damaged by the storm. Figure 1.2
shows the maps for Tacloban City before and after the volunteers’ activities. Philippines-based OSM
mappers made significant contributions as well, through, for example, multiple “mapathon” events;
one was hosted by the University of the Philippines Diliman Geodetic Engineering Department in
Manila on November 15, 2013. Figure 1.3 shows the results of the building-level damage assessment
by the HOT volunteers for Tacloban, overlaid on the OpenStreetMap basemap.

In recent years, the World Bank/Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)
has supported such participatory mapping in Bangladesh, Colombia, Haiti, Indonesia, Nepal, the
Philippines, and Sri Lanka through the Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI). In the case of
Haiti, for example, hundreds of volunteers worked together to produce the most accurate and up-to-
date basemap of Port-au-Prince and surrounding areas ever created. This map played a critical role
in response and reconstruction efforts. Currently, OSM is being used as part of OpenDRI projects
in a number of countries to facilitate community-based mapping, create information on critical
assets and infrastructure, and ensure that as broad as possible a section of society is involved in
the process of risk identification activities.
                                                                                                        Figure 1.2
                                                                                                        OpenStreetMap
                                                                                                        Basemaps for
                                                                                                        Tacloban City,
                                                                                                        Before and
                                                                                                        After Volunteer
                                                                                                        Efforts
                                                                                                        Source:
                                                                                                        OpenStreetMap.




                                                                                                        Figure 1.3
                                                                                                        Sample Remote
                                                                                                        Damage
                                                                                                        Assessment in
                                                                                                        Tacloban
                                                                                                        Sources: American
                                                                                                        Red Cross and
                                                                                                        OpenStreetMap.
                                                                                                        Note: Red marks
                                                                                                        collapsed buildings,
                                                                                                        yellow marks
                                                                                                        damaged buildings.




                                                                                             Summary of Knowledge Briefs 3
                        Validation, Damage Reporting, and Geotagging
                        After major disasters, many space agencies and private companies provide pre- and post-disaster
                        satellite imagery for noncommercial use. Before data are used, a validation process is recommended,
                        including ortho-rectification of the maps for positional accuracy.2 Often, images contain cloud cover,
                        which may make it difficult to generate a complete road network view from these images alone.
                        A recommended first step is to assess the usability of the images, particularly those with cloud
                        cover, and consider alternative sources to assess damage in these areas where necessary. While
                        the resolution of the images is often sufficient for preliminary assessment of damage, options for
                        acquiring aerial images or the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in high-priority areas can be
                        explored if more detailed information is needed.

                        Figure 1.4 shows an example of aerial imagery collected by UAV after the typhoon. This imagery
                        was openly available for use by the OSM community. In the Philippines, post-Haiyan imagery was
                        provided by U.S.-based Digital Globe;3 its extent is shown in Figure 1.5. The images were available
                        free of charge for thirty days at fifty-centimeter resolution, which is roughly equivalent to the
                        resolution of images viewable in standard Google Earth.

Figure 1.4 Post-
Disaster Aerial
Imagery Extents
for Tacloban
City
Source: Corephil Data
Services.




                        When damage extends over a wide area and post-processing needs for images are high, prioritized
                        selection of sites for possible aerial surveys is recommended. Beyond the use of remote sensing
                        for damage assessment, digital elevation models (DEMs), derived from IFSAR or LiDAR data,4 can
                        be useful. In the case of the Philippines, the DEM developed by the Department of Science and
                        Technology (DOST) could, for example, be processed to derive baseline data for local roads. If the
                        resolution is high enough, the DEM can also be used to assess the condition of the road surfaces. In
                        addition, DEM is a multipurpose dataset that can be used for flood modeling, landslide modeling,
                        three-dimensional building extraction, and land use planning, among other applications.

                        Automating and digitizing field reporting protocols before a disaster hits is important if GIS analysis
                        is to contribute to damage reporting, validation, and generation of mapping outputs post-disaster.
                        Geotagging—that is, adding spatial coordinate data to a digital photo or video—can support
                        the analysis of damaged assets based on their exact locations. After Haiyan, DPWH’s Bureau of
                        Maintenance and field teams submitted paper-based field reports that did not contain GIS coordinate
                        data. These were entered into a newly launched project monitoring system, from which the GIS
                        team extracted the data, including the names of the roads, and mapped them, using the baseline




4 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
data for national roads. Results for local roads could                                                  Figure 1.5
not be mapped due to the lack of baseline data.                                                         Available High-
                                                                                                        Resolution
The work of the Yolanda Command Center team                                                             Satellite Images
would be significantly enhanced by streamlining                                                         from Digital
workflow to enable GIS analysis to contribute to                                                        Globe for
the monitoring and validation of damage reports                                                         Post-Haiyan
and to facilitate the generation of mapping outputs,                                                    Response
which would lead to faster, more effective recovery.
                                                                                                        Source: GFDRR
Currently, the GIS and reporting specialists have
                                                                                                        analysis based
access to needed information technology (IT)                                                            on http://www.
tools, but their efforts are limited by the lack of GIS                                                 digitalglobe.com/
                                                                                                        super-typhoon-haiyan.
coordinates in the damage reports.


Multihazard Maps and Medium-
to Long-term Information
Management
Hazard and risk assessment outputs produce
detailed risk information for typhoons, flooding,
earthquakes, and other hazards, providing valuable
information and expertise in the weeks and months after a disaster and during medium- and long-
term resilient reconstruction and recovery. Subnational hazard mapping efforts, conducted by local
universities and agencies, are helpful to the work of lead recovery agencies. Further hazard and risk
mapping can be initiated based on these local-level assessments, datasets, and knowledge to meet
the specific needs of reconstruction planning.

After Haiyan, the DPWH Planning Services GIS specialists collected available multihazard maps
developed by the Mines and Geosciences Bureau, downloading thousands of maps in jpg format
from the MGB site. The GIS team manually digitized the data for use in planning but found them
limited in extent and resolution. The Greater Metro Manila Risk Assessment Project, led by NDRRMC
and the Collective Strengthening on Community Awareness on Natural Disasters (CSCAND) agencies,
produced detailed risk information for typhoons, flooding, and earthquakes, alongside the ongoing
efforts of the Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (NOAH) Project. Likewise, various
subnational hazard mapping efforts were conducted by local universities, including landslide
mapping carried out by University of the Philippines Los Baños for the Leyte Province, to provide
useful information (see Figure 1.6).

The conditions after a major disaster pose many challenges to oversight agencies, but they also
offer opportunities to advance technical and policy changes that have long-term benefits. For many
countries, these include expanding capacity for GIS tools and the preparation and sharing of data
and information across the various agencies. Furthermore, improving project monitoring systems for
reconstruction can be mainstreamed into the core systems beyond the scope of recovery operations.
In the Philippines, various initiatives are underway with respect to GIS and general data analytics
to support the core services of DPWH. DPWH will work with the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority (NAMRIA) and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) on the
Agency Geospatial Data Infrastructure (AGDI). DPWH also plans to consolidate analytical services,
such as under the “Right of Way” programs. Improving the human and technical GIS capabilities



                                                                                             Summary of Knowledge Briefs 5
Figure 1.6                                                                             within DPWH and other leading agencies can
Landslide                                                                              support future recovery efforts and contribute to
Hazard Map of                                                                          efficient recovery planning, implementation, and
the N1 Road                                                                            monitoring.
Network with
Project READY
Output
Source: DPWH Road
Network with Project
Ready Landslide
Hazard Data.
Note: See Project
Ready website
at http://www.
preventionweb.
net/files/3289_
READYProject.pdf.




                       Endnotes
                       1 This chapter draws on contributions from Abigail C. Baca, John R. Crowley, Vivien Deparday, Ariel Mauricio Nunez
                       Gomez, Rashmin Gunasekera, Liana Razafindrazay, Keiko Saito, and Alanna Leigh Simpson. The needs and
                       recommendations have been identified for the Philippines Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and teams
                       from the Yolanda Command Center, Planning Services, Bureau of Maintenance, Bureau of Design, and Information
                       Management Service.
                       2 Ortho-rectification is the processing of an aerial photograph to geometrically correct it so that the scale of the
                       photograph is uniform and, as on a map, can be measured.
                       3 See http://www.digitalglobe.com/super-typhoon-haiyan.
                       4 IfSAR (Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar) and LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) are data sources that allow
                       the generation of DEMs—three-dimensional representations of the earth’s surface essential to some applications, such as
                       flood or landslide modeling, forestry, and urban analysis. Both require intensive post-processing of data. In general terms,
                       LiDAR has a higher spatial resolution than IfSAR.




6 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Chapter 2
Public Buildings and Infrastructure: Good Practice
for Resilient Reconstruction
This chapter focuses on principles of reconstructing public buildings and infrastructure,
summarizing good practice and offering recommendations for the medium and long terms for
the areas affected by Typhoon Haiyan.1 Further details of the structural damage assessment
and design recommendations can be found in the Field Investigation Report on the Impact
of the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Yolanda on Buildings (DPWH and World Bank 2014a)
and in the Guidelines for Earthquake and Wind Strengthening and Reconstruction of Public
and Cultural Heritage Buildings: Findings from the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Yolanda
Assessment (DPWH and World Bank 2014b).



Key Principles for Reconstruction of Public Buildings and
Infrastructure
Reconstruction of public buildings and infrastructure in storm surge zones needs to be carefully
reviewed. For critical structures, such as ospitals and emergency evacuation shelters, new
construction or reconstruction in high-hazard zones is not recommended (although certain structural
mitigation measures can be put into place if this is unavoidable—for example, minimum elevation
levels for critical functions). Multistory essential buildings and schools can be specifically designed
as tsunami and storm surge evacuation structures. At the same time, public education regarding
storm surge risks is needed, and evacuation routes should be planned for communities.

For all new construction and reconstruction, site-specific hazards, such as flood and storm surge,
tsunami, and soil failure, such as landslide, liquefaction, settlement, and lateral spreading, need
to be considered. If soil reinforcement and slope stability measures are not implemented, detailed
(and practiced) preparedness plans can mitigate the risk to the facilities and communities exposed
to these hazards.

A detailed understanding of exposure to multiple hazards is necessary for risk-informed land use
planning on the community scale. In the communities surrounding Mount Merapi in Indonesia, for
example, detailed hazard maps have been used to inform zoning and land use restrictions to protect
lives and property from future volcano impacts. The high resolution maps indicate which areas are
safe for reconstruction of dwellings and which should be used for agriculture and livestock only. A
similar principle can be applied in neighborhood replanning and reconstruction to minimize the
impact of multiple hazards on fisheries and livelihoods in affected communities.




                                                                                               Summary of Knowledge Briefs 7
                       Quality control is executed by participation of both national and local agencies. For public buildings,
                       such as schools, hospitals, and emergency evacuation shelters, quality control of new construction
                       or repair is essential. It is a vital tool not only for providing safe and resilient construction but
                       for building capacity in contractors, engineers, and public agencies. The existence of a broader
                       capacity-building system is important for successful implementation of a reconstruction program.
                       Standards of practice should be established by the publication of guidelines and the presence of a
                       continuing education system.


                       Key Considerations for Reconstruction
                       The Bohol earthquake and Typhoon Haiyan caused substantial devastation in the northern Cebu
                       and Bantayan Islands. In the Visayan Islands (Visayas), most damaged structures were made out of
                       concrete, stone, and brick masonry; they included heritage churches, schools, city administration
                       buildings, non-engineered one-story block houses, and engineered two-story concrete houses
                       (DPWH and World Bank 2014a). Observed damage was the result of inadequate earthquake and
                       wind resistance in stone churches—typically unreinforced masonry—and schools, public buildings,
                       and houses—typically nonductile concrete and masonry (for details, see Box 2.1 Damage Observed
                       in the Visayas from the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Haiyan).



                            Box 2.1 Damage Observed in the Visayas from the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Haiyan
                         Many of the structural failures observed in the Bohol earthquake and Typhoon Yolanda were the result
                         of poor design details and construction that did not follow the design and material specifications.

                         Most of the observed damage was due to the use of light-gauge (too thin) sheet metal or wood for
                         roofing, inadequate attachment of the sheet metal roofing to the roof framing of the building, and
                         poor hold-down attachments anchoring the roof framing (joists, beams, trusses, and so forth) to
                         building walls and columns. Inadequate protection of openings led to damaged windows and doors,
                         which breached the building envelopes and exposed the structures to higher wind forces and the
                         building interiors to rain and water damage.

                         Concrete frames and masonry infill walls experienced generally minor to no damage unless they
                         were inadequately reinforced, like many non-engineered houses of this variety. Non-engineered
                         wood houses with light-gauge sheet metal roofs typically broke apart and blew away. Roofs on
                         engineered buildings also experienced significant damage.

                         Better-attached and heavier- (at least twenty-six-) gauge sheet metal roofing performed well, as did
                         structures of all-concrete construction. New government buildings in Bohol collapsed even though
                         they were designed to meet the provisions of the current national building code, because code-
                         specified seismic reinforcement (for example, horizontal ties around vertical column rebars) was
                         missing, or weak concrete composed of sea sand and round aggregate was used.

                         Source: DPWH and World Bank 2014a.




8 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
According to the Field Investigation Report on the Impact of the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon
Yolanda on Buildings (DPWH and World Bank 2014a), the damage would have been minimal if the
structures had been designed and constructed (or retrofitted) in line with the existing Philippine
structural design code (NSCP 2010). Reconstruction can be a major opportunity to improve the
structural resilience of these buildings if certain principles are followed, including those described
below.

Rebuild with wind- and earthquake-resistant features. Such features may include, for example,
roof framing ties and foundation anchorage, glazing protection, improvements to roofing and
other attachments (such as gutters, flashing, and so forth), and reduced eaves/roof overhangs and
other projections to reduce the surface area that allows wind to lift off roofs. Most of the highest
wind design levels in the world are set at approximately 250 kilometers per hour, and buildings
designed (and properly constructed) to withstand that speed have met the Life Safety criterion
(see below). Concrete buildings have generally performed at higher levels than Life Safety, at 250
kilometer per hour design wind speed. Mass housing of the concrete construction type, particularly
precast concrete (such as flat slabs and double-Ts), needs to be designed to the appropriate seismic
standards, properly constructed, and carefully inspected so the structures do not become collapse
hazards in large earthquakes. Field observations from the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and
Tsunami, for example, showed that modern, multistory concrete structures (usually schools) had
adequate capacity against tsunami forces, and they were used for shelter (teachers and students
in each had been trained to proceed to the top floor, which had food, water, blankets, and other
essential provisions for disasters).

Improve resilience of utility distribution lines. Utility distribution lines along national highway
easements are vulnerable to collapse in typhoon winds. For new highways, the addition of
underground conduits for utility lines should be considered. For existing alignments, horizontal
directional drilling of underground conduit ducts can be a lower-cost option (in place of expensive
trenching) for critical segments that must remain clear of debris. Other lower-cost options include
moving utility lines farther away from road surfaces, as downed power lines on roads are common
in wind storms. The lowest cost solution is planning and preparedness. Governments (national and
local) should plan for disaster scenarios to clear debris as quickly as possible.

Update the National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP). For most structural codes worldwide,
the intended performance level for a majority of structures is “Life Safety,” which means a structure
will not collapse under the code-specified design event. Life Safety does not imply continuous
operation or immediate occupancy, which are both higher performance criteria that are typically
applied to essential facilities, such as hospitals, emergency operations centers, mission-critical
structures, and so on. Current NSCP provisions for wind speeds of 250 kilometers per hour should
provide the Life Safety level of protection for most building structures in a Category 5–equivalent
typhoon, as well as an earthquake of up to magnitude 8. In magnitude 8-plus earthquakes in Mexico
(1985), China (2008), Chile (2010), and Japan (2011), among other countries, wood and concrete
structures properly designed to provisions of the 1997 Uniform Building Code (upon which the
NSCP 2010 is based) did not collapse and were only minimally damaged. Box 2.2 gives an overview
of the structural design codes in the Philippines, as well as providing maps of, respectively, the code
levels adopted in the Philippines and the path of Super Typhoon Haiyan.




                                                                                               Summary of Knowledge Briefs 9
                                                         Box 2.2 Structural Design Codes in the Philippines
                         The National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP) is the reference standard of the National
                         Building Code of the Philippines (NBCP), based on the 1997 Uniform Building Code. The NSCP
                         divides the country into two seismic zones (zone 2 and zone 4; see the map on the left, below). Most
                         of the Philippines, including the areas affected by Typhoon Haiyan, is in seismic zone 4, for which
                         the NSCP expects the highest seismic ground motion.

                         With regard to design wind speeds, the NSCP divides the country into three zones (1, 2, and 3;
                         see the right-hand map). For zone 1, the design wind speed is 250 kilometers per hour, for zone
                         2 it is 200 kilometers per hour, and for zone 3 it is 150 kilometers per hour. The Visayas are
                         typically in wind zones 1 and 2 (with design wind speeds of 250 and 200 kilometers per hour,
                         respectively). Most of the Haiyan-affected population is in zone 2 (200 kilometers per hour).
                         Structures designed and constructed to the provisions of the NSCP should perform as intended at
                         Category 5–equivalent wind speeds and in a major earthquake (even up to a magnitude 8 event).
                         It is recommended that the zone 2 design wind speed be increased to 250 kilometers per hour,
                         since the land mass of the Philippines is not large enough to cause wind speeds to degrade as
                         typhoons travel from east to west.

                         NSCP Earthquake Zone Map	                                             The Path of Super Typhoon Haiyan
                                    118°       120°       122°       124°       126° E                         118°         120°       122°       124°      126° E


                          20° N                                                                 20° N
                                                                 Legend	Zone	Coefficient                                                      Legend	Zone	Coefficient
                                                                         4	0.40                                                                       4	0.40

                                                                            2	0.20                                                                       2	0.20
                            18°                                                                   18°




                            16°                                                                   16°
                                                                                                        ZONE II
                                                                                                        V = 55m/s (200kph)
                                                                                                                                                   ZONE I
                                                                                                                                                   V = 70m/s (250kph)
                            14°                                                                   14°




                            12°                                                                   12°




                           10°                                                                   10°




                                                                                                                      ZONE III
                            8°                                                                    8°                  V = 35m/s (125kph)




                            6°                                                                    6°




                                      Seismic zonation map in NSCP 4th ed. (1992, 1996)
                                      essentially the same 5th ed. (2001) and 6th ed. (2010)


                                                                                               Source: Based on DPWH and World Bank 2014a.




10 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Improve construction quality control and enforcement. Many structural failures observed in
post-disaster situations (that is, following earthquakes and typhoons) are due to construction
not following the design and material specifications. Among many examples are public buildings,
including new government buildings, that collapsed even though they were designed to meet
recent code provisions. A medium- to long-term priority for the country is to develop better
mechanisms for ensuring construction quality and enforcement of national building and structural
codes. International experience has shown that, on average, an effective permitting and inspection
program adds just 1 to 2 percent to overall project costs.

Develop capacity in contractors for non-engineered construction. A significant amount of low-
income housing is the product of non-engineered construction based on local practices (DPWH
and World Bank 2014a). Capacity needs to be built among contractors and carpenters to add
wind-resistant hardware and reinforcement to tie key structural components together, which will
significantly strengthen houses to withstand typhoons. Adding typhoon ties to key roofing elements,
for example, does not require complex engineering and is inexpensive. Local government capacity
for quality control also needs to be assessed and strengthened.

Develop guidelines for reconstruction and inspection of public buildings. Technical guidelines, an
inspection process, and a continuing education system should be developed at the national level.
Standard plans and guidelines are essential for massive implementation of repair, strengthening,
and reconstruction. They have to be based on a strong understanding of the types of damage
observed in the building stock, however.

Clearly define roles of national and local governments for quality control. Local government staff,
including city and municipal engineers and building officials, should be empowered and trained to
use technical guidelines and inspection procedures to implement quality control, while the national
government should monitor the quality control mechanisms at the local government level.


Building Back Better: Recommendations
for Public Buildings
Public infrastructure plays an important role during disasters, often serving, for example, as
emergency shelters and providing emergency care. A list of guiding principles for reconstruction
is presented below. Table 2.1 summarizes priority actions for the short, medium, and long terms to
achieve resilience of public infrastructure.

Carefully evaluate reconstruction in disaster-prone zones. Site hazards must be carefully evaluated
in all reconstruction and new construction. Important hazards include flood and storm surge,
tsunami, landslide, liquefaction, settlement, and lateral spreading, and preparedness plans should
be developed for them. For essential structures, such as hospitals and shelters, reconstruction or
new construction in high-hazard zones is not recommended.

Increase wind design standards. Public buildings (such as schools, hospitals, police and fire
stations, municipal buildings, community centers, and markets) are engineered structures designed
to follow professionally established design codes. If built and constructed according to the NSCP,
the current earthquake provisions, and the proposed 250 kilometer per hour typhoon standards,
most should resist major earthquakes and typhoons without collapse:




                                                                                           Summary of Knowledge Briefs 11
Table 2.1 Recommended Priority Actions for Reconstruction of Public Infrastructure

 Time frame           Recommended actions

 Short term           ▼▼ Give citizens and national and local government agencies access to robust hazard and risk information
                          produced by technical agencies and universities, such as PHIVOLCS, PAGASA, MGB, NAMRIA, and DOST‘s
                          NOAH Project. This information will enable both the public and private sectors to ensure new construction
                          and reconstruction can be planned and designed for multihazard resilience. Government agencies should
                          provide access to the latest hazard map data in digital GIS format for easy access via the internet. This could
                          be facilitated through, for example, the Philippine Geoportal initiative.
                      ▼▼ Mandate a design wind speed of 250 kilometers per hour for all reconstruction projects, and make formal
                          revisions to NSCP in parallel.
                      ▼▼ Repair damaged schools, hospitals, and other public structures. For critical public structures, consider
                          rebuilding outside of storm surge zones. Some multistory public buildings in storm surge and tsunami
                          zones can be engineered and rebuilt as evacuation structures. Install wind-resistant features to protect the
                          building envelope.
                      ▼▼ Train local government engineers, carpenters, and contractors in typhoon-, wind-, and earthquake-resistant
                          reconstruction. Training could cover roof framing ties and foundation anchorage, glazing protection,
                          improvements to roofing and other attachments (such as gutters and flashing), and reduction of eaves, roof
                          overhangs, parapets, and other projections from the building structure that basically act as large sails to
                          attract more wind forces and are often points where damage is initiated. Removing them reduces wind loads
                          on a building structure and makes the building more resilient.
                      ▼▼ Conduct a public information and education campaign on the hazards of rebuilding in storm surge zones.
                      ▼▼ Develop a typhoon preparedness plan and procedures for each school, particularly if it is a designated
                          disaster shelter. Preparedness plans also need to be developed for critical health facilities and hospitals
                          assigned as emergency response units.
                      ▼▼ Encourage citizens’ personal disaster preparedness using existing models, such as MMDA’s Earthquake
                          Preparedness Plan.

 Medium term          ▼▼ Develop and provide open access to multihazard micro-zonation maps (covering hazards including
                          earthquake, storm surge, tsunami, flood, landslide, liquefaction, lateral spreading, and so forth) and
                          distribute in digital GIS format to government agencies, local governments, and citizens.
                      ▼▼ Develop and implement a nationwide inspection system to improve construction quality. A formal plan-
                          checking and construction inspection system should be required for all public and private buildings. The
                          cost of such a system is typically paid for by the building owner. Good models can be found in Japan, New
                          Zealand, and the United States (specifically California).
                      ▼▼ Train national and local government inspectors in good construction practices and important structural and
                          nonstructural elements that minimize earthquake and typhoon damage.
                      ▼▼ Establish quality control standards through the publication of guidelines and a continuing education/training
                          system for municipal building officials.

 Long term            ▼▼ Evaluate older churches, schools, hospitals, and other important public buildings for earthquake and typhoon
                          vulnerability.
                      ▼▼ Identify public assets (such as buildings, utilities, roads, and bridges) that are vulnerable to natural hazards,
                          and develop preparedness plans for them. Planning should be required for both national and local government
                          agencies for typhoons, earthquakes, and floods.
                      ▼▼ Evaluate schools designated as evacuation shelters and designated emergency response hospitals for wind
                          and earthquake resistance.
                      ▼▼ Initiate a phased seismic upgrading strengthening program for bridges, other schools and hospitals, and
                          other public buildings.
Source: World Bank staff, with inputs from DPWH and World Bank (2014a).



12 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
     ▼▼   For reinforced concrete masonry structures with concrete roofs, most of the damage
          is expected to be nonstructural in nature—consisting of damaged roofing, siding, and
          other building envelope materials, water intrusion, and content damage. If the reinforced
          concrete masonry building has a wood-framed roof, roof damage may occur if the frame is
          not adequately tied to the concrete masonry walls.

     ▼▼   For wood frame buildings, significant structural and nonstructural damage is expected in
          coastal locations and moderate damage in inland locations. Gymnasiums are large open
          structures that can be significantly damaged if not properly designed and constructed.

     ▼▼   For essential structures (typically hospitals, fire stations, and emergency evacuation
          centers), higher design force levels are needed (for example, an importance factor of 1.5,
          or 50 percent higher design force, is required in the NSCP for earthquake forces), and
          equipment must be anchored to improve resilience and allow post-event operability.

Combine structural and nonstructural measures. Reconstruction should incorporate wind-resistant
features such as roof framing ties and foundation anchorage, glazing protection, improvements
to roofing and other attachments (such as gutters), and reduction of projections such as eaves.
Together with structural measures, preparedness plans and public awareness campaigns are
needed to inform the population about existing risks and evacuation routes planned for vulnerable
communities. Citizens’ personal disaster preparedness should also be encouraged, using existing
Philippine models such as the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) Oplan Metro
Yakal (Earthquake Preparedness Plan).



Endnote
1	 This chapter benefited from contributions by Christopher C. Ancheta, Tom Chan, Jolanta Kryspin-Watson,
   Kit Miyamoto, and Artessa Saldivar-Sali.




                                                                                                            Summary of Knowledge Briefs 13
Gawad Kalinga (“give care”) volunteers help build brightly painted colorful homes in sustainable communities for poorest of the poor and
displaced families after typhoon Yolanda. Photo: Danilo Victoriano

14 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Chapter 3
Housing: Lessons Learned from Large-Scale
Housing Reconstruction Programs
This chapter focuses on selected issues that are relevant when devising a housing recovery
program, including determining the scope of the program and the roles of the stakeholders
involved and tackling key implementation issues, such as the establishment of an overall
disaster risk reduction policy for housing reconstruction, linkages between reconstruction and
transitional housing, communication with the affected population, quality control systems,
arrangements to encourage family resource mobilization, and monitoring and auditing
systems.1



How to Approach Housing Recovery
Best practices for large-scale housing reconstruction programs encourage household self-recovery
rather than providing “turnkey” (ready-to-move-in) solutions and focus on getting the normal
housing system and construction materials markets working again. People are resourceful and
know how to acquire and improve housing. Providing support that encourages self-recovery should
be a pillar of the housing recovery strategy. Even for low-income families, most housing is provided
in normal times through markets (for houses, materials, rentals, and so forth). The goal of housing
recovery should be to jumpstart the housing market, provide support to households, and identify
options for speeding up the normal housing process; it is not to create new, unfamiliar processes—
such as large-scale social housing or construction programs—if that is not how households normally
acquire housing.

Through post–Typhoon Haiyan reconstruction, a post-disaster housing recovery and reconstruction
methodology could be developed that can be mobilized in future disasters and incrementally
upgrade the national housing stock with safer housing, especially for low-income people. The
overall goal of efforts in housing recovery and reconstruction is to establish an equitable, timely,
cost-effective housing recovery program that can reach scale, reduce risks, restore family dignity,
and support household self-recovery. In line with these objectives, timelines and priorities for
large-scale housing projects fall into the following phases:

    ▼▼   Immediate: Provision of temporary shelter grants to households; development of
         government-sponsored bunkhouses; design of community-based reconstruction, repair,
         and relocation programs; and establishment of a monitoring system

    ▼▼   One year: Launch of a community-based reconstruction, repair, and relocation program
         and establishment of a multi-donor trust fund and a remittance facility




                                                                                           Summary of Knowledge Briefs 15
                             ▼▼    Two years: Full implementation of the community-based reconstruction, repair, and
                                   recovery program


                       Determining the Scope of a Housing Recovery Program
                       When determining the scope of a housing recovery program, the government needs to consider
                       different options, including the scale of temporary and permanent housing, risk reduction efforts,
                       and neighborhood redevelopment and upgrading, as well as relocation of landless populations or
                       populations living in high-risk areas. Moving communities from newly established no-build zones can
                       pose considerable challenges of finding appropriate locations—a common problem after major floods
                       and sea surges. Table 3.1 provides a summary of key considerations for the different options.


                       Table 3.1 Options and Considerations When Determining the Scope of a Housing Recovery Program

                        Options                                      Considerations
                        Temporary housing/shelters, with most High rates of relatively secure/formal land occupation mean
                        in situ and a limited number of new sites most sheltering can be in situ.
                                                                     High rates of secure/formal land occupation mean most
                        Permanent housing through repair and         reconstruction will be in situ. Those given temporary shelter
                        reconstruction, with most in situ and a      need a permanent solution; to avoid multiple moves, shelter
                        limited number of new sites                  sites should be chosen carefully (and, where possible, be in
                                                                     situ) and be convertible to permanent sites.
                        Risk reduction for housing sites and
                        neighborhoods by means of safe designs The high number of non-engineered houses in the most
                        for construction, repair guidelines,   damaged zones demonstrates the importance of new housing
                        capacity building, and disaster        designs.
                        mitigation works
                        Neighborhood replanning, rehabili-
                                                                     Cost of rehabilitating existing neighborhoods is generally much
                        tation for existing neighborhoods, or
                                                                     lower than new site development.
                        upgrading at new sites
                                                                     Relocation should be minimized; social and economic impact
                                                                     should be carefully evaluated and mitigated. Beneficiaries
                        Relocation of landless or high-risk          of funding earmarked for relocation should be given options
                        households                                   (including self-relocation) for reaching the same end (safer
                                                                     housing). Other interventions to improve land tenure security
                                                                     in reconstruction may be warranted.

                       Source: World Bank staff.


                       Collecting data can facilitate the planning and management of the housing recovery program. A
                       housing survey, for example, provides a sample of destroyed and damaged housing. It is used
                       to develop a set of housing prototypes (based on the typology of damage) and prepare repair
                       guidelines. A standard household survey will collect the following information:

                             ▼▼    Location of family and housing

                             ▼▼    Housing condition

                             ▼▼    Tenure status and security

                             ▼▼    Family characteristics, including family size and sources of income



16 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
    ▼▼    Basic family economic data (such as source of income, access to and use of banking
          services, access to savings or remittances, and so on)

    ▼▼    Participation in cash transfer programs

International experience from large-scale housing reconstruction programs suggests the most
effective approach is community-driven or owner-driven reconstruction (see Box 3.1, Box 2.2, and
Box 3.3), which can help expedite the whole recovery process. This approach is equivalent to the
community-driven development (CDD) model followed in many East Asian countries, including the
Philippines. Experience shows community-driven and homeowner-driven housing reconstruction
to be 40 percent less expensive per housing unit than contractor-built housing. In the 2010
Philippines housing census, more than 95 percent of households in the Typhoon Haiyan–affected
region reported owning or renting their land or occupying it with the consent of the landowner,
which means most households should be able to reconstruct on the land they already occupy.


                          Box 3.1 Housing Recovery after the 2006 Yogyakarta Earthquake in Indonesia
  ▼▼ Impact: Earthquake 6.3 M; 350,000 houses destroyed and damaged
  ▼▼ Program overview: The objective was reconstruction and rehabilitation of 350,000 seismically safe houses and
      settlement restoration for the 500 most affected villages; total cost of the program was US$500 million; completed in
      two years.
  ▼▼ Program principles:
      •   Community-driven housing and settlement reconstruction
      •   Quality assurance through use of technical facilitators, spot checks and technical audits, and conditional grants
      •   Preparation of community settlement plans, which incorporated disaster risk reduction
      •   Establishment of strong support system to ensure transparency and accountability of the program, including robust
          complaint handling
  ▼▼ Program elements:
      • Establishment by presidential decree of a powerful coordinating body for reconstruction, located in Jogjakarta
      • Detailed community self-survey, supported by facilitators, on level of damage (good, damaged, destroyed) and need
        for temporary shelters, verified through public announcements and independent audits
      • Conditional grant (US$1,500 to $2,000 per group) for housing groups of ten households each to support a 36m2
        seismic structure (foundation, columns, and roof); each housing group assigned a single bank account and held
        accountable for the use of the funds in accordance with the conditions of the grant
      • Architectural and civil engineering support for the communities that had specific design requests in addition to the
        housing prototypes
      • Technical assistance to community for preparation of community settlement plan incorporating disaster risk
        reduction measures
      • Conditional grant to village (up to US$100,000) for settlement restoration, including infrastructure and disaster risk
        reduction
  Source: World Bank staff.




                                                                                                   Summary of Knowledge Briefs 17
                               Box 3.2 1999 Colombia Earthquake in Coffee-Growing Region (Armenia)
   ▼▼ Impact: More than 130,000 houses affected; 550,000 people homeless; 16,700 households in need of relocation; 649
       schools and 52 health centers destroyed
   ▼▼ Program overview: One of first major assisted community-based reconstruction programs, involving twenty-eight
       municipalities in five departments, with total reconstruction cost of US$750 million, of which 40 percent was borrowed
       from international organizations
   ▼▼ Key principle: A highly decentralized system
       • Twenty-eight universities, cooperatives, civic groups, and professional associations selected by the government to
         manage the program in thirty-two operational areas
       • Popular housing organizations called upon by grassroots community groups to organize families and help them
         understand and compare available housing options and complete necessary forms
   ▼▼ Program elements:
       • Popular housing organizations enforced administrative practices, ensured participation of affected population, ran
         procurement processes for construction projects, and implemented environmental safeguards.
       • Beneficiaries selected house designs through public exhibitions known as “mobile windows.”
       • NGOs acted as zonal managers, working with affected communities, local governments, and civil society to identify
         and set priorities for reconstruction and develop and implement area plans.
       • The government supervised the project and created the Fund for Reconstruction and Social Development of the Coffee
         Region (FOREC). Only 120 government officials were permanently assigned to the program, and three years later, the
         government dissolved FOREC, declaring its mission completed.
   Source: World Bank staff.



                       Box 3.3 Pakistan Rural Housing Reconstruction Program after the 2005 Earthquake
   ▼▼ Impact: 73,000 people killed; 2.8 million left homeless
   ▼▼ Program overview: Total cost of over US$1.5 billion, of which US$210 million was provided by the World Bank.
       The program oversaw construction of approximately 460,000 seismically safe houses and restorations.
   ▼▼ Program principles
       •   Ensure owner-driven housing reconstruction
       •   Assist and inspect reconstruction and restoration
       •   Ensure seismic safety
       •   Ensure uniform principles and assistance packages across all funding sources
       • Ensure judicious use of grants; reduce conflicts and grievances; avoid socioeconomic distortions and disparities
   ▼▼ Program elements
       •   Dedicated reconstruction agency, the Earthquake Reconstruction and Recovery Agency (ERRA)
       •   Detailed damage assessment and beneficiary eligibility verification survey
       •   Conditional grant and bank accounts
       •   Seismic-resistant structural design solutions
       •   Training and capacity building
       •   Assistance, inspection, and certification
       •   Public information campaigns
       •   Facilitation of access to building materials
       •   Defined role for NGOs in implementation (community mobilization)
       • Reporting, monitoring, and evaluation and grievance redress mechanisms
   Source: Based on https://www.gfdrr.org/ruralhousingreconstruction.




18 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
A housing recovery program must address several considerations simultaneously, including those
described below.

Purposes of assistance. Separate grants should be provided to households for temporary lodging
or shelter construction and for safe, permanent housing reconstruction and repair. If housing only
needs to be repaired, a temporary shelter subsidy may not be necessary. Infrastructure grants to
communities should be principally for projects that reduce risk (such as those involving drainage,
retaining walls, evacuation routes, and so on).

Amount of assistance to be provided. Assistance should be sufficient to allow construction of
either a safe building structure (foundation, columns, and roof) or a small, safe house (costing
US$2,500 to $3,500). Recipients should be encouraged to supplement assistance with their own
savings (for example, from earnings or remittances). Repair assistance generally comprises 40 to
50 percent of the reconstruction grant.

Form of assistance. Unconditional cash grants are recommended for temporary shelter and
conditional grants for housing repair and reconstruction. Housing grants should be accompanied
by technical assistance and training for families and builders. Vouchers and material donations
are only recommended when markets are not functioning efficiently, and only until they begin to
do so. The provision of turnkey houses should be strongly discouraged, whether by government
or donors, except in specific situations, such as rehousing of vulnerable families. Even then, these
houses should be modest and cost no more than the amount of the housing reconstruction grant,
to avoid social pressures and corruption.

Eligibility and form of assistance. Households with destroyed housing should receive conditional
reconstruction grants. Households with damaged housing should receive smaller grants for
repairs. The repair grant may need to be adjusted to the level of damage (with no more than two
distinct levels of damage, for ease of implementation). Neighborhoods should also receive grants
to carry out small infrastructure projects. Households located in high-risk sites should not be
automatically relocated to new, preselected sites but should be provided with a grant that can be
used for a range of options, including site mitigation and self-relocation.

Community-driven reconstruction requires setting up and managing a multi-tiered system of
training, facilitation, and monitoring. National government, local government, the private sector,
academia, the nongovernmental sector, village groups, networks, and households all have
important roles, the elements of which are set out in Table 3.2.




                                                                                            Summary of Knowledge Briefs 19
                       Table 3.2 Proposed Roles of Stakeholders Involved in a Community-Based Housing Recovery Program

                        Agency /Entity             Functions
                        National government        ▼▼ Establish a steering committee of various key shelter agencies as part of
                                                       overall policy direction and coordination.
                                                   ▼▼ Decide on a single lead agency for the overall preparation, implementation,
                                                       supervision, and monitoring of reconstruction, and define roles for
                                                       collaborating agencies.
                                                   ▼▼ Approve policies for assistance and technical standards, and issue technical
                                                       and operational guidelines for the program.
                                                   ▼▼ Select national and regional management consultants, and recruit
                                                       facilitators.
                        Local government           ▼▼ Appoint a local government project manager for payment verification, local
                                                       program management, land use planning, and resettlement.
                        Local-level NGOs           ▼▼ Conduct a beneficiary survey with the community, ensure integrity of
                                                       implementation, facilitate meetings on community needs, and implement
                                                       small-scale community infrastructure projects (supported by facilitators).
                        Private sector             ▼▼ Supply materials, transport goods, and contractors to households, provide
                                                       consultants and contractors for complex small-scale infrastructure projects,
                                                       conduct area mapping, and provide banking services.
                        National and regional      ▼▼ Assist the implementing agency (the national government) with
                        consultants                    implementation and oversight of the overall program, and ensure the
                                                       program’s quality, effectiveness, efficiency, and timely completion.
                                                   ▼▼ Support establishment of an effective monitoring and complaint-handling
                                                       system.
                        Facilitator teams         ▼▼ Help community and households build capacity in housing and village
                        (which include               reconstruction, ensure high-quality house construction that meets resilience
                        technical, financial, and    standards, oversee bookkeeping, facilitate disputes, and maintain two-way
                        social facilitators)         flow of information with the community.
                        Civil society              ▼▼ Assist with community planning and capacity building, train facilitators,
                        organizations                  and facilitate reconstruction for vulnerable households (in the context of the
                                                       overall program).
                        Housing groups             ▼▼ Manage bank account for ten houses, maintain transparent bookkeeping, and
                        (of approximately ten          ensure implementation integrity by each member.
                        households each)
                        Academia                   ▼▼ Design and carry out facilitator training, assist with development of housing
                                                       prototypes, and provide architecture and engineering students and faculty
                                                       as technical resources to local government units (LGUs).
                       Source: World Bank staff.




20 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Critical Implementation Issues
Agencies in charge of housing programs have to be mindful of a number of implementation aspects,
discussed below.

Establishing disaster risk reduction policy for housing reconstruction. Decisions concerning which
risks need to be managed in recovery and what is an acceptable level of risk affect the design
of the housing program, the nature of housing and site improvements, and decisions regarding
relocation. Where new standards are imposed, enforcement measures must be developed. Not all
risks are disaster related; the risk hierarchy of households should be considered. For instance,
losing one’s livelihood as the result of relocation may concern the household more than the next
typhoon does. Establishing feasible, improved building and repair standards provides the basis for
training households and contractors and contributes to long-term sustainability. Prototype designs
and a housing damage survey provide the parameters for training.

Coordination of reconstruction with provision of emergency and transitional or temporary shelter.
As sheltering decisions will affect reconstruction costs and progress, temporary and permanent
solutions need to be viewed as a whole. Transitional shelter on a household’s own land is best
practice, since it causes minimal disruption and facilitates permanent reconstruction. The Haiyan-
affected zones have relatively large plots, so this approach should be feasible. Shelter standards
should be flexible and reflect cost, duration of use, and safety considerations. In many cases,
temporary housing takes as long to construct as permanent housing, and it later tends to become
permanent, even if it is of low quality.

Communication with the affected population. Communication with the affected households is
critical because it provides information that allows them to make decisions about self-recovery.
Lack of communication contributes to dependency. A communications program should provide
ongoing, two-way communication between affected households and all involved institutions.

Embedding of quality control in the program. Quality control should be embedded in all phases
and at all levels of the community-based recovery and reconstruction program. At the outset, the
government implementing agency could work with relevant agencies to establish technical standards
and guidelines for new construction and rehabilitation of housing. For new construction, prototype
designs can be developed that incorporate these standards. Repair standards can be developed
to respond to the typology of local housing and the damage sustained. National, municipal, and
barangay-level consultant teams can provide training at different levels to ensure standards are
understood and capacity exists to adhere to them. Housing and infrastructure facilitators can
accompany the housing groups and communities throughout the construction period. To enforce
the application of the housing technical standards, housing grant payments can be made in three
tranches, whose release is contingent upon compliance with the standards. In addition, at various
stages of program implementation, technical audits and spot checks should be conducted to assess
the construction quality.

Encouraging family resource mobilization. Housing subsidies should be designed as seed to
encourage resource mobilization for housing by the households themselves. Remittances in 2013
reached a level of US$25,351 million, compared to US$23,352 million in 2012 and US$21,922 million
in 2011.1 This increase reflects international aid and family resource mobilization post-Haiyan and
represents a flow of funds that could be facilitated by banks. Incentives in the form of matching
grants or other measures could be offered by government to encourage use of the funds for housing
and village reconstruction.


                                                                                           Summary of Knowledge Briefs 21
                       Monitoring and audit. Monitoring of financial flows and physical progress is essential at program,
                       locality, and household levels. Monitoring results should be provided to the public, especially the
                       affected population, to keep people informed of progress. Both financial audits and social auditing
                       (by watchdogs or beneficiaries) add credibility to the overall program. Reporting continuously
                       and candidly to the public and educating the press about progress and the use of funds provide
                       insurance against inaccurate charges, which are almost inevitable during reconstruction.



                       Endnote
                       1	Data from Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, http://www.bsp.gov.ph/statistics/keystat/ofw.htm. Major sources of cash
                         remittances in 2013 were Canada, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and
                         the United States. Cash remittances support local economic activity, accounting for 8.4 percent of the Philippine gross
                         domestic product (GDP) in 2013.
                       2. This chapter benefited from contributions by George Soraya, Priscilla Mary Phelps, and Yan F. Zhang.




22 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Chapter 4
Building Back Better: Restoring Key Sectors, Local
Economy, and Livelihoods
This chapter focuses on key sectors that were affected by Typhoon Haiyan, including agriculture,
irrigation, water, sanitation, health, and education and summarizes recommendations made
for their resilient recovery and reconstruction. It also looks at how to facilitate revitalization
of the local economy and the livelihoods of vulnerable populations.1



Revising Key Economic Sectors
The quick recovery of agriculture and irrigation, as well as water and sanitation, is vital to
communities’ ability to restore their livelihoods. Restoring health and education services and
reconstructing structures are likewise important to avoid further shocks to the communities and
disruption of development gains. To address medium- and long-term challenges across all these
sectors, disaster and climate resilience should be integrated into reconstruction efforts in the form
of higher standards with respective training and inspection, location of new buildings outside
hazardous areas where necessary, and/or adequate retrofitting of existing structures to mitigate
risk. Restoring operations of private businesses is fundamental to sustainable recovery and job
generation. This requires a long-term commitment and close collaboration between government
and the private sector, and it usually comes after immediate relief and reconstruction have restored
key basic services.

Agriculture and Irrigation
The agriculture sector was severely affected by Typhoon Haiyan. The total developed service area in
the regions affected by the typhoon was about 575,700 hectares of land. In most of these regions,
irrigated agriculture is an important source of livelihood. Approximately 550,000 families directly
depend on irrigation schemes, with rice being the common crop across the country. Irrigation is
critical to agricultural production, especially during the dry season. Almost all irrigation water is
derived from rivers with direct abstraction and conveyance, while its distribution depends largely
on open canals. During the reconstruction and recovery process, immediate restoration of rural
livelihoods is a priority, and affected irrigation systems must become operational as soon as possible
to avoid future loss of production. This can be facilitated through the measures discussed below.

Prioritization. Reconstruction spending can be prioritized based on scheme investigations and
surveys for the worst affected regions. De-silting of canals and the repair of critical structures,
such as abstraction and canal diversion structures, can be prioritized so the needed water can be
conveyed and distributed to the farmers’ fields.




                                                                                             Summary of Knowledge Briefs 23
                       Use of implementation mechanisms. Contractors can be mobilized to repair the larger structures
                       and de-silt the canals. As a form of income support to affected communities, irrigation associations
                       could carry out the de-silting of secondary and tertiary canals with hired laborers under a cash-for-
                       work scheme.

                       Climate proofing of key irrigation infrastructure. To avoid recurring damage from future extreme
                       weather events, climate proofing of key irrigation infrastructure should be implemented. This may
                       include strengthening key hydraulic structures (including river abstraction works) to withstand
                       future floods and improve the drainage and silt retention capacity around and within irrigation
                       systems (to avoid siltation of canals and fields).

                       Water and Sanitation
                       Impacts on water and sanitation systems can include power loss and damage to power equipment
                       (such as power lines and generators), pump houses and offices, storage tanks (reservoirs), and
                       transmission and distribution piping and service connections. Although water treatment facilities
                       can be resilient to wind and precipitation, their operation may be disrupted by power loss due
                       to flooding and lack of backup generators. Pump houses and poorly designed and constructed
                       buildings, such as offices and operations buildings, may experience damage from wind, debris,
                       and water intrusion. Transmission and distribution systems (including pump stations, tanks, and
                       aboveground and buried piping) are usually resilient unless damaged by storm surges, landslides,
                       washouts, and falling debris. In the event of earthquakes, transmission and distribution systems
                       are vulnerable to shaking, ground failure (such as liquefaction, lateral spreading, and landslides),
                       and tsunamis.

                       Recovery and rehabilitation may take longer in some areas than others due to redevelopment and
                       new land use patterns that may require hydraulic flow redesign and rehabilitation. The delayed
                       restoration of water supply services and the lack of sanitation facilities in the affected areas are
                       threats to people’s health and the environment, and they adversely affect the economy of the
                       affected city or municipality. To enable quick restoration of facilities, the following actions are
                       recommended.

                       Prioritize and build back better. Resumption of water operations in areas severely damaged by
                       disasters should be prioritized to avoid further loss of production from nonfunctioning irrigation
                       infrastructure. Damaged transmission and distribution systems should, however, be reconstructed
                       to higher standards to protect contents of facilities and equipment (especially electrical) from future
                       water intrusion and flood damage. Repair and reconstruction of water district buildings should follow
                       the resilience guidelines for public buildings, especially the wind standards, when feasible.

                       Financing. Debt relief policies should be triggered to allow restructuring of financial debts and
                       provide incentives to local water utilities to reconstruct and recover as soon as possible. The GoP
                       could provide concessional funds to service providers to fast track the restoration of access to
                       improved water supply and sanitation.

                       Emergency preparedness. Investments should be made in emergency response logistics (for example,
                       for provision of mobile treatment plants, water tankers, mobile gensets, and portalets), which are
                       extremely necessary for continued water supply and sanitation operations. Power is essential to
                       operate water treatment facilities, and generators should be anchored to prevent damage during
                       earthquakes. Emergency generators should be provided to water utilities to continue operations



24 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
(such as running pumps and filters) following an earthquake or other disaster. Contingency and
disaster recovery plans for water districts should be developed in parallel.

Risk reduction. Earthquake and typhoon assessments of undamaged and repaired structures,
equipment, tanks, and piping should be conducted to identify vulnerabilities and develop mitigation
plans, which may include selective retrofits of important components to keep water systems
operational and/or post-event response measures to ensure continuity of operations.

Private sector participation in reconstruction, recovery, and rehabilitation. Local governments
could encourage the private sector to mobilize expertise and resources in reconstruction and
rehabilitation. To attract private sector financing, small water utilities should be consolidated to
increase financial viability and sustainability.

Health Services
In the short term, essential health services need to be provided, including medical, surgical, and
mental health consultations, immunization, restoration of the referral system, establishment
of temporary health facilities and services, repair or rehabilitation of damaged health facilities,
delivery of maternity tents and containers for hospital delivery rooms, and mobile health teams.
In addition, nutrition services for families need to be restored, with the provision of supplies for
therapeutic feeding, micronutrient supplements, and equipment. Before Typhoon Haiyan, the
Visayas region already had high rates of malnutrition and the second highest rate of child mortality
in the Philippines. Many Visayas households do not have access to safe water and sanitary toilet
facilities. The damage wrought by Haiyan disrupted supply chains for medicines and equipment
and displaced health care workers, rendering the delivery of essential health care services (such as
immunization, safe delivery, and regular curative care) almost impossible.

Prioritization and planning. The Department of Health (DOH), together with LGUs, should undertake
mapping of the service delivery network in the affected areas. A recovery and reconstruction plan
for different types of health facilities (covering services, supplies, and manpower) should be
developed according to the facilities’ exposure to multiple hazards. DOH should put into place a
more robust monitoring system, not only to serve the needs of the reconstruction phase, but to
become a backbone of the program monitoring and reporting system it shares with the LGUs.

Building back better. Reconstruction and recovery provide an opportunity for DOH to develop plans
with LGUs for improving and building stronger service delivery networks. Reconstruction should begin
before the relief phase ends. Damaged hospitals and clinics outside of storm surge zones should be
repaired, while major structures in those zones should be considered for relocation to higher ground
or provided with elevated “safe haven” areas. New hospitals should be built to higher design wind
speeds than the ones they replace (from the current 200 kilometers per hour in some zones of the
country to a uniform 250 kilometers per hour), with the inclusion of wind-resistant features such
as roof framing ties and foundation anchorage, glazing protection, and improvements to roofing
and other attachments (such as gutters and flashing). In the long term, hospital structures should
be evaluated for wind and earthquake resistance and upgraded if found deficient. The GoP could
develop and implement an inspection system to improve construction quality and train inspectors on
principles of resilience, the cost of which could be covered by permit and inspection fees.

Implementation and financing parameters. DOH may also consider expanding its public–private
partnerships for smaller health facilities, since reestablishment of the service delivery network
almost simultaneously in all affected municipalities is urgently needed.



                                                                                           Summary of Knowledge Briefs 25
                       Education
                       During a post-disaster situation, restoring the education sector and getting children back into the
                       classroom is vital. The Haiyan-affected areas included a high concentration of public elementary and
                       secondary schools. In the most significantly affected regions—Western, Central, and Eastern Visayas—
                       approximately 5,000 schools and 2.2 million children were directly affected. The reconstruction of
                       schools involves a number of important policy decisions. Table 4.1 lists recommended post-disaster
                       reconstruction and recovery priorities in the education sector.

                       Table 4.1 Recommended Actions for Recovery and Reconstruction in the Education Sector

                        Time frame             Recommended actions
                        Short-term             ▼▼ Provision of temporary or alternative learning spaces (makeshift classrooms) for
                        priorities for             affected and displaced children
                        recovery…              ▼▼ Use of alternative modes of teaching and learning
                                               ▼▼ Mobilization of volunteer or mobile teachers from nonaffected regions
                                               ▼▼ Provision of early childhood care and development learning packages
                                               ▼▼ Provision of psychosocial services and counseling to affected students and teachers
                                  …and ▼▼ Cleaning of damaged schools and community learning centers
                         reconstruction ▼▼ Repairing of damaged schools outside the storm surge area and building of
                                           replacement schools (outside the surge zones) to higher wind speeds
                        Medium-term            ▼▼ Replacement of damaged and destroyed teaching materials
                        priorities for         ▼▼ Expansion of alternative delivery modes (for example, open high school, modified
                        recovery…                  in-school, off-school approach, and so on) and of learning system through increase
                                                   in volunteer or mobile teachers
                                               ▼▼ Train teachers and school administrators on psychosocial care and counseling
                                  …and ▼▼ Development of typhoon preparedness plans and procedures, prioritizing structures
                         reconstruction   designated as disaster shelters
                        Long-term              ▼▼ Training of teachers, school administrators, students, and parents in disaster
                        priorities for             preparedness
                        recovery…              ▼▼ Replacement of destroyed furniture and equipment.
                                  …and ▼▼ Reconstruction, repair, or retrofitting of damaged public learning facilities
                         reconstruction    • Evaluation of school structures and building envelopes for wind and earthquake
                                              resistance, prioritizing schools that are designated as evacuation shelters and
                                              upgrading vulnerable facilities if found to be deficient
                                           • Development and implementation of an inspection system to improve
                                              construction quality
                                        ▼▼ Training of municipal building officials and contractors in resilient construction
                                           practices
                       Source: World Bank staff.



                       For the above actions, national and local government resources should continue to be supplemented
                       by support from private sector groups, corporate foundations, industry and business, and bilateral
                       and multilateral donors. Aside from classroom construction, these partners can assist with the
                       provision of continuous education during and after typhoon and other disaster situations; extension
                       of psychosocial services and counseling to students and teachers; and provision of a safe and secure
                       learning environment that promotes the protection and well-being of learners.



26 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Reviving the Economy after a Disaster
Experience from other countries suggests two key challenges for businesses reviving economic activity
after a disaster are replacing assets and obtaining operating capital. Businesses are often unable to
gain access to financing because they lack collateral or have temporarily lost their ability to generate
income. Government response usually includes stimulating financial institutions to restructure existing
loans and provide additional financing, possibly by providing credit guarantees. Governments can, for
example, provide regulatory relief for banks operating in the affected areas, which in the Philippines
was done by the Philippine Central Bank (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, or BSP).

Estimates from the Labor Force Survey suggest most of the 4.5 million employed persons in the
Visayas are employed informally. Service sector employment dominates, providing jobs to 43
percent of the population and contributing 54 percent to the local GDP. Among workers in industry
and the service sector (60 percent of those employed), over 95 percent work for micro or small
enterprises. A particular challenge in the affected areas is that only a small portion of businesses
had formal access to finance prior to the crisis. To revive the business sector, areas of support may
include those below.

Loan restructuring, refinancing, and guarantees. The sufficiency of the existing refinancing
mechanisms, especially for supporting rural banks in the affected areas, needs to be assessed.
Given the lack of collateral and generally high levels of liquidity in the country’s financial system,
a guarantee instrument could play a role in stimulating lending in the affected areas by private
institutions to ensure financing flows to micro, small, and medium-sized businesses.

Financing through cooperatives and microfinance institutions. Since most micro, small, and
medium-sized businesses in the affected areas did not have access to bank financing before Typhoon
Haiyan, this is a critical area of support. Availability of refinancing mechanisms for microfinance
providers needs to be assessed. Support should be targeted to these businesses, building on the
existing programs operating at the local government level. Experience shows a sectoral approach
with a focus on supply chains is the most effective.


Addressing Poverty and Social Impacts
Households in the affected areas inhabit rural communities, and their average per capita income
is about 10 percent lower than the national average. Income from wages from both agricultural
and nonagricultural activities comprises 45 percent of their income; about a quarter comes from
entrepreneurial farm and off-farm activities; and about a third comes from other sources, including
domestic and foreign remittances. This composition of household income in areas where many
already hovered just above the poverty line suggests the destruction of livelihood caused by the
typhoon has pushed hundreds of thousands of highly vulnerable households into immediate income
poverty. An additional 2.3 million people (nearly half a million households) are now estimated
to live below the poverty line, representing an increase in the poverty rate from 41.2 percent to
approximately 55.7 percent in the worst affected areas (GoP 2013). For those who have lost houses
and/or productive assets, the impact might be long term, and poverty could become deep and
chronic. The following are the key potential negative social consequences, as observed in other,
similar disaster situations:

    ▼▼   Worsening of health and nutrition status. Disasters put food consumption at significant
         risk and also increase health risks.



                                                                                               Summary of Knowledge Briefs 27
                            ▼▼   Disrupted education and loss of human capital. Some families may decide to remove
                                 their children, particularly the older ones, from school. This coping strategy has a
                                 long-term negative impact on children’s future earning capacity and contributes to the
                                 intergenerational transmission of poverty.

                            ▼▼   Shift in livelihood/employment. Since the majority of affected households are engaged in
                                 agricultural activities that can take some time to recover, most look for alternative sources
                                 of income. It is important to provide cash and/or training for work programs, skills training,
                                 and capital and other business development support services for alternative forms of
                                 income-generating activities.

                            ▼▼   Out migration. The employment opportunities in host urban areas are burdened by out
                                 migration, which also creates other social problems, such as increase in informal settlers.
                                 Prolonged stays with relatives and friends may put a financial strain on the host households.

                            ▼▼   Increased child labor and other forms of exploitative labor. The acquiescence of some
                                 affected households to exploitative work arrangements, such as child labor or underpaid
                                 employment, is not unlikely, particularly among those who have lost the major income
                                 earner of the family. If the rest of the family members have neither labor skills nor work
                                 experience, they would be forced by circumstances to accept any form of income-generating
                                 activities.

                            ▼▼   Increased debt burden. Many disaster-affected households have no access to lending or
                                 credit services. If not provided with public emergency income cash support, compensation
                                 for lost assets, cash support for housing reconstruction, and so on, many might be forced
                                 to borrow from private money lenders at predatory interest rates, risking the loss of land
                                 or other property and ultimately facing destitution. The need to rebuild or repair the house,
                                 replace furniture and household goods, and replenish clothing, among other expenses,
                                 puts additional pressure on households’ resources.

                            ▼▼   Increased risk of violence. Traumatic experiences and weakened public safety might
                                 contribute to an increase in sexual abuse and domestic violence, particularly toward
                                 children, women, and other vulnerable groups.

                            ▼▼   Deterioration of mental health. The capacity of victims to recover their livelihoods and
                                 income would also depend on how well they cope with or manage, not just the physical
                                 trauma, but the psychosocial trauma of the disaster.




28 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Actions to mitigate or manage these risks can include the following.

Provide emergency income support in cash. Cash support can be offered to mitigate the immediate
impoverishing impact of the disaster and bridge the time until households resume farming and
other economic activities. Most countries affected by disasters have used this type of program (see
Box 4.1). Often delivered as a one-time payment to all affected households, the support normally
compensates for a three-month estimated income loss, or some percentage of it, incurred by affected
households. Experience shows almost all money is used for food, clothes, house repairs, and debt
repayment. The success of the program is greatly enhanced when efforts are made to stabilize the
supply of basic goods so that inflated prices (in case of shortages) do not decrease beneficiaries’
purchasing power.


                               Box 4.1 Lessons Learned from Aceh, Indonesia, after 2004 Tsunami

   ▼▼ Start with cash for work to clear debris, and begin shelter reconstruction as a priority.
   ▼▼ Once reconstruction needs have been estimated, determine how many jobs will be created in construction and assess
       availability of labor in the local market. To meet demand in Aceh, some labor was brought in from other parts of
       Indonesia; in other cases, people were trained to gain the skills required so the jobs could go to local people. Importing
       labor will be necessary in some cases, but it does create social jealousy.
   ▼▼ Rebuild community service facilities in the agriculture/fisheries sector.
   ▼▼ Provide grants and compensation for asset replacement.
   ▼▼ Provide access to credit and technical assistance to restore businesses. Governments or NGOs can set up business
       advisory centers for this purpose.
   ▼▼ Set up training and job counseling and referral for those seeking employment, particularly in construction.
   ▼▼ Different strategies will be needed for urban and rural livelihoods. Donors in particular tend to focus on rural areas, but
       people in the city should not be forgotten.
   ▼▼ Shift quickly from recovery livelihood programs (cash for work) to restoration of original livelihoods.
   ▼▼ Involving communities in identifying needs and solutions is crucial. The human infrastructure (comprising networks,
       facilitators, and so on) available for community-driven development can be mobilized for this purpose. Combined with
       surveys of employers and market analysis, it can be used to prepare a rapid livelihood needs assessment.
   ▼▼ A joint government–donor livelihood recovery working group should be established with a clear lead from the
       government side and a joint convener from the development community.
   Source: World Bank staff.



Suspend conditionality on the conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs in affected areas. Local
government bodies, parental leaders, and other stakeholders should monitor the health and
education services recovery to ensure conditionality is reactivated as soon as services resume.
CCT benefits should be delivered to affected households irrespective of their current residence
(some might have temporarily left the disaster area). This provision could be of limited duration
(for example, six months).

Develop cash-for-work and public works programs. Many people affected by disaster are neither
farmers nor self-employed individuals in need of employment. Cash-for-work programs have been
a good option to provide work, albeit temporary, for these people, including clearing debris and
building temporary shelters. The global practice is to pay participants an hourly wage that is slightly
(5 to 10 percent) below the applicable minimum wage, although the International Labor Organization




                                                                                                     Summary of Knowledge Briefs 29
                       recommends paying 100 percent of the minimum. As reconstruction picks up, some of the work
                       could be done in the form of public works, which would provide cash for work to disaster-affected
                       unemployed individuals and may also used as an opportunity to train participants in construction-
                       specific jobs, with construction companies involved in reconstruction obliged to employ unskilled
                       workers from the disaster-affected communities. The cash-for-work program can be cross linked
                       with the other cash transfer programs described above. It can be self-selected on a volunteer
                       basis and target certain groups of individuals or households.

                       Provide grants for productive assets restoration. Grants schemes are used by many disaster-
                       affected countries to compensate for losses and help households restart their livelihood activities
                       as soon as possible. An important precondition for such a program is the availability of assets in
                       the local markets.

                       Provide long-term support. A longer-term cash income support program for poor or extremely
                       poor households can be sustained for up to one year. Such a program is sometimes conditioned
                       upon at least one household member’s taking part in the public works program. Governments
                       should also focus on developing social protection mechanisms and programs that would be
                       triggered automatically in a disaster situation and on improving mechanisms for monitoring and
                       evaluation.


                       Endnote
                       1	 This chapter benefited from contributions by Christopher C. Ancheta, Jorge Avalos, Melba D. Baltasar, Leonardo Jr.
                          Batugal Paat, Caryn Bredenkamp, Victor Dato, Lynnette Dela Cruz Perez, Marianna Alfa Fernando-Pacua, Carolina
                          V. Figueroa-Geron, Edkarl M. Galing, Amelia Johnston, Victoria Florian S. Lazaro, Paula Maria Leynes Felipe, Maria
                          Loreto Padua, Paul A. Mariano, Eduardo Martinez-Miranda, Phyllis Nadine Mortola, Nataliya Mylenko, Gerardo F.
                          Parco, Aleksandra Posarac, Maria Theresa G. Quinones, Roberto Antonio F. Rosadia, Aileen Theresa Ruiz, Artessa
                          Saldivar-Sali, Ferdinand Sia, Matthew J. K. Stephens, Joop Stoutjesdijk, Karl Kendrick Tiu Chua, Rogier J. E. Van
                          Den Brink, Conrad Antonius Vasquez De Jesus, Rashiel Velarde, Noel Verdote, Catherine G. Vidar, Maya Gabriela Q.
                          Villaluz, Felizardo K. Virtucio, Makiko Watanabe, Yan F. Zhang, and Maribelle S. Zonaga.




30 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Chapter 5
Roads and Bridges: Enabling Operational
Continuity of Lifelines for Evacuation and Post-
disaster Response
This chapter focuses on maintaining continuity of the operational lifelines during evacuation
and post-disaster response. It discusses assessment of the vulnerability of the roads and
bridges network and options for strengthening the resilience of road infrastructure through
improvements in asset management, as well as in design standards and planning.1



Why Focus on Roads and Bridges?
Roads and bridges, which serve as lifelines for evacuation and provide access for post-disaster
response, should be sufficiently resilient in design and condition to remain open and operational
along key routes and quickly restorable to a passable state along other important routes. Reliable
management information on road and bridge assets needs to be immediately available in the event of
a disaster and readily usable as a consistent reference during the full cycle from pre-disaster through
ultimate reconstruction. As organizational resources (such as staff, facilities, and communications)
may be disabled by a disaster, a response plan for damage assessment, restoration, and recovery
needs to include prompt, efficient, and accountable deployment of external resources. Key areas of
focus include the following:

    ▼▼   Assigning strategic classification to road and bridge assets. Classification of assets
         should be based on the criticality of functions during emergencies and recovery.

    ▼▼   Enhancing resilience of strategic routes. The planning and design standards for assets
         should reflect location-specific natural hazard risks and the assets’ strategic classifications.

    ▼▼   Improving emergency and recovery via multiyear maintenance contracts. Multiyear
         contracting arrangements, which include emergency management in addition to
         maintenance and rehabilitation of roads and bridges on a performance-specified basis,
         should be developed and tested in hazard-prone areas as a means for improving the
         efficiency and reliability of emergency response and recovery.

    ▼▼   Enhancing information management systems. Information management systems could
         include spatial geocoding and image data that interface readily with the government’s
         GIS system and data infrastructure. A national geospatial database should extend to cover
         local assets.




                                                                                                Summary of Knowledge Briefs 31
                       Assessing the Vulnerability of the Network
                       The Philippines’s road network comprises national roads managed by DPWH and local roads
                       supervised by LGUs. The road network is the main means of transporting people and goods in the
                       country. Part of the national roads network, the primary arterial roads connect important centers
                       for the purpose of regional development as well as during emergencies. Totaling about 172,000
                       kilometers nationally, the local road network comprises barangay (village) or farm-to-market roads
                       (69 percent), provincial roads (18 percent), city roads (8 percent), and municipal roads (5 percent).
                       The Haiyan-affected area includes 6,728 kilometers of national primary roads, or 42 percent of
                       the total 16,056 kilometers. The national secondary roads in the affected area comprise 5,583
                       kilometers (36 percent) of the national total of 15,541 km. The affected area includes 3,357 bridges,
                       or 42 percent of the national total. Local roads in the affected area total about 65,000 kilometers.

                       Through vulnerability assessments, road sections in high-hazard areas can be identified and
                       upgraded, when feasible, or entirely reconstructed. If funds for retrofitting are not available,
                       preparedness plans should be developed for possible failure of these sections, including alternative
                       routing options. The following are hazards that should be identified for road sections vulnerable
                       to storm surge (induced by typhoons and precipitation), landslides, washouts, flooding, and
                       earthquake-induced soil failures, such as liquefaction, lateral spreading, compaction, and landslides.
                       For earthquakes, the structural integrity of bridges needs to be specifically assessed.

                            ▼▼   Typhoons. Unless damaged by storm surge or precipitation-induced earth movement or
                                 washouts, typhoon impacts to roads are usually limited to debris and downed utility poles
                                 and lines. These damages block roads, however, and delay rescue operations by a few
                                 days. For Typhoon Haiyan, the government had road and bridge clearing equipment ready
                                 by day two, and road clearing commenced on day three, after operators arrived. By day
                                 four, 96 percent of the roads were passable. This was a commendable performance for a
                                 Category 5–equivalent storm, as compared to a week or more the clearing took for other
                                 major storms, such as Hurricane Katrina in the United States in 2005.

                            ▼▼   Earthquakes. Earthquake impacts on roads (including landslides, other forms of slope
                                 failure, and subsidence, liquefaction, rupture, and displacement) can be more severe
                                 than those from typhoons and tend to depend on geotechnical conditions. The impacts on
                                 bridges are also dependent on structural features and include approach failure, abutment
                                 and pier damage, and superstructure damage or collapse. To reduce these risks, an
                                 earthquake analysis of vulnerable bridges should be conducted and retrofits implemented
                                 for those assets found to be at high risk.

                       The incidence of damage (that is, the percentage of assets affected) is important, but related statistics
                       indicating the passability and percentage affected of road routes (which may have multiple sections
                       and involve both road and bridge damage) will be valuable, both for planning repair and publicizing
                       access information. Damage costs are compared to asset replacement costs and to annual budget
                       appropriations to provide comparative measures of financial impact.

                       Estimates of the damage and restoration costs of local roads and bridges are needed, as local
                       transportation infrastructure is likely to represent a higher percentage within the annual road-
                       related budgets of the affected local governments. This has to do with the fact that lighter structures
                       are likely to be more vulnerable to geotechnical and water hazards. Given that asset inventory
                       information is less reliable at the local government level, relevant national government agencies



32 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
could play a supporting technical role in validating damage estimates against GIS information on
the local road network, damage distribution, and appropriate unit costs.


Improving the Resilience of Road Infrastructure through
Asset Management
The government of the Philippines could take a number of steps during the recovery and
reconstruction process for roads and bridges that reflect good practice. These are discussed below.

Provide reliable asset information management. In the event of a disaster, asset information
needs to be available immediately and readily usable as a consistent reference during the full
cycle from preparedness through reconstruction. Local organizational resources (including staff,
facilities, and communications) may be disabled by a disaster, and a response plan at the agency
level for restoration, early recovery, and damage assessment needs to include prompt, efficient, and
accountable deployment of both national and external resources.

Incorporate emergency management into contracts. While the Philippine government performed
well in implementing recovery operations by rapidly deploying staff, equipment, and fuel supplies
from unaffected regions following Typhoon Haiyan, the incorporation of emergency response
for road and bridge repairs into multiyear or long-term, performance-based contracts can help
countries provide relief and early recovery more efficiently. Successful examples are the multiyear
road management contracts found in Australia and New Zealand and the performance-specified
road maintenance and rehabilitation contracts (CREMA) used in Latin America.

Relocate utilities or put them underground. The government is requiring that utility poles be
located outside the road right of way, as and when budget permits, to avoid creating debris and
obstruction in storms, as well as to enhance road safety. In “lifeline” road sections, such as main
arterial roads, for which access is critical, the provision of underground ducting for power and
telecommunications utilities is good practice in high-risk zones.

Enhance information management systems. In the Philippines, DPWH could progressively enhance
its database to include field data collection, with electronic data capture, spatial geocoding and
image data linked to the GoP’s GIS system and, if applicable, to the geospatial data infrastructure
framework.


Improving the Resilience of Road Infrastructure through
Design Standards and Planning
Currently, planning and design procedures in the Philippines address resilience indirectly through
the standards adopted for design return period of hazards, such as flood level. An explicit treatment
of resilience could include the actions summarized below.

Classify strategic assets. Road and bridge assets should be classified strategically based on the
criticality of functions for evacuation, delivery of relief supplies, and access in an emergency. An
ongoing study led by the GoP has defined categories of “critical” (those assets that need to stay
operational), “essential” (those that must be repairable), and “others” (those that must avoid
collapse) for national bridges; a similar system could be applied to road routes.




                                                                                            Summary of Knowledge Briefs 33
                       Add geohazard risks and zoning to planning and design processes. Adding hazard risk (for
                       earthquakes, landslides, liquefaction, and other hazards) as a layer of geospatial information
                       available to the planning and design processes can support decisions on realignment of roads or
                       on explicit design measures to reduce the impacts of identified hazards. At the planning stage, the
                       information would guide the budgeting for and the selection and prioritization of projects, and, in
                       the design stage, it would guide preliminary testing and the selection of structural type.

                       Raise the design standards in terms of the return periods for weather-related natural hazards. An
                       ongoing government review of design standards needs to take into account the impact of climate
                       change in raising the frequency and severity of natural hazards.

                       Prioritize quality over cost. The use of higher design standards for enhancing resilience may
                       increase construction costs of a new asset by 20 to 40 percent in the critical sections. The added
                       cost, which will depend greatly on the type of treatment selected, may be considered a requisite
                       of the higher strategic resilience standard. An economic evaluation of the added cost should be
                       based on an annualized budget with zero discount rate rather than on the basis of an independent
                       investment.

                       A summary of the recommendations in this chapter is presented in Table 5.1.

                       Table 5.1 Recommended Actions for Enhancing the Resilience of Roads and Bridges
                        Time frame      Recommended actions
                        Immediate       ▼▼ Use remote-sensing data to augment damage assessment. Support government
                                           agencies with access and methodology for interpreting damage assessments from
                                           satellite and LIDAR images for local government infrastructure (roads, public buildings,
                                           other) and housing.
                                        ▼▼ Promote rapid deployment of electronic image capture for data validation, detailed
                                           assessment, and project tracking on as-needed basis. Equip and train a central
                                           government agency team to respond to on-demand requests for support on detailed,
                                           limited-area surveys by directing and deploying available local providers using
                                           geotagged imaging technology to produce the following:
                                           •	 Geotagged digital photographs
                                           •	 Ground-level geo- and time-tagged video imaging with field commentary (via an
                                              existing Android phone application from the Department of Tourism)
                                           •	 Low-altitude aerial imaging with high resolution using unmanned aerial vehicle
                                              (UAV) technology.
                                        ▼▼ Plan for upgrading GIS functionality in national government agencies to support
                                           disaster response as well as core functions. Upgrade functionality of existing GIS in
                                           relevant line agencies (such as DPWH), in accordance with guidance issued by the
                                           agency in charge of spatial data infrastructure in the country.




34 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Table 5.1 Continued
 Time frame         Recommended actions

 Short term         ▼▼ Classify road routes based on their disaster-related strategic importance. Define
                        and agree with the national government on classification of disaster-related strategic
                        importance of road routes, and apply to national road and provincial road networks
                        nationwide.
                    ▼▼ Populate GIS database with available hazard risk information and enable future
                        enhancement. Import hazard zone information from PHIVOLCS, PAGASA, DOST Project
                        NOAH, and other sources to support design for resilience of national infrastructure
                        (roads, flood control, and drainage) and local government infrastructure (roads and
                        buildings); prepare medium-term action plan for detailed ground assessment and
                        upgrading of hazard information to support design-level parameters.
                    ▼▼ Plan for developing electronic data capture (EDC) capability in relevant line agencies
                        (such as DPWH). Evaluate options and plan for roll-out of appropriate image-based
                        and time-stamped geotagged electronic data collection technology and methodologies
                        to support disaster response and damage assessment, as well as the core business
                        process of asset management and project monitoring.
                    ▼▼ Enhance delivery of civil works and participation of private sector in disaster response
                        and recovery. Prepare contract models for civil works, which include emergency
                        response and recovery operations, with reference to available international good
                        practice, including alliance contracts and long-term, performance-based contracts.

 Medium             ▼▼ Implement resilience-based approach in planning, design, and construction of public
 term                   works. Upgrade and authorize planning criteria, design codes, and construction
                        specifications to address resilience to site-specific hazards and disaster-related
                        strategies for roads, buildings, and flood or drainage assets, and implement the
                        resilience-based approach in the design and construction of civil works and critical
                        public assets and facilities.
                    ▼▼ Implement a program to build EDC capability in the relevant line agencies. Purchase
                        equipment, train personnel, and deploy EDC capability for disaster response and
                        damage assessment, as well as core business processes, in accordance with the roll-out
                        plan.
                    ▼▼ Implement contract models that include private sector provision of emergency and
                        recovery works. On a pilot basis and in accordance with the national government’s
                        program delivery policy, implement long-term, performance-based contracts and an
                        alliance-based contract program that includes emergency and recovery works.
Source: World Bank staff.



Endnote
1	 This chapter benefited from contributions by William Paterson, Abigail Baca, Christopher Ancheta and Victor Dato.




                                                                                                             Summary of Knowledge Briefs 35
The devastation caused by typhoon Haiyan left many without shelter and food but not without hope. A small village in Tacloban, Leyte
fights through the rubbles and works hand-in-hand in rebuilding their community. Photo: Robert John Cabagnot - Philippines

36 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Chapter 6
Institutional Structures: Good Practices and
Options for Effective Planning for Reconstruction
and Recovery
This chapter focuses on three specific considerations: deciding among different models of
institutional arrangements; understanding the roles of a recovery and reconstruction agency
vis-à-vis a national planning agency; and ensuring overall guidance and oversight. The chapter
includes lessons learned from large-scale recovery and reconstruction programs in Indonesia,
Pakistan, Turkey, and other countries.1



Why Focus on Institutional Arrangements?
A large disaster requires a multifaceted recovery and reconstruction strategy on a scale that many
governments have never faced. Disasters the size of Typhoon Haiyan emphasize the importance of
having an integrated recovery and reconstruction plan that addresses all key elements of recovery:
(1) institutional frameworks; 2) policy and planning; 3) recovery finance; and 4) management and
monitoring. Figure 6.1 illustrates the various aspects of a strong and coherent reconstruction plan.
Determining the most appropriate institutional arrangements is crucial to the overall success of a
recovery program.

Figure 6.1 Aspects of a Coherent Reconstruction Plan

                                           Sequencing and
                        Institutional                               Recovery Financing,
                                            Criteria-based
                      Arrangements for                              Aid Harmonization,
                                           Prioritization of
                          Recovery                                     and Tracking
                                           Recovery Needs


              Public-Private Civil                                      Programs Reflecting
             Society Participation                                      Recovery Needs, and
               and Collaboration                                         Capacity Building


           National Recovery                Recovery and                    Monitoring and
             Vision Setting                Reconstruction                    Evaluation of
             and Strategy
                                                                           Recovery Programs
             Development

Source: World Bank/GFDRR staff.




                                                                                               Summary of Knowledge Briefs 37
                       In 1941, the Philippines established the Civilian Emergency Administration to formulate and
                       execute policies and plans to protect the population in emergencies. Since then, the institutional
                       and disaster management systems have undergone many changes, most significantly in 2010,
                       with the introduction of the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Act. The
                       act marked a shift toward a proactive, comprehensive, and integrated approach to disaster risk
                       management (DRM) that promotes the involvement of all sectors and all stakeholders at all levels,
                       especially the local community.

                       Overall policy and coordination are provided through the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
                       Management Council (NDRRMC). Its thirty-nine members come from national government agencies,
                       local governments, NGOs, and the private sector, and it is complemented by regional and local
                       councils (see Figure 6.2).2 NDRRMC is chaired by the Secretary of the Department of National Defense
                       and supported by a Vice Chairperson for Disaster Preparedness (Secretary of the Department of
                       Interior and Local Government), Vice Chairperson for Disaster Response (Secretary of Department
                       of Social Welfare and Development), Vice Chairperson for Disaster Prevention and Mitigation
                       (Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology), and Vice Chairperson for Disaster
                       Rehabilitation and Recovery (Director General of the National Economic Development Authority).
                       Working with communities, local government units (LGUs) are involved in disaster preparedness,
                       prevention, mitigation, and response. Line agencies focus on disaster prevention and recovery for
                       specific sectors. DRRM has seventy-nine provincial offices, as well as over 1,487 city and municipal
                       offices. (Figure 6.3 depicts the Philippines’s regions and provinces.)


                       Options for Implementation Arrangements
                       Global post-disaster reconstruction experience suggests a number of options for implementation
                       arrangements, depending on the characteristics of the disaster, current governance structure, and
                       prior experiences and the overarching coordination, monitoring, and control frameworks operating
                       among oversight and line agencies. A summary of the main advantages and disadvantages of the
                       specific options is provided in Table 6.1.

                       Option 1: Create a new institution for reconstruction and recovery management. A single lead
                       implementation agency envisions, strategizes, plans, implements, and controls the overall
                       multisectoral reconstruction program. The lead agency needs to be equipped with implementation
                       capacity and authority matching the level of assigned responsibilities. In this model, the agency
                       should also have a direct reporting relationship with a high authority in the country. Similar to
                       option 3 below, the agency could be established with a sunset clause, with the institution ceasing to
                       exist upon the achievement of clear, predefined goals. Alternatively—provided the agency proves to
                       be highly effective—its capacity can be retained, but the organization is absorbed and mainstreamed
                       by an authority responsible for overall disaster risk management in the country.

                       Option 2: Strengthen and coordinate existing line agencies to be the reconstruction leaders, sector
                       by sector. In option 2, individual line agencies work independently to manage recovery in their
                       particular sectors and also supervise and implement projects. Their work usually begins with joint
                       preparation of a master plan, blueprint, or action plan for the recovery, in which their respective roles
                       and activities in support of the reconstruction are identified. Even in this model, the need is strong for
                       a high authority in the country to coordinate and oversee the recovery works.

                       Option 3: Establish a hybrid arrangement by creating a temporary reconstruction and recovery
                       agency. In this option, a designated agency provides oversight and a single point of coordination



38 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
                                 Figure 6.2 Organizational Chart of NDRRMC

                                                                                                                              Chairperson
                                                                                                                       Dept. of National Defense




                                                         Vice Chair                                    Vice Chair                                    Vice Chair for Prevention                        Vice Chair for
                                                     for Preparedness                                for Response                                         and Mitigation                                Recovery
                                                            DILG                                         DSWD                                                  DOST                                       NEDA




                                                               Dept. of                                           Dept. of                                             Dept. of Public                                     Dept. of
                                       Dept. of             Transportation                Dept. of                                                   Dept. of                                      Dept. of
                                                                                                                  Foreign                                                Works and                                       Budget and
                                      Agriculture                and                      Health                                                   Environment                                     Finance
                                                                                                                  Affairs                                                Highways                                        Management
                                                           Communications



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Housing and Urban
                                   Commission on                                   Dept. of Trade and                                                                                      Dept. of Labor and          Dev’t Coordination
                                                          Dept. of Education                                  Dept. of Justice                 Dept. of Energy        Dept. of Tourism
                                  Higher Education                                     Industry                                                                                              Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Council



                                                                                                              Exec. Secretary                  Press Secretary




                                                                                                                                                                     National Anti-Poverty
                                                                                                               Presidential                                                                     Nat’l. Comm. on
                                                              Philippine              Armed Forces                                             Climate Change        Commission-Victims of
                                                                                                              Adviser on the                                                                   the Role of Filipino
                                                            National Police         of the Philippines                                           Commission          Disasters & Calamities
                                                                                                              Peace Process                                                                          Women
                                                                                                                                                                             Sector



                                  Union of Local        League of                              League of                                                           Philippine
                                                                           League of                                                           Philippine                          Gov’t Service          Social
                                   Authorities          Provinces                            Municipalities       Liga ng Mga                                        Health                                                 Lead Private
                                                                          Cities in the                                                       National Red                          Insurance            Security
                                      of the              in the                                 in the            Barangay                                        Insurance                                                Sector Rep.
                                                                          Philippines                                                            Cross                               System              System
                                   Philippines         Philippines                            Philippines                                                            Corp.



                                                       Civil Society                          Civil Society                                                      Civil Society                         Civil Society
                                                    Rep. for Prevention                         Rep. for                                                            Rep. for                             Rep. for
                                                      and Mitigation                           Response                          Office of Civil                 Preparedness                           Recovery
                                                                                                                                    Defense




Summary of Knowledge Briefs 39
                                 Source: World Bank staff, based on the Philippine DRRM Act of 2010 (GoP 2010).
Table 6.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Options for Institutional Arrangements
 Options for
 institutional
 arrangements          Advantages                                              Disadvantages
                       ▼▼ Accelerates coordination and implementation of
                           recovery
                                                                               ▼▼ Potential for rivalry with existing agencies
 Option 1:             ▼▼ Features can be replicated from existing models
                                                                               ▼▼ Can take more time and resources to establish
 Reconstruction            of good practice
 and recovery                                                                  ▼▼ Requires strong central government for support
                       ▼▼ Draws on resources beyond the civil service pool
 agency model                                                                     and authority
                       ▼▼ Focuses on tasks specific to reconstruction,
                                                                               ▼▼ Does not strengthen existing government bodies
                           such as land acquisition and development of
                           reconstruction policy
                                                                               ▼▼ Line agencies will be drawn away from their
                       ▼▼ Strengthens existing government structure and           routine work
                           capacities                                          ▼▼ Requires third-party implementation
 Option 2:
                       ▼▼ Does not create additional competition for
 Line agency                                                                   ▼▼ Will not address reconstruction-specific activities,
                           resources and power                                    such as coordination of off-budget funds,
 model
                       ▼▼ Facilitates transition from reconstruction to           continuous communication with stakeholders
                           longer-term development                                on reconstruction progress, or upholding of
                                                                                  transparency and accountability
                       ▼▼ Has a light structure and can be dissolved after
                           reconstruction
                       ▼▼ Provides additional capacity to line agencies
                                                                               ▼▼ Light structure may not be sufficient to deal with
                           whose capacities and resources will be under
                                                                                  the enormity of the task.
 Option 3:                 immense pressure
 Hybrid model                                                                  ▼▼ May lack the political weight necessary to
                       ▼▼ Provides a single point of responsibility for
                                                                                  coordinate other line agencies or reconstruction
                           managing reconstruction.
                                                                                  actors
                       ▼▼ Can focus on tasks specific to reconstruction,
                           such as land acquisition, development of
                           reconstruction policy, and aid tracking
Source: World Bank/GFDRR staff.


                          for national and international stakeholders, along with additional capacity to implement and expedite
                          delivery of reconstruction deliverables and targets. Option 3, which was used in Indonesia after the
                          2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and in Pakistan following the 2005 earthquake, is desirable when exist-
                          ing government agencies are unlikely to be able to coordinate and implement rapidly an enormous
                          number of additional projects while sustaining routine public services. The temporary agency could
                          have a sunset clause and cease to exist upon the achievement of clear, predefined targets. Alterna-
                          tively, in countries with frequent catastrophic events, the temporary agency, with all its recovery and
                          reconstruction experience, could be retained but be absorbed by an authority responsible for overall
                          disaster risk management. Experience shows that hybrid arrangements can perform or facilitate a
                          number of functions important to sustainable recovery, including the following:

                                  ▼▼   Ensuring adequate planning and implementation capacities. While national-level
                                       planning and land use agencies may have adequate institutional capacities to develop and
                                       implement reconstruction plans and projects to some extent, subnational institutions may
                                       not. The government should consider structuring a comprehensive, long-term program to
                                       strengthen planning and reconstruction capacities at district- and local-level institutions
                                       in affected areas as part of the overall reconstruction plan.


40 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
    ▼▼   Ensuring land supply. Accurate and timely information is necessary for land parcels to be
         made quickly and readily available for reconstruction and redevelopment. After the 2004
         tsunami in Aceh, Indonesia, land mapping and parcel information gathering was quickly
         undertaken at the village level with support from the National Land Agency. A major
         program was also undertaken after the 1999 earthquake in Marmara, Turkey, to update
         and upgrade cadastral information in affected areas.

    ▼▼   Incorporation of disaster risk management into urban and rural planning. Following the
         1999 Marmara earthquake in Turkey, local-level decision makers were targeted by a
         national training program on urban development processes and risk management through
         urban planning and building regulation. A special emphasis was placed on the creation of
         hazard maps and their incorporation into special project zone plans.

    ▼▼   Land readjustment and urban redevelopment. After the 1995 Kobe earthquake in Japan,
         the country’s government initiated a top-down, government-led reconstruction planning
         and implementation process that employed policy instruments to ensure recovery and
         reconstruction took place in a sustainable, well-planned manner and was delivered within
         acceptable time frames. Immediately after the disaster, the national government announced
         a two-month moratorium on reconstruction, which may have enabled more thorough
         planning and policy development to take place. Hyogo prefecture and Kobe city adopted
         complementary restoration plans in this period. These recovery programs included land
         readjustment projects, urban redevelopment projects, and projects for residential areas.

    ▼▼   Active community engagement. After the Kobe earthquake, the Japanese government
         actively engaged affected communities and stakeholders by forming community
         development councils with significant influence on the outputs and outcomes of the urban
         community planning process throughout reconstruction. Similarly, community engagement
         was sought in Tamil Nadu, India, and Aceh, Indonesia.

    ▼▼   Relaxing of planning standards based on local conditions. In China, after the 2008
         Wenchuan earthquake, the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources announced major
         exceptions to policy on land management to streamline and hasten post-disaster land use
         and town-planning reconstruction.


The Roles of Economic Planning Agencies and
Reconstruction Agencies
Another important choice governments face when establishing institutional arrangements is how
to distribute the responsibilities of the national planning agency and a reconstruction agency. As
highlighted above, having a dedicated recovery agency can greatly advance post-disaster recovery
and reconstruction. Since medium-term recovery can offer a chance to align reconstruction
priorities with overall national development objectives, however, the involvement of the national
planning agency in reconstruction is essential. Table 6.2 summarizes the main advantages and
disadvantages of models led by a recovery and reconstruction agency as opposed to a national
planning agency. Table 6.3 provides an overview of the various responsibilities of planning and
reconstruction agencies across the different stages of reconstruction.




                                                                                         Summary of Knowledge Briefs 41
Table 6.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Models Led by Recovery and Reconstruction Agencies
versus National Economic Planning Agencies

                        Advantages                                                Disadvantages
                        ▼▼ Mechanisms to implement reconstruction
 Reconstruction
                        ▼▼ Mandate to implement reconstruction
 and recovery                                                                     ▼▼ Lacks complete knowledge of long-term
                        ▼▼ Capacity to address the scope and magnitude of
 agency–led                                                                          development goals
                           work required
 model
                        ▼▼ Does not have a “business as usual” approach
                        ▼▼ Knowledge of planning objectives                       ▼▼ Institutional inertia can prevent reconstruction
 Economic
                        ▼▼ Knowledge of approval procedures for planning             from being done with urgency.
 planning
                           initiatives                                            ▼▼ May lack implementation capacity and
 agency–led
                        ▼▼ Coordination mechanisms to assist with                    institutional mechanisms to address
 model
                           reconstruction                                            reconstruction needs appropriately
Source: World Bank/GFDRR staff.


Table 6.3 Responsibilities of Recovery and Reconstruction and Planning Agencies during
Reconstruction

 Recovery stage and key outputs                                                   Responsibilities
                         Setting an overall recovery vision that balances,        Economic planning agency: Lead role in
                         and provides optimal tradeoffs between, public           coordinating across sectors and aligning recovery
                         sector and private needs to create a common              vision with long-term development objectives
 Recovery vision
                         recovery vision that includes the views and needs        Reconstruction and recovery agency: Advisory and
                         of communities, government agencies, and the             facilitation role in coordinating with partners and
                         reconstruction agency                                    sharing of good practice
                         Developing and instituting a central framework for       Economic planning agency: Key role in developing
                         creating a set of policies and guiding principles that   and recommending an enabling policy framework to
 Policy setting
                         outline the main goals of recovery and set forth the     implement the vision and in revising existing policies
                         broad parameters of the reconstruction effort            or drafting new ones for legislation
                                                                                  Economic planning agency: Key role in leading
                                                                                  intersectoral prioritization, sequencing needs, and
                         Conducting criteria-based inter- and intrasectoral       securing corresponding financial allocations, and
 Prioritization          prioritization to create a comprehensive                 in matching supply and demand, tracking aid, and
 and financial           prioritization plan to guide sequencing of planned       developing a multiyear recovery financing plan
 planning                and future recovery programs and projects, both          Reconstruction and recovery agency: Secondary
                         within and across sectors                                role in providing impact-proportionate criteria
                                                                                  and data on damage and needs for intrasectoral
                                                                                  prioritization
                         Setting standards and benchmarks through a
                                                                                  Economic planning agency: Advisory role in
                         strategic results framework to guide detailed sector
                                                                                  ensuring synergies and transition between recovery
 Central strategy        recovery strategies to create a central recovery
                                                                                  and regular development agenda
 and results             program and institutional arrangements for central
                                                                                  Reconstruction and recovery agency: Key role in
 framework               oversight and coordination of monitoring and
                                                                                  establishing central programmatic framework and
                         evaluation, budget planning, resource management,
                                                                                  institutional arrangements for integrated recovery
                         staffing, and strategic initiatives
                                                                                  Economic planning agency: Approving authority
                         Designing and implementing of projects and capacity
                                                                                  role for larger projects that are beyond the threshold
                         building to support the design of projects and
                                                                                  of the recovery agency
 Project and             programs for livelihoods restoration, agricultural
                                                                                  Reconstruction and recovery agency: Key role
 program design          recovery, and the reconstruction of houses,
                                                                                  in setting technical standards, any specialized
                         hospitals, schools, and other physical and energy
                                                                                  procurement rules, and approval/clearance of line
                         infrastructure
                                                                                  departments’ project proposals
Source: World Bank/GFDRR staff.


42 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
After the 2005 earthquake, Pakistan’s Earthquake Reconstruction and Recovery Agency (ERRA)
coordinated reconstruction and incorporated long-term development objectives into the recovery
efforts through the appointment of the deputy chairperson of the National Planning Commission
to the ERRA council (ERRA’s apex body). To ensure reconstruction was consistent with economic
planning in the affected areas, the ERRA council also included the ministers of the key line agencies
and the prime ministers of the affected areas. The approach proved successful in smoothly
implementing reconstruction activities that were aligned with planning objectives. However, it is
important to note that success hinged on political backing at the highest levels allowing the ERRA,
as a new institution, to mobilize resources.

Pakistan’s contrasting experience with the 2010 floods offers an example of the challenges
associated with planning agency–led approaches. In this instance, the country’s National Planning
Commission authored the National Flood Reconstruction Plan. However, the planning commission
shared the reconstruction mandate with the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), as
well as a variety of line agencies, which complicated decision making. The planning commission
lacked capacity to appropriately manage the scope and magnitude of the reconstruction efforts
and was missing functioning institutional mechanisms to enable rapid procurement and emergency
budget approvals, which can prove critical in reconstruction. These two models for recovery
planning, implemented in the same country after events that were only five years apart, highlight
the importance of having a standing institutional protocol rather than ad hoc arrangements for
recovery after every disaster.

Indonesia’s successful reconstruction experience following the 2004 tsunami provides a strong
example of good practice. The national planning agency (BAPPENAS) was involved in reconstruction
planning from the very start and led the country’s damage and needs assessment. As reconstruction
activities began, the country followed an institutional setup very similar to that used in Pakistan’s
post-earthquake reconstruction.


Institutional Guidance and Oversight
Because of the speed and quantity of disbursement of funds, the risks to transparency and
accountability in recovery and reconstruction programs are especially high. Ways exist to insulate
programs from these risks, however, or at least to mitigate the risks significantly. Mechanisms
focusing on transparency, accountability, and participation can provide a temporary solution while
the government enacts formal mechanisms.

It is advisable to develop a public grievance or complaint-handling mechanism with its own
embedded monitoring and evaluation system. Participatory and demand-driven mechanisms to
redress grievances are essential to the legitimacy and perceived success of reconstruction programs
and are vital tools in ensuring accountability. Monitoring of such mechanisms must include the
tracking of complaints and follow-up solutions and should also provide real-time feedback and
feed-forward loops.

In addition, the beneficiary community can play a vital role in increasing accountability. A tool that
can be used for this purpose is the social audit. After an implementation process is completed, a
social audit can be conducted to evaluate its success in achieving medium- and long-term objectives.
Ideally, communities should be involved at the planning stages to better assess their needs. However,
this can take a lot of time and may cause competition between partners and communities.




                                                                                             Summary of Knowledge Briefs 43
                       A case study analysis of six countries, including Indonesia and Pakistan, found that oversight and
                       coordination were the central functions of all of the reconstruction institutions developed (whether
                       as agencies, centers, or government committees). Central and federal governments had the strongest
                       representation in these institutions, with varying degrees of representation for local government
                       and international donors.

                       Indonesia’s Reconstruction Agency (BRR) has two oversight boards, one advisory and one
                       supervisory, both appointed by the president. The advisory board oversees reconstruction planning
                       and is composed of seventeen ministers and representatives of regional governments, religious
                       institutions, and civil society. The supervisory board oversees implementation and is composed of
                       nine technical advisers and community and donor organization representatives. In Aceh and Nias,
                       the various local and international NGOs provided oversight and coordination of reconstruction
                       by creating community-driven development working groups under the leadership of local and
                       provincial governments.

                       In Pakistan, reconstruction was led and overseen solely by the federal reconstruction agency,
                       ERRA. There were, however, NGOs and private sector entities acting as implementing partners.
                       Implementation carried out by NGOs was overseen by a program manager who was an employee of
                       ERRA. The divisions of policy planning and approval (the responsibility of the ERRA council) and
                       programmatic planning and implementation (the responsibility of the ERRA board) were replicated
                       at the local levels. At the provincial and state levels, the provincial steering committee was coupled
                       with the Provincial Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (PERRA), and the state
                       steering committee was coupled with the State Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation
                       Authority (SERRA). Similarly, at the district level, reconstruction advisory committees provided
                       work-plan oversight to district reconstruction units with designed programmatic interventions.



                       Endnotes
                       1	 This chapter benefited from contributions by Jaeeun Chung, Jolanta Kryspin-Watson, Ayaz Parvez, Raja Rehan Arshad,
                          Hamzah Saif, Artessa Saldivar-Sali, Zuzana Stanton-Geddes, and Catherine G. Vidar.
                       2	 For details on the roles and responsibilities of the different levels of councils, see the Philippine DRRM Act of 2010 (GoP
                          2010).




44 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Figure 6.3 Map of the Philippines with Administrative Regions




Source: The World Bank/IBRD 33466R4.




                                                                Summary of Knowledge Briefs 45
Students from the newly-repaired Bislig Elementary School, Tanauan City in Leyte province, Philippines on July 13, 2014.
Photo: World Bank

46 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
Conclusion
The recommendations offered in this report highlight the need for the Philippines to take into
account multiple hazards (earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides, as well as typhoons)
in the recovery and reconstruction process, to bring communities, buildings, and infrastructure to
higher multihazard resilience standards. Some of the key messages include the following.

Reconstruction policy and plans should explicitly mandate standards for safe and resilient
buildings and infrastructure and for risk-informed land use planning. Recovery and reconstruction
plans should take into consideration the need to build resilience to the wide range of natural
hazards—geological as well as weather related—to which the Philippines is exposed. Information
about hazards and risk should be openly shared in combination with training and capacity building
to enable its proper use in risk reduction measures.

Construction quality control, enforcement, and training are essential for rebuilding
infrastructure that is resilient. The wind and earthquake provisions mandated by the current
National Structural Code of the Philippines (2010) are to ensure the “Life Safety” level of protection
for most building structures up to a Category 5–equivalent typhoon and a magnitude 8.0 earthquake.
A priority should be to develop and oversee during reconstruction mechanisms for the assurance of
construction quality and enforcement of the NSCP. Experience from Turkey (after the 1999 Marmara
earthquake) and other countries has shown that, on average, an effective inspection program adds
just 1 to 2 percent to overall project costs.

The best housing recovery approach is to identify the desired outcome and give households a
choice of means and support that will speed up normal housing processes—not to create new,
unfamiliar processes. The GoP is well positioned to support a choice of safe recovery paths, which
include the owner-driven self-recovery model as well as the government-driven new construction
programs. The government is responsible for ensuring quality, assessing results, and channeling
resources. Experience from large-scale disasters around the world, including the 2004 Aceh
tsunami and the 2005 Pakistan earthquake, has shown that the in situ household self-recovery and
community-driven reconstruction model is highly effective and costs some 40 percent less than
contractor-built housing. This model is also faster to implement, has a significant economic multiplier
effect, and leads to change in behavior and attitudes and increased resilience, as long as proper
training and oversight are provided. Even for low-income families, most housing is acquired through
the market in normal times, and the goal of recovery should be to get that market working again.
If the housing reconstruction is supported by a variety of agencies and NGOs, these organizations
should work in accordance with standards and practices established by the government and report
results to the governmental entity responsible for reconstruction monitoring and outcome tracking.




                                                                                              Summary of Knowledge Briefs 47
                       For schools, hospitals, emergency evacuation shelters, and municipal buildings, reconstruction
                       and repair are opportunities to implement cost-effective resilience measures and a strong quality
                       control and enforcement mechanism. Particular attention should be paid to developing strategies
                       for operational continuity of critical infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools designated as
                       emergency shelters, during disasters. Roads and bridges serve as lifelines for evacuation and
                       provide access for post-disaster response, and designs should be sufficiently resilient to ensure key
                       routes remain operational and secondary routes can be quickly restored. Roads and bridges should
                       be assigned strategic classifications based on how critical they are for access.

                       While full recovery from a disaster of this scale will take years to conclude, the importance of the
                       planning that guides the implementation cannot be overstated. The advisory services documented
                       in this report provided important contributions to the GoP’s process of post-Haiyan recovery and
                       reconstruction planning. The collection of international best practices represents a multisectoral
                       approach, both to addressing urgent short-term needs and taking medium- and long-term actions to
                       increase the disaster and climate resilience of the country and its communities.




48 Recovery and Reconstruction Planning In the Aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)
References
DPWH (Philippine Department of Public Works and Highways) and World Bank. 2014a. Field Investigation
Report on the Impact of the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Yolanda on Buildings. Washington, DC: World Bank.
       . 2014b. Guidelines for Earthquake and Wind Strengthening and Reconstruction of Public and Cultural
Heritage Buildings: Findings from the Bohol Earthquake and Typhoon Yolanda Assessment. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
GoP (Government of the Philippines). 2010. Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010.
       . 2013. Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda (RAY) Plan.
http://www.gov.ph/downloads/2013/12dec/20131216-RAY.pdf.
Van Trotsenburg, Axel. 2013. “Philippines: Global Lessons for Rebuilding Communities after Yolanda.”
Philippine Daily Inquirer. December 20. http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2013/12/17/global-
lessons-for-rebuilding-communities-after-yolanda.
World Bank. 2013. “Reconstruction after Typhoon Haiyan.” Brief. November 14.http://www.worldbank.org/
en/country/philippines/brief/philippines_reconstruction_after_typhoon_haiyan_yolanda.
       . n.d. “Philippines National Community Driven Development Program.” Project profile.
http://www.worldbank.org/projects/P127741/philippines-national-community-driven-development-
program?lang=en.

Further information

World Bank. 2013. “Philippines: Timely Reconstruction to Lessen Impact of Typhoon Yolanda—World Bank.”
Press release. December 6.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2013/12/06/philippines-reconstruction-impact-typhoon-
yolanda-world-bank.
       . 2013. “Statement on Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines.” November 9.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2013/11/09/world-bank-statement-on-typhoon-haiyan-
philippines
       . 2013. “World Bank Group Increases Package to Nearly $1 Billion in Recovery and Reconstruction
Support to the Philippines.” Press release. November 22. http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
release/2013/11/22/world-bank-group-recovery-support-philippines
       . n.d. “Philippines Building Back Stronger Communities and Infrastructure.” Video.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2013/12/17/philippines-building-back-stronger-homes-and-
communities-after-typhoon-haiyan.
       . n.d. “Philippines: Picking Up the Pieces after Haiyan (Yolanda).” Video.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2014/04/15/philippines-picking-up-the-pieces-after-haiyan-
yolanda.




                                                                                                    Summary of Knowledge Briefs 49
