        Strengthening the
      Citizen-State Compact
        through Feedback:
         Effective Complaint Management as
       a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice
            and Improving State Response




              Summary Assessment Report on
Complaint Handling Mechanisms in the Palestinian Territories
                       Report No: ACS18685
        Strengthening the
      Citizen-State Compact
        through Feedback:
         Effective Complaint Management as
       a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice
            and Improving State Response




              Summary Assessment Report on
Complaint Handling Mechanisms in the Palestinian Territories
                       Report No: ACS18685
Copyright © 2016

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
All rights reserved

Manufactured in the United States of America

Standard Disclaimer
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and con-
clusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in
this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of appli-
cable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The
World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant
permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a
request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax
978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.
                                                                                                                         Contents

Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vii

Acronyms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xi

Executive Summary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xiii

1. Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1

2. Context  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3

3. Methodology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7

4. Key Findings  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
        Face-to-Face Survey—Overall Findings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
        Ministry-by-Ministry Findings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

5. Suggestions for Improvement  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 77
        Cross-Cutting Areas for Improvement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
        Specific Recommendations for the Ministry of Social Development  . . . . . . . . 81
        Specific Recommendations for the Ministry of Education and
        	     Higher Education  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
        Specific Recommendations for the Ministry of Local Government  . . . . . . . . . . 83
        Specific Recommendations for the Palestinian Land Authority  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
        Specific Recommendations for the Ministry of Health  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
        Specific Recommendations for the Directorate General of Complaints  . . . . . 87

6. Next Steps  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 89

References  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 91

Appendix A. Survey Instruments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 93




                                                                                    iii
iv   Contents




     Boxes
     3.1	 User Survey Topics................................................................................................... 9
     4.1	 Key Findings .......................................................................................................... 12
     4.2	 Improving Citizen Engagement in the Ministry of Social
            Development’s Cash Transfer Program................................................................ 48
     4.3	 Recent Interventions by the Ministry of Education and Higher
            Education to Improve Complaint Resolution...................................................... 53
     4.4	 Complaint Resolution through One-Stop Shops in Ramallah
            Municipality............................................................................................................ 62
     4.5	 Improved Customer Relations Leads to Improved Service Provision:
            Complaint Handling at the Palestinian Medical Complex in Ramallah............. 72

     Figures
     2.1	 Complaint Handling Architecture in the West Bank and Gaza............................ 6
     3.1	 Grievance Redress/Complaints Handling Mechanism Value Chain ................... 8
     4.1	 S1_1—How did you learn about the complaint unit in the ministry?................ 17
     4.2	 S1_2—Have you filed your complaint to another party before heading
            to the ministry? ...................................................................................................... 18
     4.3	 S1_2a—Why did you file your complaint to another party?............................... 19
     4.4	 S1_2b—With whom did you file your complaint?............................................... 20
     4.5	 S1_3—Do you agree with the statement: You have previous information
            about the procedures for filing a complaint?...................................................... 21
     4.6	 S1_4—Did you seek help from an employee or an official from outside
            the ministry to follow up on your complaint? ..................................................... 22
     4.7	 S1_5—If your answer to the previous question (S1_4) is yes, why did
            you seek help?........................................................................................................ 23
     4.8	 S1_6—If you are not satisfied with the result of your complaint, will you
            appeal the decision? ............................................................................................. 24
     4.9	 S1_6/S1_6a—If you are not satisfied with the result of your complaint,
            and if you are not appealing the decision, why not?.......................................... 25
     4.10	 S2_1—Do you know about the complaint unit of the ministry? ........................ 26
     4.11	 S2_2—If you encounter a problem with the ministry regarding a
            service you requested or a right you are entitled to, would you file
            a complaint with the complaint unit?................................................................... 26
     4.12	 S2_3—Have you ever had a problem receiving service from the
            ministry and resorted to a party other than the ministry’s complaint
            unit for recourse?................................................................................................... 27
                                                                                                                   Contents      v




4.13	 S2_3a—If the answer is yes (to S2_3), was the complaint
      handled/solved?.................................................................................................... 28
4.14	 S2_4—If you do not want to file a complaint with the ministry, would you file it
      with another party?................................................................................................ 28
4.15	 S2_4a—If yes to S2_4, with what party would you file a complaint?................. 29
4.16	 S2_5— If you do not want to file a complaint with the ministry, why not?........ 30
4.17	 2—How did you file your complaint to the ministry?.......................................... 32
4.18	 4—Do you agree with the statement: The complaints unit clearly
      informed you of the procedures and follow-up mechanisms involved
      in filing a complaint. ............................................................................................. 33
4.19	 4_1—If the answer to question 4 is disagree or strongly disagree, why?......... 34
4.20	 5—Do you agree with the statement: The unit team treated you
      respectfully, neutrally, and without discrimination? ........................................... 35
4.21	 5_1—If the answer to question 5 is disagree or strongly disagree, why?......... 36
4.22	 6—Do you agree with the statement: It was easy to reach the complaint
      unit and inquire about the procedures for complaint handling........................ 37
4.23	 6_1— If the answer to question 6 is disagree or strongly disagree, why?........ 38
4.24	 7_7—Do you agree with the statement: The complaint unit provided
      you with all information about your inquiry of handling a complaint?.............. 39
4.25	 8—Do you agree with the statement: Your complaint was handled in
      a reasonable time? ................................................................................................ 39
4.26	 9—Do you agree with the statement: The unit employee informed you
      of the result of the complaint? ............................................................................. 40
4.27	 9_1—If the answer to question 9 is yes, how were you informed?.................... 41
4.28	 10—If the answer to question 9 is no, when you revisited the unit,
      was it easy to find your file and receive a quick response? ............................... 42
4.29	 11—Did you ask any ministry employee or official to follow-up on
      your complaint? ..................................................................................................... 42
4.30	 12—Did you seek help from an employee or an official from outside
      the ministry to follow up on your complaint? ..................................................... 43
4.31	 13—In general, are you satisfied with the result of your complaint? ................ 43
4.32	 15—If a problem relating to the ministry’s services reoccurs, would
      you file it with the complaint unit? ...................................................................... 44
4.33	 15_1—If the answer to question 15 is No, why?.................................................. 44
4.34	 16—If you encounter another problem and do not wish to file your
      complaint with the ministry, to whom would you direct your complaint?......... 45
4.35	 17—What actions would you recommend to improve the complaint
      unit’s performance and effectiveness?................................................................. 46
Tables
1	    Summary of Key Findings......................................................................................xvi
3.1	 Number of Survey Respondents........................................................................... 10
4.1	 Complaints Received by Complaint Units in the West Bank............................. 15
                               Acknowledgments

This summary assessment report intends to capture key findings and sug-
gestions for improvement that have emerged from the technical assis-
tance “Strengthening Complaint Handling Mechanisms in the Palestinian
Territories.” The World Bank team for the technical assistance comprises
Sanjay Agarwal (task team leader), Saki Kumagai, Samira Hillis, Pierre Messali,
Warren Van Wicklin, Hélène Pfeil, Alfredo Gonzalez-Briseno, Suha Rabah, and
Maha Bali. The primary authors of this report are Hélène Pfeil, Saki Kumagai,
and Sanjay Agarwal, with invaluable support from Alfredo Gonzalez-Briseno.

The Bank team would like to express its sincere appreciation to Steen
Jorgensen, Ranjana Mukherjee, Mark Ahern, Bjorn Philipp, and Alexandra
Pugachevsky from the West Bank and Gaza Country Management Unit for
their strategic and timely guidance. The team is grateful to Jeff Thindwa and
Keith McLean of the Governance Global Practice for their inputs and sugges-
tions. The encouragement, patience, and support of Task Team Leaders Samira
Hillis, Lina Abdallah, and Bjorn Philipp made the technical assistance possible.

The team also appreciates the invaluable comments and inputs of Dana
Almubaied, Zubair Bhatti, Abel Bove, Emmanuel Cuvillier, Mona el-Chami,
Hélène Grandvoinnet, Gustavo Ezequiel Miranda, Tatiana Tassoni, and Lina
Tutunji.

The team is much obliged to the Coalition for Accountability and Integrity
(AMAN), the Palestinian chapter of Transparency International, for carrying
out an in-depth survey of complainants—an integral part of this report—
and for sharing valuable insights. Most findings in this report are based on
the background report: “Status, Effectiveness and Efficiency of Palestinian
Complaint Units,” submitted by AMAN in May 2016, which summarizes the
results of the survey. The team would especially like to thank Hama Zidan,
Isam Haj Hussein, and Majdi Abu Zaid from AMAN for their efforts.




                                       vii
viii   Acknowledgments




       It would not have been possible to complete his report without contribu-
       tions from colleagues in the Palestinian Territories and beyond who pro-
       vided inputs toward identifying strengths and challenges regarding the
       current complaint handling mechanisms in the West Bank and Gaza and
       who shared invaluable insights, captured in the findings and suggestions
       for improvement in this report. The team would like to express their deep
       gratitude to His Excellency Salah Elayan, Acting Cabinet Secretary General
       of the Council of Ministers, and Kamel Al Rimawi, Director General of the
       Complaints Department of the Council of Ministers, for their leadership and
       constant support, particularly with regard to organizing launch and validation
       workshops. The team thanks Faiq Al Deek, Chairman of the High Council
       for Public Procurement, and Daoud Deek, Assistant Deputy Minister of the
       Ministry of Social Development, for their invaluable time and insights.

       The team is very grateful to Siham Hamdan, Head of Complaint Unit,
       Ministry of Social Development (formerly known as the Ministry of Social
       Affairs); Ahmad R. A. Hindi, Head of Complaint Unit, Ministry of Education
       and Higher Education; Jihad Badawi, Head of Complaint Unit, Ministry of
       Health; Mohammed Muhaisen, Head of Complaint Unit, Ministry of Local
       Governance; and Anas Ahmad, Head of Complaint Unit, Palestinian Land
       Authority. The team thanks Tahani Madhoun, former Coordinator of the Cash
       Transfer Program, Ministry of Social Development; Ayman Sawalha, Project
       Coordinator for the Cash Transfer Program, Ministry of Social Development;
       Fadi Hamad, Project Director, Project Coordination Unit, Health System
       Resiliency Strengthening Project, Ministry of Health; Suha Khalilli, Director,
       Project Coordination Unit, Teacher Education Improvement Project, Ministry
       of Education and Higher Education; Hazem Kawasmi, Acting Director
       General, Municipal Development and Lending Fund and his team; Sahar
       Jallad, Advisor and the Second Land Administration Project Director,
       Palestinian Land Authority; and Ghadir Ismail, Director, Coordination and
       Projects Management, Council of Ministers. The team also thanks the devel-
       opment partners for taking the time to meet with the Bank team during its
       missions.

       The team would also like to thank Laura Johnson for her excellent editorial
       support.
                                                                   Acknowledgments   ix




This technical assistance was funded by the Norwegian Government through
the Norway West Bank and Gaza Support Trust Fund (NWBG–TF), which
finances activities in support of the World Bank’s analytical and strategic pro-
gram in the West Bank and Gaza. The team/authors would like to express
their gratitude to the Norwegian Government for this important and timely
contribution.
                                                 Acronyms

AMAN	   Coalition for Accountability and Integrity
	       (Palestinian chapter of Transparency International)

CMS 	   complaint management system

DGC	    Directorate General of Complaints

MIS	    management information system

NGO	    nongovernmental organization

PMC	    Palestinian Medial Complex




                                   xi
                            Executive Summary

             “Leadership is to have the humility to continue
                  to get feedback and to try to get better.”
                                      n Jim   Yong Kim, World Bank President, April 2014


The Palestinian Authority is committed to improving state-citizen rela-
tions through various mechanisms, including complaints resolution. The
Regulation on Complaints (No. 6), issued in 2009 by the Council of Ministers
of the Palestinian Authority, establishes an internal system for handling citi-
zen complaints based on rights-based approaches. It provides for the estab-
lishment of the Directorate General of Complaints (DGC) in the Council of
Ministers and outlines the role, mandate, and procedures of complaint units
in Palestinian ministries. As a result, 56 units have been established in various
ministries and governorates to receive complaints regarding programs and
services implemented by their ministries.

This technical assistance, undertaken at the request of the DGC, seeks
to strengthen the complaint handling mechanisms of the DGC and five
Palestinian ministries or government entities supported by World Bank-
financed projects: the Ministry of Social Development (formerly called the
Ministry of Social Affairs), the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education
and Higher Education, the Ministry of Local Government, and the Palestinian
Land Authority. It resonates with the World Bank’s commitment to include
beneficiary feedback in 100 percent of projects with clearly identified ben-
eficiaries, as defined in the “Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen
Engagement in World Bank Group Operations” (World Bank 2014). Complaint
handling mechanisms help empower citizens and integrate their voices into
programs. The inclusion in 2014 of an indicator on complaints handling—the
percentage of registered grievances resolved—in the World Bank Corporate
Scorecard is catalyzing the integration of complaint handling mechanisms in
Bank projects and their results frameworks.



                                       xiii
xiv   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
      Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




      Activities included a preliminary assessment of complaint handling mecha-
      nisms in the five priority ministries, a formulation of initial recommendations
      for improving them, a survey of complainants and others who either have or
      may use the complaint handling mechanisms in the five target ministries, sup-
      port for the elaboration of ministry-specific action plans, several workshops,
      and a study tour for the Ministry of Social Development staff to learn from the
      complaint handling mechanism established as part of Pantawid Pamilya, the
      Philippine government’s flagship conditional cash transfer program.

      This summary report synthesizes key findings from the technical assis-
      tance and formulates ministry-specific recommendations. It forms the
      basis of the project’s potential second phase, which would support the
      implementation of the recommendations. The report presents the innovative
      methodology used to bring together demand- and supply-side perspectives
      on complaint handling mechanisms in target ministries, important survey
      and ministry-by-ministry assessment findings, key suggestions for improve-
      ment, and next steps.

      Several interesting findings emerge. In over half of the cases, information
      about the complaint unit was provided by a source other than a ministry; cit-
      izens often turned to third parties to voice complaints and inquire about the
      complaint handling process; and the public was generally aware of the pro-
      cedures to file a complaint. According to the survey results, the key barriers
      to complaint submission are perceived bureaucracy, the need for technical
      and legal advice, the frequent occurrence of personal mediation, and lim-
      ited trust in the performance of the government. These barriers also impact
      citizens’ readiness to appeal the results of the complaint handling process.
      There is a fairly widespread willingness among dissatisfied complainants
      to appeal the results of the complaint handling process, but at the same
      time, many citizens express reluctance because of the system’s reputation for
      being corrupt, slow, and untrustworthy.

      Overall, the behavior by complaint unit staff toward complainants
      appears to be respectful, neutral, and nondiscriminatory, but there has
      been some criticism with regard to preferential treatment and gender dis-
      crimination. In addition, citizens often perceive the communications about
      procedures, follow-up mechanisms, and results by complaint unit staff as
      unclear or not straightforward. In the Gaza Strip, complainants did not think
                                                                     1. Introduction   xv




the physical facilities for complaint submission were suited for their purpose,
and complained about missing or overly complex grievance forms provided
by the ministry. Satisfaction rates regarding complaint resolution outcomes
and the timeliness of handling complaints are quite low. Table 1 summarizes
key findings and how they relate to good practices in the area of complaint
handling mechanisms.

This technical assistance identified several areas that need improvement
in the existing complaint handling processes of the DGC, the four minis-
tries, and the Palestinian Land Authority. All entities requested additional
staff, equipment, furniture, and automobiles. Key suggestions for building
trust and confidence among citizens in the ministry’s complaint handling
mechanisms include: clarifying the roles and responsibilities of the complaint
unit relative to other departments within the ministry and of the complaint
units compared with the Directorate General of Complaints; improving citi-
zen awareness programs regarding complaint procedures; simplifying busi-
ness processes and creating ministry-specific guidelines; fast-tracking the
rollout of the complaint management system that would allow for online
complaint submission; building staff capacity for those involved in complaint
resolution; and measuring complainant satisfaction through short surveys.
Given the evident resource constraints, both financial and human, it will be
crucial to prioritize these areas, mobilize internal and external resources
from within the ministry and from development partners, and then imple-
ment relevant actions. The example of the Ministry of Education and Higher
Education clearly indicates that complaint units can take a number of actions
internally (box 4.3). Similarly, lessons from the complaint handling mecha-
nism of the Ramallah Medical Complex can easily be scaled up (box 4.5).
Such commendable initiatives should be further encouraged.

The technical assistance has generated a great deal of interest among
the relevant ministries, the DGC, and development partners. A second
phase would allow for follow-up efforts to support the target ministries and
the DGC in applying the assessment recommendations and expanding the
activities to other ministries. Subject to the availability of funds, possible
activities to consider include a technical assessment of the complaint man-
agement system and support for its strengthening and rollout; sensitization
regarding complaint handling mechanisms for the senior management of all
target ministries; technical, and to the best extent possible financial, support
xvi   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
      Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




      to the target ministries for implementing the suggestions for improvement
      and their action plans; capacity development of staff of complaint units to
      improve the management of citizen complaints and to use a management
      information system; development of communications material for each
      ministry—internally for ministry staff and externally for complaint handling
      mechanism users; and, subject to the availability of funds, an expansion of
      strengthening activities for complaint handling mechanism to an additional
      five ministries.




      Table 1. Summary of Key Findings

       Good Practice                  Key Findings
       Citizens know about    •	 In the West Bank, an average of 4–6 people out of 10 were
       the complaint handling    aware of the complaint unit’s existence. In the Gaza Strip,
       mechanism.                between 6 and 7 people out of 10 were aware of it.
                                      •	 The public is generally aware of the procedures to file a
                                         complaint. Over two-thirds of respondents were aware of
                                         the procedures to file a complaint with a complaint unit,
                                         except in the case of the Palestinian Land Authority in the
                                         West Bank.
                                      •	 In over half of the cases, information about the complaint
                                         unit was provided by a source other than a ministry.
       Citizens trust the             •	 Citizens often turn to third parties to voice their
       complaint handling                complaints and inquire about the complaint handling
       mechanism.                        process.
                                      •	 Low trust in government performance is a factor that
                                         prevents citizens from submitting complaints to a
                                         complaint unit.
       Barriers to complaint          •	 Key barriers to complaint submission are perceived
       submission are low.               bureaucracy, the need for technical and legal advice, and
                                         the frequent use of personal mediation.
                                      •	 Complainants in the Gaza Strip did not feel that the
                                         physical facilities for complaint submission were suited
                                         for their purpose and highlighted that the forms at the
                                         ministry were sometimes missing or overly complex.
                                                                                                    (continued)
                                                                              1. Introduction   xvii




Table 1. Continued

Good Practice           Key Findings
The complaint           •	 Citizens often think that communication about
handling mechanism         procedures, follow-up mechanisms, and results by
informs users about        complaint unit staff is not clear or straightforward.
procedures, follow-up   •	 In the West Bank, 34.8–62.5 percent of complainants
mechanisms, and            found it easy to reach the complaint unit to inquire
results.                   about complaint handling procedures. In the Gaza Strip,
                           50.8–66.0 percent found it easy.
                        •	 In the West Bank, 13.0–62.5 percent of complainants
                           agreed that the complaint unit clearly informed them
                           of the procedures and follow-up mechanisms linked to
                           complaints. In the Gaza Strip, 63.8–72.5 percent agreed.
                           Complainants who were unclear about procedures and
                           follow-up mechanisms tended to blame uncooperative
                           complaint unit employees.
                        •	 A significant percentage of respondents were seeking
                           help outside the ministry in order to get updated
                           information on the status of their complaints.
                        •	 Complainants were not systematically informed about
                           the results of their complaints.
The complaint           •	 Overall satisfaction rates with the timeliness of handling
handling mechanism         complaints remains fairly low, although they are
is quick.                  systematically higher in the Gaza Strip than in the
                           West Bank.
Good Practice           Key Findings
The complaint           •	 Satisfaction rates with complaint resolution outcomes
handling mechanism         are quite low in the West Bank (the highest satisfaction
is effective.              rate is 37.5 percent for the Palestinian Land Authority; the
                           lowest is 12.3 percent for the Ministry of Health). Rates are
                           relatively higher in the Gaza Strip—34.5 percent for the
                           Ministry of Social Development and 79.2 percent for the
                           Ministry of Health.
                        •	 There is a fairly widespread willingness among dissatisfied
                           complainants to appeal the results of the complaint
                           handling process (over half would do so), but at the same
                           time, many expressed reluctance because of the system’s
                           reputation for being corrupt, slow, and untrustworthy.
The complaint han-     •	 Overall, behavior by complaint unit staff toward complain-
dling mechanism treats    ants seems to be respectful, neutral, and nondiscrimina-
all users equally.        tory, but some complained of preferential treatment and
                          gender discrimination.
                                           1. Introduction

The objective of this technical assistance, undertaken at the request of
the Complaints Directorate of the Cabinet Secretariat, is to strengthen
the complaint handling mechanisms of five Palestinian ministries and
government entities supported by World Bank-financed projects: the
Ministry of Social Development (formerly called the Ministry of Social Affairs),
the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and Higher Education,
the Ministry of Local Government, the Palestinian Land Authority, and the
Complaints Directorate.

The technical assistance resonates with the World Bank’s commitment to
include beneficiary feedback in 100 percent of projects with clearly iden-
tified beneficiaries, as defined in “Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming
Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group Operations” (World Bank 2014).
Complaint handling mechanisms help empower citizens and integrate
their voices into programs. The inclusion of an indicator on complaint han-
dling—the percentage of registered grievances resolved—in the World Bank
Corporate Scorecard in 2014 is catalyzing the integration of complaint han-
dling mechanisms in Bank projects and their results frameworks.

The technical assistance also aligns with the focus on strengthening
the citizen-state compact specified in the World Bank Group’s 2015/16
Assistance Strategy for the West Bank and Gaza. Reflecting the Palestinian
Authority’s priorities as expressed in its National Development Plan, the
strategy’s first pillar is to “strengthen the institutions of a future state to
ensure service delivery to citizens.” The proposed outcome 1.2 is “increased
transparency and accountability in service delivery.” With its emphasis on
state- and institution-building, the strategy also builds on the governance
elements present in the Middle East and North Africa regional strategy. The
technical assistance aligns well with these outcomes.




                                       1
2   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
    Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




    Activities undertaken as part of this effort have included: a preliminary
    assessment of the complaint handling mechanisms in the five priority min-
    istries;1 the formulation of initial recommendations for improving them; a
    survey of complainants and others who have or may use a complaint han-
    dling mechanism in one of the five target ministries; support for the expan-
    sion of ministry-specific action plans; several workshops; and a study tour for
    Ministry of Social Development staff to learn from the complaint handling
    mechanism established as part of Pantawid Pamilya, the Philippine govern-
    ment’s flagship conditional cash transfer program.

    This summary report synthesizes key findings from the technical assis-
    tance and formulates ministry-specific recommendations. It forms the
    basis of a possible second phase for the project, which would support the
    implementation of recommendations. The following sections describe the
    context, the methodology used to bring together demand- and supply-side
    perspectives on complaint handling mechanisms in the target ministries, the
    key findings from the survey and the ministry-by-ministry assessments, key
    suggestions for improvement, and recommended next steps.




    1. The Ministry of Social Development’s complaint handling mechanism was not evaluated as part of
    the May 2015 mission because a rapid assessment had already been conducted during an implementa-
    tion support mission in May 2014 for the World Bank-assisted cash transfer program, which had led the
    Ministry of Social Development to start implementing several of the earlier recommendations.
                                                                         2. Context


The Palestinian Authority was established in the West Bank and Gaza
shortly after the Oslo Accords of 1993. It assumed civilian responsibility
for most Palestinian residents, but its security powers were limited to the
major urban centers. Israel maintained full control of large tracts of land
around settlements and primary movement axes, leaving 61 percent of the
West Bank—Area C2—outside the Palestinian Authority’s reach. Under the
Oslo Accords, this arrangement was intended to be a temporary measure, to
be replaced with a final-status agreement by the year 2000, but it still remains
in force. Several peace processes have been initiated but, to date, none have
succeeded.

In November 2012, the United Nations voted in favor of the Palestinian
Authority’s application to be a nonmember observer state. This opened
the door for the Palestinian Authority to apply for membership in a number
of United Nations agencies, but the positive vote put additional strain on its
relations with Israel. The United States facilitated Palestinian–Israeli peace
talks restarted in mid-2013. By the end of March 2014, the peace talks began
to stall. After Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas forged a unity pact with
Hamas, which forms the de facto authority in Gaza, Israel suspended its par-
ticipation in the talks.

In May 2014, a formal unity government was created between Fatah
and Hamas, but it has been severely strained, particularly by violence
that erupted in Gaza in July–August 2014 and by the hostility of both parties
toward one another. The “consensus government” is composed of a cabi-
net of technocrats unaffiliated with any political party, who are endorsed by
both Fatah and Hamas. In practice, the ruling power is split into two separate
administrations: (i) the Fatah-led Palestinian Authority, which rules the West


2. The West Bank is divided into three zones: Areas A, B, and C. The land in Area A is entirely controlled
by the Palestinian Authority. Area B is under Palestinian civil authority but is controlled by Israeli military
forces. Area C is under complete Israeli authority.
                                                     3
4   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
    Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




    Bank Area A and has civil control over Area B; and (ii) the Hamas govern-
    ment, which is de facto administering the Gaza Strip since the violent conflict
    between Fatah and Hamas in 2007, which led to the expulsion of officials
    affiliated with Fatah from the Gaza Strip and to Hamas taking control of the
    area. Governance arrangements and service delivery in Gaza are complicated
    by the existence of two distinct public service providers—one funded and
    managed by the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah, the other by the Hamas
    administration. At the end of 2015, Gaza’s unemployment rate was 38 per-
    cent—twice that of the West Bank—including a particularly high rate of youth
    unemployment in 2015. Poverty rates were at 39 percent in 2014—nearly 2.5
    times higher than that of the West Bank. Since June 2007, the movement of
    all people and goods in and out of Gaza has been restricted by Israel and
    Egypt. The July–August 2014 conflict in Gaza prompted a humanitarian and
    economic crisis. At the current pace of recovery, the Gaza economy is not
    expected to rebound to its pre-war level until 2018. According to the United
    Nation’s Relief and Works Agency, almost 80 percent of Gaza’s population of
    around 1.8 million currently depends on aid. The West Bank fares better than
    Gaza, but by late 2015, 19 percent of the West Bank’s population (estimated
    at 2.8 million in July 2015) was unemployed, and 15 percent lived below the
    poverty line. The persistence of administrative, trade, movement, and access
    restrictions has had a dampening effect on private investment and private
    sector activity.

    The Palestinian Authority is committed to improving state–citizen rela-
    tions through various mechanisms, including complaints resolution. The
    Regulation on Complaints (No. 6), issued in 2009 by the Palestinian Authority’s
    Council of Ministers, establishes an internal system for handling citizen com-
    plaints based on rights-based approaches. The regulation provides for the
    establishment of a Directorate General of Complaints (DGC) in the Council
    of Ministers. It also outlines the role, mandate, and procedures of complaint
    units in Palestinian ministries. As a result, 56 complaint units were established
    in various ministries and governorates. These units receive complaints about
    programs and services being implemented by their ministries. According to
    the regulation, the DGC is responsible for supervising all complaint units.
                                                                         2. Context   5




The regulation sets timeframes for units to resolve complaints. A com-
plaint unit has three days to accept or reject a complaint and two weeks to
resolve it. If that amount of time is insufficient, the unit informs the com-
plainant, and it is allowed to take up to one month to resolve the issue.

The activities of the Directorate General of Complaints are focused on
solving complaints and providing support to the complaint units of min-
istries and other entities. According to the regulation, the DGC’s duties
are to: (i) receive complaints from public institutions and organizations; (ii)
review each case and discuss it with relevant parties to find solutions or send
it to court if a solution cannot be reached through legal negotiations; and (iii)
coordinate with the General Administration for Legal Affairs to follow up on
complaints about ministries not implementing Supreme Court decisions. The
DGC handles complaints referred to it and appeals of complaints that min-
istry and lower-level complaint units cannot resolve. The DGC also receives
complaints from citizens directly; provides training to complaint units about
how to run their units; develops procedures and bylaws on complaint han-
dling; receives quarterly reports from ministry complaint units; and produces
quarterly and annual reports for the Prime Minister’s Office. The DGC moni-
tors and evaluates complaint units with a focus on problems or delays in the
resolution of complaints. The DGC makes direct recommendations to the
Prime Minister’s Office, but its authority over ministry complaint units is lim-
ited. Given the DGC’s strategic position in the Council of Ministers, several
of its recommendations to the Prime Minister’s Office have been positively
received. Its recommendations generally focus on suggesting amendments
to laws or regulations impeding the resolution of complaints. Ministry com-
plaint units are accountable to their respective ministries, but they also report
to the DGC.

The DGC is developing an electronic complaint management system.
Once operational, it will provide ministry complaint units with a comprehen-
sive database to replace the current system based on hard copies of com-
plaints. The new system will allow for the online submission of complaints
as well as for the anonymous submission of complaints. It is expected to
improve complaint processing and tracking and allow for a broader analy-
sis of complaints statistics (e.g., percentage of complaints resolved by each
ministry and areas where complaints are most frequent).
6   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
    Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




    Figure 2.1.
    Complaint Handling Architecture in the West Bank and Gaza

                                                      Prime Minister’s
                                                          Office
                    Intraministerial reporting
                    Interministerial reporting
                                                                              Directorate General
                    Complaint unit report                                        for Complaints




                                      Ministry of                            Ministry of
            Ministry of                                 Ministry of                                   Palestinian
                                    Education and                              Local
           Social Affairs                                Health                                     Land Authority
                                   Higher Education                         Government

             Minister                   Minister         Minister              Minister                Minister


                                     Ministry of
            Ministry of                                Ministry of           Ministry of              Palestinian
                                    Education and
           Social Affairs                                Health           Local Government          Land Authority
                                   Higher Education
          Complaint Unit                              Complaint Unit       Complaint Unit           Complaint Unit
                                    Complaint Unit


            Regional                   Regional         Regional              Regional              Settlement and
           Directorates               Directorates     Directorates          Directorates            Field Offices




    Source: Authors.




    The technical assistance supports the DGC and five selected ministries
    and nonministerial entities in strengthening their complaint handling
    mechanism. The World Bank portfolio in the Palestinian Territories com-
    prises 25 active projects and 15 pipeline projects.3 Based on the West Bank’s
    institutional mandate on grievance redress and the Palestinian Authority’s
    commitment and efforts to address complaints from Palestinian citizens, the
    World Bank decided to support the Complaints Directorate in strengthen-
    ing its complaints resolution procedures in five selected ministries and other
    entities that the World Bank is already directly supporting through projects.
    An integrated approach toward strengthening the Palestinian Authority’s
    complaint handling mechanism is likely to result in increased cost savings,
    improved and sustained technical support, greater efficiency and effective-
    ness, and better project implementation. Figure 2.1. schematizes relation-
    ships and reporting lines between the various actors involved in complaint
    handling mechanisms who were directly or indirectly targeted by the techni-
    cal assistance.


    3. According to data from the operational portal on February 26, 2015.
                                    3. Methodology


This technical assistance adopted an innovative methodology by com-
bining demand- and supply-side approaches in analyzing complaint
handling mechanisms. Identifying and including the perspectives of the
government as well as citizens regarding the functioning of the complaint
handling mechanisms was considered essential. Indeed, demand for good
governance initiatives can succeed only when they take into account the will-
ingness and capacity of the government to be held accountable and of the
citizens to demand accountability (Agarwal and Van Wicklin 2012).

A preliminary analysis (World Bank 2015) regarding the supply side was
performed for each ministry using the Grievance Redress/Complaint
Handling Mechanism Value Chain framework for analysis (figure 3.1.).

Every step of the grievance/complaint management process addresses dif-
ferent questions, including:

•	 Uptake. How is the grievance collected? At how many locations and
   through what channels?

•	 Sorting and processing. How is the grievance categorized, logged, and
   prioritized? Who is it referred to? How is the complaint addressed?

•	 Acknowledgment and follow up. Does the complainant receive an
   acknowledgment of submitting a grievance? How are they provided prog-
   ress updates? Are complainants informed of the timeline and process to
   address their concerns?

•	 Verifying, investigating, and acting. How is information about the com-
   plaint gathered in order to resolve it? How is it resolved? How does it
   escalate to higher levels?

                                      7
8   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
    Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




    Figure 3.1.
    Grievance Redress/Complaints Handling Mechanism Value Chain


         Uptake             Sort       Acknowledge               Verify,       Monitor
                                                                                                 Provide
     (locations and         and             and               investigate,       and
                                                                                                feedback
        channels)         process        follow up              and act        evaluate




    Source: Post and Agarwal 2012.



    •	 Monitoring and evaluation. How does management track the com-
       plaint? Is grievance data analyzed? Does management get regular reports
       on grievance receipt and resolution trends? Is complaint-gathering an
       agenda item in management meetings?

    •	 Providing feedback. Are complainants informed of the action(s) taken
       regarding their grievance? How? Is information on the complaint and the
       action(s) taken made available to other citizens and beneficiaries?

    Supply-side perspectives were obtained through interactions with gov-
    ernment officials. Two missions were undertaken as part of the technical
    assistance: May 18–29, 2015, and February 8–18, 2016. The first mission
    focused on meetings with complaint unit staff in the four relevant ministries,
    the Palestinian Land Authority, and the Directorate General of Complaints
    (DGC) as well as with beneficiary groups, regional offices, and others. It
    closed with a half-day validation workshop, which brought the heads of the
    six complaint units together, giving them an opportunity to share strengths,
    challenges, concerns, and experiences about complaint handling mecha-
    nisms and to identify priority actions to strengthen them.

    Demand-side perspectives were obtained from a survey of complainants
    and from focus group discussions with program beneficiaries. Because of
    its pertinent experience and existing relationships with the relevant ministries,
    the Coalition for Accountability and Integrity (AMAN), the Palestinian branch
    of Transparency International, was selected to carry out the survey of citizen
    experiences and perceptions regarding complaint units and complaint han-
    dling procedures. Meetings and focus group discussions with program bene-
    ficiaries, parent and beneficiary councils, and nongovernmental organizations
    provided deeper insights, supplementing the findings of the survey.
                                                                                            3. Methodology    9




   Box 3.1. User Survey Topics

   •	 Awareness of the complaint unit
   •	 Knowledge about method for filing complaint at ministry
   •	 Other nonministerial parties to which citizens filed complaints
   •	 Information about procedures to file a complaint and about follow-up
       mechanisms
   •	 Treatment by complaint unit (respectful, neutral, and nondiscriminatory)
   •	 Ease of access to complaint unit and inquiry about complaint handling
       procedures
   •	 Provision of information on handling of grievance by complaint unit
   •	 Timeliness in resolving complaint
   •	 Communication to complainant regarding outcome of grievance
   •	 Ease of follow-up
   •	 Satisfaction with resolution
   •	 Appeals
   •	 Suggestions for improvement


The survey examined several aspects of complaint handling mechanisms,
including awareness of the complaint unit, knowledge of methods to file
complaints, timeliness of the process, ease of follow-up, and satisfaction with
outcomes (box 3.1). There was a face-to-face exit survey of visitors to the five
target ministries (sample size: 1,656) and a telephone survey targeting individ-
uals who had submitted complaints (sample size: 635). The latter were identi-
fied from the databases available at the four target ministries and Palestinian
Land Authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip (table 3.1),4 but because
most complainants prefer to verbally air their grievances rather than sub-
mit them in writing, most grievances are not registered. In order to account
for the nonregistered grievances, the face-to-face exit survey included non-
complainants; focus group discussions were held; and interviews were con-
ducted with Parents Council members for the Ministry of Education and
Higher Education, Beneficiary Council members for the Ministry of Social
Development, complainants who approached the AMAN office and agreed


4. Databases were made available by all of the complaint units of the ministries and the Palestinian Land
Authority in the West Bank. In the Gaza Strip, databases were provided by the complaint units of all minis-
tries, but in the cases of the Palestinian Land Authority and the Ministry of Social Development, they were
made available by the internal audit units.
10   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     to take part in focus group discussions, and the Independent Human Rights
     Commission. Finally, there were meetings and interviews with officials from
     the four target ministries and the Palestinian Land Authority from the com-
     plaint units as well as the public relations, legal, administrative, and internal
     audit departments; with hospital administrators from the Ministry of Health
     in Ramallah; with Ramallah and Gaza municipality officials; and with lawyers.

     Key findings and suggestions were discussed and refined at a valida-
     tion workshop. The second mission closed with a workshop that brought
     together officials from the four ministries, the Palestinian Land Authority,
     and the DGC. It included progress updates by representatives from partic-
     ipating ministries and broadly validated the findings of the AMAN survey.
     Participants identified priority actions to further improve their complaint han-
     dling mechanisms over the next 6–9 months.



     Table 3.1.
     Number of Survey Respondents
                                                             Number of Respondents
                                         Face-to-face       Face-to-face          Phone              Phone
                                           Surveys            Surveys            Surveys            Surveys
      Name of Ministry                      in the             in the             in the             in the
      or Institution                      West Bank          Gaza Strip         West Bank          Gaza Strip
      Ministry of Social
      Development
                                               298                171                229                 58
      (formerly called the
      Ministry of Social Affairs
      Ministry of Education and
                                               104                128                 86                 50
      Higher Education
      Ministry of Health                       235                124                 58                 24
      Ministry of Local
                                               144                112                 23                 59
      Government
      Palestinian Land Authority               234                106                   8                40
      Total                                  1,015                641                404                231
     Source: AMAN 2016.
                                         4. Key Findings

The findings presented in this section build on the ministry-by-ministry
assessments carried out during two missions to the Palestinian Territories
as well as the May 2016 background report that summarizes the survey
results: “Status, Effectiveness and Efficiency of Palestinian Complaint Units,”
produced by the Coalition for Accountability and Integrity (AMAN)—the
Palestinian chapter of Transparency International. The present section starts
with a summary of key findings, then outlines the findings of the face-to-face
survey, and then summarizes the findings of the phone survey. Face-to-face
survey participants consisted of complainants and noncomplainants exiting
one of the relevant ministry offices. Phone survey respondents were com-
plainants identified using databases made available by the complaint units
or internal audit units of the ministries for 2014–August 2015. To account for
the differences in the governance systems between the two territories and to
allow for greater granularity, the figures in this report present the data for the
West Bank and Gaza Strip separately. The findings are not intended as inter-
regional comparisons—i.e., the West Bank versus the Gaza Strip—because
the context and governance arrangements are quite distinct. Nor are the
findings intended for interministerial comparisons, such as the Ministry of
Education and Higher Education versus the Ministry of Health, because the
programs and services offered by each ministry are specific to it. Some obser-
vations will require additional time and research to test causal relationships
and explain variations in patterns—e.g., between ministries in the same ter-
ritory or between the same ministry in the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip.
The survey’s key findings are presented in box 4.1.




                                        11
12   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




         Box 4.1. Key Findings

         Face-to-Face Surveys

         Factors Facilitating Grievance Uptake
         •	 Awareness of procedures. With the exception of the Palestinian Land
             Authority in the West Bank, two-thirds or more of respondents were
             aware of the procedures to file a complaint with a complaint unit.
         •	 Willingness to appeal. Over half of the complainants who were dissat-
             isfied with the result of their complaint intended to appeal, reflecting
             a readiness to use the complaint management system and a certain
             degree of trust in it.  

         Factors Limiting Grievance Uptake
         •	 If you don’t know, you don’t go. Awareness of the existence of complaint
             units is low and can be enhanced, especially in the West Bank where only
             40–60 percent of respondents knew of them. In the Gaza Strip, 60–70
             percent were aware of them. Even among respondents who were aware
             of the complaint units, many did not know about the procedures for filing
             a complaint.
         •	 Three main reasons emerge for why citizens do not want to file a com-
             plaint with a ministry:
             –	 Time is money. Over one-fifth of respondents did not want to file a
                 complaint with a ministry because they thought the procedures were
                 too slow.
             –	 What counts is who you know. Over one-fifth of survey participants
                 did not want to file their complaint with a ministry because the frequent
                 use of personal mediation has led them to believe that the system is
                 corrupt.
             –	 Trust takes years to build and seconds to break. A third major group
                 of respondents said they did not want to file a complaint because they
                 did not trust the performance of the government.
         •	 Kafka’s legacy. Except for the Ministry of Health in the West Bank and the
             Gaza Strip and the Gaza Strip’s Ministry of Education and Higher Educa-
             tion and Ministry of Social Development complaint units, over one-third
             of respondents who filed their complaint somewhere else than with the

                                                                                                (continued)
                                                                      4. Key Findings   13




Box 4.1. Continued

  complaint unit did so because they thought that approaching the ministry
  with their grievance would be a highly bureaucratic process.

Importance of Nonministry Actors
•	 Second-hand information about the complaint unit. Over half of the
  respondents said they learned about the complaint unit from a source
  other than a ministry.
•	 Citizens trust that nonministry entities can handle the complaint well.
  Citizens think of third parties as very relevant and credible alternatives to
  the complaint unit for filing complaints. Among the face-to-face complain-
  ants, 20–50 percent filed their complaint to another party before heading
  to the relevant ministry. In the West Bank, most filed complaints with the
  Directorate General of Complaints (DGC), private institutions, and non-
  governmental human rights organizations. In the Gaza Strip, most turned
  to the DGC and the Anti-Corruption Commission.
•	 The need for outside help. Other than the respondents for the Pales-
  tinian Land Authority, over one-fifth of respondents reported submitting
  their complaint to another party because they thought they needed tech-
  nical and legal support. A significant percentage of respondents sought
  help from outside the ministry in order to receive updated information on
  the status of their complaint.


Phone Surveys

Main Factors Impacting the Experience of Citizens
•	 Customer service. Complainants generally believed that the complaint
  unit staff was respectful, neutral, and nondiscriminatory. However, in the
  Gaza Strip, many respondents indicated gender-based discrimination as a
  reason for dissatisfaction with complaint unit staff. Others complained of
  the absence of a “first-come, first-served” rule, with more attention given
  to some over others. Complainants who were unclear about procedures
  and follow-up mechanisms tended to blame uncooperative complaint unit
  employees. A significant proportion of complainants in the Gaza Strip
  pointed out that the physical space for filing complaints was not suitable

                                                                   (continued)
14   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




         Box 4.1. Continued

             and that the complaint form provided by the ministry was too complex or
             was unavailable.
         •	 Communication about procedures. Complainants in the Gaza Strip
             tended to agree much more than those in the West Bank that the com-
             plaint unit had clearly informed them about procedures and follow-up
             mechanisms related to their grievance—63.8 percent or more compared
             with 13.0–62.5 percent, respectively.
         •	 Communication about status updates and results. Views were mixed
             regarding ease of access to the complaint unit to inquire about complaint
             handling procedures. Respondents who did not find it easy to get in
             touch with the complaint unit cited as reasons for their dissatisfaction the
             unwillingness of complaint unit employees to offer information, a lack of
             updated data, lengthy timeframes to retrieve complaints, and staff absen-
             teeism. Many citizens—especially in the West Bank—expressed their sense
             that they had not received all of the necessary information regarding their
             inquiries about complaint handling and the result of the complaint.
         •	 Satisfaction with outcomes. Satisfaction rates with complaint resolution
             outcomes are quite low in the West Bank—the highest satisfaction rate is
             37.5 percent for the Palestinian Land Authority; the lowest is 12.3 percent
             for the Ministry of Health. Rates are relatively higher in the Gaza Strip—
             ranging from 34.5 percent for the Ministry of Social Development to 79.2
             percent for the Ministry of Health.
         •	 Timeliness. Satisfaction rates with the timeliness of complaint handling
             remain fairly low overall, but they are systematically higher in the Gaza
             Strip (up to 65 percent) than in the West Bank (up to 50 percent).

         Complainants’ Choices Impacted by Current Processes
         •	 Likelihood of returning to the complaint unit. The likelihood of a com-
             plainant returning to the complaint unit if a problem reoccurs varies
             between 41.4 and 77.8 percent in the West Bank and 45.8 and 65.0 per-
             cent in the Gaza Strip. This finding is linked to the perception of a lack of
             professionalism in the complaint units, especially pronounced in the West
             Bank, and to dissatisfaction with results.


                                                                                                (continued)
                                                                           4. Key Findings   15




    Box 4.1. Continued

    •	 Complainants search for internal and external assistance. Up to one-
        fourth of citizens in the West Bank ask ministry employees or external
       officials to follow-up on their complaints. If dissatisfied with the com-
        plaint unit, a significant proportion of citizens would choose to approach
        the DGC. In the Gaza Strip, around one-third of respondents addressed
        ministry or external employees or officials, seeking help regarding their
        complaint. Many respondents who were dissatisfied with the complaint
        unit said they would turn to the Anti-Corruption Commission or the State
        Audit and Administrative Control Bureau.

    Recommendations for Improvement
    •	 In the Gaza Strip, respondents broadly recommended improving citi-
        zen awareness programs regarding complaint procedures (13–43 per-
        cent depending on the ministry), simplifying processes (22–38 percent),
        increasing the number of complaint unit employees (15–38 percent),
        and mainstreaming digitalized procedures (12–19 percent). In the West
        Bank, priorities for improvement are less clear: over 40 percent of respon-
        dents from each ministry recommend taking “other” measures.




Complaint units receive more complaints when they are empowered and
communicate better with the public. Most complaint units do not receive
many formal complaints (table 4.1) because most complainants prefer to air
their grievances rather than submitting them in writing. It is therefore likely
that these complaints are not registered in the complaint unit databases.


Table 4.1.
Complaints Received by Complaint Units in the West Banka
 Complaint Unit                                         2013   2014          2015
 Ministry of Social Development                         691     371           399
 Ministry of Education and Higher Education             345     314         1,160
 Ministry of Local Government                           644     123           355
 Palestinian Land Authority                              17      20              6
 Ministry of Health                                      83      76             77
Source: AMAN 2016.
a. Data for the Gaza Strip was not readily available.
16   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     For instance, the Ministry of Social Development has three different types
     of formal and informal mechanisms to receive and respond to complaints.
     The first, which is formal and quite effective, involves the complaint unit,
     entrusted with the responsibility of receiving, responding to, and resolving
     all complaints. The second involves written complaints received by the minis-
     try operational staff at the national and regional levels. The staff investigates
     and responds to the complaints. Grievances received through this mecha-
     nism are not captured in the complaint management information system nor
     are they reported to the complaint unit, but cases are opened for them, and
     they are documented in regional offices. Data on these types of complaints
     are not readily available. The third and final mechanism deals with verbal
     complaints received by Ministry of Social Development operational staff at
     all levels. Because there is no documentation for complaints received this
     way, tracking, monitoring, and analysis are not possible. However, informal
     estimates suggest that this is the most common channel used. Recent inter-
     ventions by the Ministry of Social Development and the Ministry of Education
     and Higher Education (see boxes 4.2 and 4.3) that have empowered their
     complaint units led to an increase in complaints received.



     Face-to-Face Survey—Overall Findings

     Questions beginning with S1 (figures 4.1–4.9) summarize the responses
     from face-to-face interviews with citizens who came to file a complaint.
     Questions beginning with S2 (figures 4.10–4.16) summarize the responses
     from face-to-face interviews with citizens who came for any reason other than
     filing a complaint. Citizens who visited the ministry without filing a complaint
     were also interviewed in order to capture perceptions and levels of aware-
     ness of the complaint unit by individuals who have no grievance.

     More than half of the citizens learned about the complaint units from a
     source other than the ministries. Across all ministries, information about
     the complaint unit is often passed on through personal acquaintances or
     previous complainants rather than through documentation issued by the
     ministries, which appear to provide information to only about one-third of
     respondents. These results point out deficiencies in the ministries’ commu-
     nication strategies, particularly regarding their online presence, which could
     be developed to better highlight the existence and role of the complaint unit
     and how to contact it (figure 4.1).
                                                                                                                                   4. Key Findings       17




Figure 4.1.
S1_1—How did you learn about the complaint unit in the ministry?

a. West Bank
 MOE                         35                                    18                  12                  24                        6         6

 MOH                         33                           17                      14                      25                              11

MOSA               26                                      29                     33                 31                                   11

MOLG                          36                                        21              6                      27                     3        6

  PLA              24                                          41                                6                  24                         6
        0                         20                      40                            60                      80                                 100
                                                                        percent

b. Gaza Strip
 MOE          18                                  35                              6                  29                                   12

 MOH                    28                           17                  10                     21                             24

MOSA                     33                                             33                                          29                             4

MOLG               28                           11             6                      28                                      28

  PLA                    33                               11             11             11                               33

        0                         20                      40                            60                      80                                 100
                                                                        percent

                                       By calling the ministry                          Through a friend
                                       Ministry’s website or brochures                  Previous complaint
                                       Private or NGO institution                       Other

Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.



In about one-third of recorded cases, citizens submitted complaints
to entities other than the complaint unit (e.g., ministerial sections or
departments, other bodies). This tendency highlights the low level of citizen
knowledge and trust in the ministry complaint units. It could also be linked
to insufficient communications by the ministries regarding what constitutes
a complaint; the role of the complaint units with respect to other bodies and
ministries; and how citizens can locate and benefit from the complaint units.
In the West Bank, percentages of respondents who filed their complaints
elsewhere range from 29.4 (Ministry of Education and Higher Education) to
42.9 percent (Ministry of Health). In the Gaza Strip, these percentages range
from 21.4 percent (Ministry of Education and Higher Education) to 50 percent
(Ministry of Local Government). (See figure 4.2.)
18   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.2.
     S1_2—Have you filed your complaint to another party before
     heading to the ministry? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                                                                                50.0
                                     48.1
                              42.9
                                                    36.1 37.5
          29.4                                                           30.3             29.4

                 21.4                                                                            22.2




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                 MOLG            PLA


                                            West Bank           Gaza Strip


     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     The impression that the procedures are highly bureaucratic and the per-
     ceived need for technical and legal advice deter citizens from submitting
     their grievances to complaint units. These trends are identified in figure 4.3.
     Other than the Ministry of Health and the Gaza Strip’s Ministry of Education
     and Higher Education, there seems to be a widespread perception that fil-
     ing a complaint with a ministry’s complaint unit is a very bureaucratic proce-
     dure. A significant percentage of respondents emphasized their desire to
     receive additional support and legal advice (except for the Palestinian Land
     Authority), and believed they could not receive it at the complaint units. Two
     conclusions can be derived from these findings. First, grievance uptake pro-
     cedures can be further simplified so that citizens do not feel discouraged
     from submitting complaints. Second, complaint units could better inform cit-
     izens about the array of assistance mechanisms at their disposal, including
     legal support. Another insight provided by the data is that there is a wide-
     spread lack of awareness about complaint units, except that of the Ministry
     of Education and Higher Education.

     Citizens take their complaints to a variety of entities other than com-
     plaint units. In the West Bank, citizens who do not file their complaints with a
     ministry complaint unit usually turns to private institutions, nongovernmental
                                                                                                       4. Key Findings   19




Figure 4.3.
S1_2a—Why did you file your complaint to another party?

a. West Bank

 MOE             20                                            60                                       20

 MOH                           40                        7    7                         47

MOSA                    32                     5                  32                              32

MOLG        11                           33                                 44                               11

  PLA                                     60                                                 40
        0                     20                    40                 60                    80                   100
                                                             percent



b. Gaza Strip

 MOE                                           67                                                 33

 MOH              23                      15             8                         54

MOSA                                     56                            11                         33

MOLG                           44                                      33                              22

  PLA                               50                                                  50

        0                     20                    40                 60                    80                   100
                                                             percent


                      Lack of awareness about the complaint units       Lack of trust
                      Bureaucratic procedures                           Asking for support and legal advice
                      Other


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




human rights organizations, or the Directorate General for Complaints. With
regard to complaints addressed to the Ministry of Local Government, 60 per-
cent of citizens ask for help from officials, possibly at other levels (e.g., munic-
ipalities). Private institutions, human rights organizations, nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), and the Directorate General for Complaints are often
solicited in the Gaza Strip as well. For complaints related to the Ministry of
Education and Higher Education and the Palestinian Land Authority, over
half of Gaza Strip respondents turn toward the Anti-Corruption Commission.
It seems that the relationship and differences between complaint units and
20   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     other entities frequently receiving complaints—such as the Independent
     Commission for Human Rights—are unclear. Even within ministry structures,
     citizens seem confused regarding the roles and responsibilities of the various
     entities involved in complaint handling mechanisms, including senior man-
     agement, complaint unit staff, regional directorates, the Directorate General
     for Complaints, and other departments (figure 4.4).


     Figure 4.4.
     S1_2b—With whom did you file your complaint?

     a. West Bank
       MOE                             40                           20                       20                           20

      MOH         7                                    60                                    7                       27

     MOSA                         36                                     36                            5              23

     MOLG               20                       10    10                                    60

        PLA                                  50                               17                   17                         17
              0                        20                   40                     60                      80                           100
                                                                  percent


     b. Gaza Strip

       MOE                     33                                                       67

      MOH                    31                              23                              31                           8         8

     MOSA                                   44                           22                       11            11                 11

     MOLG                                         56                                    22                      11                 11

        PLA                                      50                                                50

              0                        20                   40                     60                      80                           100
                                                                  percent


                  Complaint unit at the Council of Ministers                Private institution or human rights NGO
                  Member of Parliament in the Legislative Council           State Audit and Administrative Control Bureau



     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                                         4. Key Findings       21




With the exception of the Palestinian Land Authority in the West Bank, it
appears that two-thirds or more of respondents were aware of the pro-
cedures to file a complaint with a complaint unit. In the West Bank, aware-
ness levels of procedures range from 44–82 percent (including respondents
who selected both agree and strongly agree), depending on the ministry
or government entity. In the Gaza Strip, for four out of five ministries, more
than 80 percent of citizens “agree” or “strongly agree” that they had prior
information about complaint handling channels, revealing that knowledge of
complaint filing procedures is quite widespread (figure 4.5).


Figure 4.5.
S1_3—Do you agree with the statement: You have previous information
about the procedures for filing a complaint?

a. West Bank

 MOE        7                                        73                                                  20

 MOH                           35                           32                                      32

MOSA            12                              58                                             19               11

MOLG                 22                                     61                                           15              3

  PLA                               44                                25                            31
        0                           20          40                          60                 80                        100
                                                          percent



b. Gaza Strip

 MOE                 19                                    63                                             19

 MOH                      25                                     61                                      7           7

MOSA                 21                              46                                   21                   13

MOLG                           33                                      50                                11          6

  PLA                          33                                           56                                 11

        0                           20          40                          60                 80                        100
                                                          percent


                                         Strongly agree               Agree
                                         Disagree                     Strongly disagree

Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
22   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     A significant percentage of respondents seek help from outside the
     ministry to get updated information on the status of their complaints,
     suggesting insufficient ministry communication, clarity, and accessibility
     regarding follow-up on individual complaints. In the West Bank, between
     35.3 percent (Palestinian Land Authority) and 59.7 percent (Ministry of Social
     Development) of respondents had sought outside help to follow up on their
     complaint. The percentages are lower in the Gaza Strip, where between
     17.6 percent (Ministry of Education and Higher Education) and 50 percent
     (Ministry of Social Development) of citizens sought external support. These
     results suggest that complaint units could, as part of the overall trust-build-
     ing exercise toward citizens, do a better job of spreading the message that
     they are obliged to respond to grievances and will act on them (figure 4.6).

     In addition to the perceived amount of bureaucracy involved in submit-
     ting and following up on the status of a complaint, many respondents
     were unsure about the degree of support and legal advice they could
     receive from a ministry’s complaint unit. The negative experiences of pre-
     vious complainants also influenced the behavior of potential complainants
     (figure 4.7).


     Figure 4.6.
     S1_4—Did you seek help from an employee or an official
     from outside the ministry to follow up on your complaint?
     (percentage of respondents answering yes)

          58.8                                      59.7
                                                                           54.5
                                                           50.0
                                                                                                 44.4
                              42.9
                                                                                          35.3
                                                                                  33.3
                                     28.6


                 17.6




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip


     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                                        4. Key Findings       23




Figure 4.7.
S1_5—If your answer to the previous question (S1_4) is yes,
why did you seek help?

a. West Bank

 MOE                    38                           8                              46                              8

 MOH             26                       13                        35                             26

MOSA           20                    16                                   49                              12            2

MOLG           21                         25                                   46                                   8

  PLA                          50                                  13          13                  25
        0               20                      40                       60                   80                        100
                                                         percent


b. Gaza Strip

 MOE                      44                                   22                         22                   11

 MOH            24                         24                             29                        24

MOSA                           47                          5                   32                         16

MOLG                      46                                       23                    15               15

  PLA                               60                                                        40

        0               20                      40                       60                   80                        100
                                                         percent

                Cut red tape                              Lack of trust in performance and professionalism
                External support and legal advice         Previous complainant’s recommendation
                Other


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




More than half of complainants dissatisfied with the result of their com-
plaint intended to appeal the decision. Given the time and resources inher-
ent to an appeal process, these results are significant because they reveal the
fact that complainants were unhappy with the quality and outcomes of the
complaint handling process (figure 4.8).
24   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.8.
     S1_6—If you are not satisfied with the result of your complaint,
     will you appeal the decision? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

          88.2                                                                                   88.9
                                                                           81.8
                 76.5
                              72.2                         70.8
                                                                                          64.7
                                     57.1                                         55.6
                                                    51.6




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip



     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     The reluctance to appeal reveals a general lack of trust in the system,
     which many citizens perceive as corrupt and slow. The main reason why
     respondents in the West Bank did not want to appeal decisions was that
     they lacked hope that the results would improve, followed by the perception
     of slow procedures. In the Gaza Strip, more than one-fourth of respondents
     believed that their appeal could not succeed without interference or media-
     tion by personal connections (wasta), highlighting the low level of confidence
     among respondents in the complaint unit and its processes (figure 4.9).

     Overall awareness of the complaint unit is low and can be enhanced. In
     the West Bank, levels of awareness range from 39.4 percent for the Ministry
     of Social Development to 62.1 percent for the Ministry of Education and
     Higher Education. In the Gaza Strip, awareness levels range from 64.9 per-
     cent for the Palestinian Land Authority to 70.2 percent for the Ministry of
     Local Government. Evidently, the awareness of complaint units in Gaza Strip
     is higher than in the West Bank. Figure 4.10 shows that further improvements
     are still required in terms of communicating about the complaint unit.
                                                                                                              4. Key Findings   25




Figure 4.9.
S1_6/S1_6a—If you are not satisfied with the result of your complaint,
and if you are not appealing the decision, why not?

a. West Bank

 MOE                                                           100

 MOH                            44                                   22                              33

MOSA                           41                                          44                                   15

MOLG                                 50                                         33                             17

  PLA                                               75                                                   25
        0                      20                        40               60                   80                       100
                                                              percent


b. Gaza Strip

 MOE                                           67                                                   33

 MOH                      36                                         36                                  27

MOSA         17                                33                                         50

MOLG                                      63                                         13                   25

  PLA                                                          100

        0                      20                        40               60                   80                       100
                                                              percent

                  Cut red tape                                 Lack of trust in performance and professionalism
                  External support and legal advice            Previous complainant’s recommendation
                  Other



Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




Citizens still consider third parties to be very relevant and credible alter-
natives to the complaint units for filing complaints (figures 4.11–4.14).
These findings may be partly due to the absence of community-specific com-
munication strategies to allay mistrust and an unwillingness to directly sub-
mit grievances to the complaint unit through, for example, intermediaries
like civil society organizations. It appears that citizens of the Gaza Strip are
26   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.10.
     S2_1—Do you know about the complaint unit of the ministry?
     (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                 67.9                68.4                  68.7                   70.2
                                                                                                 64.9
          62.1
                                                                           55.0
                              44.7
                                                    39.4                                  41.5




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip



     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     Figure 4.11.
     S2_2—If you encounter a problem with the ministry regarding a service
     you requested or a right you are entitled to, would you file a complaint
     with the complaint unit? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                 67.9                68.4                  68.7                   70.2
                                                                                                 64.9
          62.1
                                                                           55.0
                              44.7
                                                    39.4                                  41.5




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip


     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                                4. Key Findings   27




Figure 4.12.
S2_3—Have you ever had a problem receiving service from the
ministry and resorted to a party other than the ministry’s complaint unit
for recourse? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                                                    51.2                                 50.0


                                                                                  34.1
            31.8
     26.7                                                           27.9
                              22.2           21.2                          21.4
                       14.6




     MOE               MOH                  MOSA                    MOLG           PLA


                                     West Bank             Gaza Strip



Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




more willing to submit complaints to the complaint unit than are citizens of
the West Bank, but they also resort to third parties to solve ministry-related
problems more frequently. Figure 4.13 shows that complaint resolution rates
by third parties are quite high in the West Bank (consistently around or above
70 percent). In the Gaza Strip, they vary between 31.8 percent for the Ministry
of Social Development and 90 percent for the Ministry of Health.

A significant proportion of dissatisfied citizens in the West Bank would
choose to approach the Complaints Directorate of the Council of
Ministers to file a complaint, while in the Gaza Strip, most would choose
to turn to the Anti-Corruption Commission or the State Audit and
Administrative Control Bureau. The results demonstrate that many actors
are approached by dissatisfied users, including officials, private institutions,
and more rarely, Members of Parliament (figure 4.15).
28   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.13.
     S2_3a—If the answer is yes (to S2_3), was the complaint handled/solved?
     (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                              86.2 90.0                                                   86.5
                                                    76.0                   77.4 80.0
          69.6

                                                                                                 55.6


                                                           31.8



                  0

            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip



     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     Figure 4.14.
     S2_4—If you do not want to file a complaint with the ministry, would you
     file it with another party? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

          55.2                                                                    55.6    54.4
                              50.3                                         52.3
                 47.6                46.7           47.0                                         47.4


                                                           32.6




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip




     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                                                 4. Key Findings     29




Figure 4.15.
S2_4a—If yes to S2_4, with what party would you file a complaint?

a. West Bank

 MOE                       40                                25                   2    6         10              13        4

 MOH                 29                       20             2         10              18                    16            4

MOSA              26                     17         3    5                  16                    26                       6

MOLG                           43                       10        22             16              14                   14

  PLA                      42                           13             3     6             19                14            4
        0                  20                  40                           60                    80                           100
                                                        percent



b. Gaza Strip

 MOE                                  67                                                               33

 MOH                      36                                      36                                        27

MOSA         17                       33                                                    50

MOLG                                63                                                13                    25

  PLA                                                    100

        0                  20                  40                           60                    80                           100
                                                        percent


             Complaint unit—Council of Ministers                  Private institutions
             Member of Parliament—Legislative Council             State Audit and Administrative Control Bureau
             Anticorruption commission                            Help from an official
             Other



Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




The length of procedures, the frequent occurrence of personal medi-
ation, and a low trust in government performance all affect citizens’
willingness to submit complaints with a complaint unit. Across ministries,
around one-fifth or more of respondents thought procedures were slow,
underlining the fact that current grievance response systems are not suffi-
ciently timely. Around one-fifth (or more) were also convinced that mediation
was needed if their complaint was to be taken seriously and lead to an out-
come (figure 4.16).
30   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.16.
     S2_5— If you do not want to file a complaint with the ministry, why not?

     a. West Bank

       MOE            15                        36                                  23                   14           7            6

      MOH                  22                        26                             28                  8       7    1         9

     MOSA              20                           28                             28                    12          5 2           6

     MOLG         7                       28                                  42                            7    5        5            5

        PLA                21                       25                                   37                     6    2 5               5
              0                           20                  40                   60                   80                             100
                                                                    percent



     b. Gaza Strip

       MOE                      26                       21                   20                   18                     15

      MOH                        30                           19                   22                   18                    11

     MOSA                            34                            26                         21                11                 8

     MOLG                  22                            28                        22                   15                    13

        PLA                21                  20                       18                    23                     20

              0                           20                  40                   60                   80                                 100
                                                                    percent


              You do not trust governmental performance             Need of mediation
              Slow procedures                                       Recommendation from friend with previous experience
              Better private independent institution                Other
              I have no opinion




     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                  4. Key Findings   31




Phone Survey—Overall Findings
The face-to-face-survey explored in the above section was comple-
mented by a phone survey. While the face-to-face survey was an exit poll,
the phone survey interviews only included citizens who had actually submit-
ted complaints to a ministry. The sample size of the phone survey was there-
fore much smaller than that of the face-to-face survey (635 for the phone
survey compared with 1,656 for the face-to-face survey). Several questions
overlap in these two surveys and show comparable results: phone survey
questions 1, 3, 3_1, 14, and 14_1 mirror questions 1_1, 1_2, 1_2a, 1_6, and
1_6a of the face-to-face survey, respectively (see appendix A for both sur-
vey instruments). Findings from the phone survey that are not covered in the
face-to-face survey are presented in figures 4.17–4.35. For additional infor-
mation, please see the “Status, Effectiveness and Efficiency of Palestinian
Complaint Units” background report produced by AMAN (2016).

Channels to submit grievances. In the West Bank, grievances are usually
submitted either by completing a ministry-specific complaint form or by
writing a personal letter. Almost no respondents submitted grievances by
phone. In the Gaza Strip, fax or email complaints are the most widely used
channels. Phone calls are also used to verbally file complaints (figure 4.17)

Information provision to complainants about procedures by the com-
plaint unit. Complainants in the Gaza Strip tended to agree much more than
those in the West Bank that the complaint unit had clearly informed them
about procedures and follow-up mechanisms related to their grievances
(figure 4.18). Complainants in both the West Bank and Gaza Strip who were
unclear about procedures and follow-up mechanisms tended to primarily
blame a lack of cooperative behavior among complaint unit employees. A
significant proportion of Gaza Strip complainants pointed out that the physi-
cal space for filing complaints was not suitable and that the complaint forms
provided by the ministries were too complex or not available (figure 4.19).

Behavior of complaint unit staff. In the West Bank, the percentage of
respondents who strongly agreed or agreed that the complaint unit staff
was respectful, neutral, and nondiscriminatory is highest for the Palestinian
Land Authority (75 percent) and lowest for the Ministry of Local Government,
32   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.17.
     2—How did you file your complaint to the ministry?

     a. West Bank

                          32                                 29                        13                  13         21         10

                     28                                             48                                     12                  12

                                       53                                     17                      15             12 4            7

          9                                       61                                             13              4          13

                                     50                                                          50
     0                         20                      40                    60                            80                             100
                                                                  percent



     b. Gaza Strip

                     24                   6       16                         30                                  18                   6

                 21                                38                                  17                        21                       4

                 21                    10               24                                  33                             7          5

                19                   14                 20                   19                            20                        8

           13                   18                     23                         23                        13                  13

     0                         20                      40                    60                            80                             100
                                                                  percent


                               Complaint form at ministry                   Own format at ministry
                               Fax complaint letter to ministry             Email to the ministry
                               Phone call to the ministry                   Through private institution or NGO
                               Other




     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     where it reaches a mere 30.4 percent (figure 4.20). In the Gaza Strip, the high-
     est satisfaction rates with customer service are recorded with the Palestinian
     Land Authority (70 percent); the lowest with the Ministry of Health (58.3
     percent). Gender-based discrimination was not mentioned by West Bank
     complainants. In the Gaza Strip, however, a majority of respondents cited
                                                                                                4. Key Findings   33




Figure 4.18.
4—Do you agree with the statement: The complaints unit
clearly informed you of the procedures and follow-up mechanisms
involved in filing a complaint. (percentage of complainants who
“strongly agree” or “agree”)

                                                                           69.5          72.5
            68.0              66.7                  63.8                          62.5
     54.8                                    55.5


                       29.3

                                                                    13.0


       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG         PLA


                                     West Bank             Gaza Strip


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




gender-based discrimination to explain their dissatisfaction with complaint
unit staff (up to 56 percent for the Ministry of Education and Higher Education
respondents). Additional reasons included the absence of a “first-come, first-
served” rule and the belief that more attention was given to some complain-
ants over others (figure 4.21)

Ease of access to the complaint unit. Satisfaction with ease of access
to the complaint unit to inquire about complaint handling procedures is
mixed. In the West Bank, it ranges from 34.8 percent for the Ministry of Local
Government to 62.5 percent for the Palestinian Land Authority. In the Gaza
Strip, it ranges from 50.8 percent for the Ministry of Local Government to
66 percent for the Ministry of Education and Higher Education (figure 4.22).
In the West Bank, reasons indicated for dissatisfaction usually focused on the
unwillingness of complaint unit employees to offer information or a lack of
current data. Reasons cited in the Gaza Strip were varied, including the time
needed to access complaint files and staff absenteeism (figure 4.23).
34   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.19.
     4_1—If the answer to question 4 is disagree or strongly disagree, why?

     a. West Bank

                 9                                   61                                             9             22

             7             7                             53                                 7                27

         3                                          68                                          3            27

             8                                            67                                            8              17

                                                                    100
     0                              20                   40                  60                         80                      100
                                                                   percent


     b. Gaza Strip

                 13                       27                                          53                                    7

                 13                      25                         25                                  38

                 11            11                                    63                                                16

                      17            11                        33                                        39

                                               60                                          20                     20

     0                              20                   40                  60                         80                      100
                                                                   percent


             The complaint form is difficult                                      There is no form to fill a complaint
             The employee at the complaint unit was not cooperative               The place to file complaints is unsuitable
             Other



     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     Provision of status updates by complaint unit to complainants. In the
     West Bank, the Ministry of Social Development complaint unit received the
     highest percentage—55.9 percent—of complainants who agreed or strongly
     agreed that the complaint unit gave them all the information they needed
     regarding their inquiry about handling a complaint. In the Gaza Strip, the
     Ministry of Education and Higher Education’s complaint unit scored highest
     at 72 percent; other ministries scored fairly high as well (figure 4.24).
                                                                                                4. Key Findings   35




Figure 4.20.
5—Do you agree with the statement: The unit team treated
you respectfully, neutrally, and without discrimination?
(percentage of complainants who strongly agree or agree)


                                                                           69.5          72.5
            68.0              66.7                  63.8                          62.5
     54.8                                    55.5


                       29.3

                                                                    13.0


       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG         PLA


                                     West Bank             Gaza Strip



Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




Timeliness of complaint handling. Overall, satisfaction rates with the
timeliness of complaint handling remain fairly low, but they are systemati-
cally higher in the Gaza Strip than in the West Bank. In the West Bank, only
4.3 percent of citizens agreed or strongly agreed that the Ministry of Local
Government dealt with their complaint in a reasonable timeframe; while the
Palestinian Land Authority received the highest rating at 50 percent. In the
Gaza Strip, the lowest score is for the Ministry of Social Development at 34.5
percent and the highest is for the Ministry of Education and Higher Education
at 66 percent (figure 4.25).

Communication of results. In the West Bank, complainants were not sys-
tematically informed of the results of their complaints: fewer than half of the
respondents said they ever received this information. In the Gaza Strip, an
average of approximately two-thirds of complainants were informed of the
results of their undertaking by the complaint unit (figure 4.26). Information
about the results of complaints usually took place over the telephone or oth-
erwise verbally rather than in writing by email or on a specific form (figure
4.27). Across the West Bank and Gaza Strip, apart from complainants with the
West Bank Ministry of Social Development complaint unit, less than one-third
36   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.21.
     5_1—If the answer to question 5 is disagree or strongly disagree, why?

     a. West Bank

       MOE                               43                                              57

      MOH                      29                          29                                      43

     MOSA                 22                                        57                                       22

     MOLG                                 43                        14                             43

        PLA
              0                          20              40                     60                 80              100
                                                                   percent

     b. Gaza Strip

       MOE              19                                        56                                         25

      MOH                                           67                                                  33

     MOSA                 23                               38                                      38

     MOLG         6                            44                                             50

        PLA                         33                    17                                  50

              0                          20              40                     60                 80              100
                                                                   percent



                      More attention given to other complainants                     Gender-based discrimination
                      Handling complaints of others (not respecting the line)        Other




     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     of all respondents who were not informed of the result of their grievance
     thought that retrieving their files during subsequent visits was fast and easy
     (figure 4.28).

     Search for assistance by complainants. In the West Bank, up to one-fourth
     of citizens asked ministry employees or external officials to follow-up on
     their complaints. Citizens in the Gaza Strip sought help to follow up on their
                                                                                              4. Key Findings   37




Figure 4.22.
6—Do you agree with the statement: It was easy to reach the
complaint unit and inquire about the procedures for complaint handling
(percentage of complainants who strongly agree or agree)

            66.0
                                                                                62.5
     56.0                                         56.9                                 57.5
                       53.3 54.2                                         50.8
                                           48.1

                                                                  34.8




       MOE               MOH                   MOSA                   MOLG         PLA


                                   West Bank             Gaza Strip


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




complaints more frequently: around one-third of respondents addressed
ministry or external employees and officials (figures 4.29 and 4.30).

Satisfaction with outcomes. Satisfaction rates with outcomes are quite low in
the West Bank. The highest satisfaction rate is 37.5 percent for the Palestinian
Land Authority; the lowest is 12.3 percent for the Ministry of Health. The like-
lihood that West Bank complainants would return to the complaint unit if a
problem reoccurs fluctuates between 41.4–77.8 percent. In the Gaza Strip,
satisfaction rates with complaint results are generally fairly high—34.5 per-
cent for the Ministry of Social Development and 79.2 percent for the Ministry
of Health—and 45.8–65.0 percent of complainants say that, if necessary, they
may return to the complaint unit (figures 4.31 and 4.32). An unwillingness to
return to the complaint unit is primarily linked to the perception of a lack of
professionalism among complaint unit staff—especially pronounced in the
West Bank—as well as dissatisfaction with results (figures 4.33 and 4.34).

Recommendations for improvement. In the Gaza Strip, respondents fre-
quently recommend improving citizen awareness programs regarding
38   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.23.
     6_1— If the answer to question 6 is disagree or strongly disagree, why?

     a. West Bank

       MOE 3                                41                                       31                            10                   10            3

      MOH          16                                       44                                           25                    6             9

     MOSA         12                                   43                                 18                  6        8                 12

     MOLG         13                              33                                           40                                   7             7

        PLA                      33                                                            67




     b. Gaza Strip

       MOE             18                    18                            35                                                  29

      MOH                   27                                   27                       18                               27

     MOSA         13                         26                                 35                                 17                         9

     MOLG                         36                                  21                            25                     7                 11

        PLA                             44                                 19                  6                  25                              6

              0                        20                        40                  60                           80                                  100
                                                                       percent


                   Looking for the complaint took long time                 Employee not ready to offer information
                   Employee’s lack of updated information                   Usually, employee is not in office
                   Follow up requires physical presence                     Other




     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     complaint procedures (13–43 percent depending on the ministry), simpli-
     fying processes (22–38 percent), increasing the number of complaint unit
     employees (15–38 percent), and mainstreaming digitalized procedures (12–
     19 percent). In the West Bank, priorities for improvement are less clear (over
     40 percent of respondents in each ministry recommend taking “other” mea-
     sures) (figure 4.35).
                                                                                                4. Key Findings   39




Figure 4.24.
7_7—Do you agree with the statement: The complaint unit provided
you with all information about your inquiry of handling a complaint?
(percentage of complainants who strongly agree or agree)

            72.0
                                                                           66.1          67.5
                              58.3
                                             55.9
     48.8                                                                         50.0

                                                    39.7
                       31.0


                                                                    13.0



       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG         PLA


                                     West Bank             Gaza Strip


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




Figure 4.25.
8—Do you agree with the statement: Your complaint was
handled in a reasonable time? (percentage of complainants who
strongly agree or agree)


            66.0                                                                         65.0
                              58.3
                                                                           54.2
                                                                                  50.0


     35.7                                           34.5
                                             31.7
                       24.2



                                                                    4.3

       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG         PLA


                                     West Bank             Gaza Strip



Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
40   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.26.
     9—Do you agree with the statement: The unit employee informed you of
     the result of the complaint? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                 74.0
                                     66.7                                                        64.1
                                                                                62.7

          47.6
                                                                                          37.5
                                                    29.3 25.9
                              24.1                                       26.1




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                 MOLG            PLA

                                            West Bank           Gaza Strip

     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     Including the citizens’ point of view in the analysis of the ministries’
     complaint units is an essential complement to the assessments based on
     interviews and discussions with government officials. However, method-
     ological questions requiring further research regarding the results of the user
     survey include:

     •	 What factors account for intra-ministry differences between the West Bank
        and Gaza?

     •	 How great is the influence of subsample size on the results of particular
        ministries?

     •	 How should the answer “other” or “don’t know,” indicated by several
        respondents, be interpreted? Can these responses be further drilled
        down?
                                                                                                                  4. Key Findings   41




Figure 4.27.
9_1—If the answer to question 9 is yes, how were you informed?

a. West Bank

 MOE             18                              35                                          43                             5

 MOH             15             15                                                69

MOSA                                 55                                                           45

MOLG                  33                                          3317                           17

  PLA                                           67                                                          33



b. Gaza Strip

 MOE        11                       32                                   38                                       19

 MOH        13                            38                                                     50

MOSA        13                            33                                                53

MOLG                  36                                     25                        17                         22

  PLA        16                            32                            24                                  28

        0                  20                         40                  60                           80                   100
                                                              percent

                                                In written form          Orally
                                                Over the phone           By email


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




•	 Did the formulation of some questions cause categories to overlap? For
   example, is there overlap between the potential answers “employee not
   ready to offer information” and “employee’s lack of updated information”?

•	 If an interviewer read aloud the possible answers to the questions to a
   respondent, could this have introduced bias in the responses, regardless
   of the fact that the respondent had the option of indicating “other” as an
   answer?
42   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.28.
     10—If the answer to question 9 is no, when you revisited
     the unit, was it easy to find your file and receive a quick response?
     (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                                                    63.8




                                                           13.6                   33.3
          27.9                                                                                   28.6
                 21.4                                                                     20.0
                              16.7

                                                                           6.3
                                      0

            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip


     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.




     Figure 4.29.
     11—Did you ask any ministry employee or official to follow-up on
     your complaint? (percentage of respondents answering yes)

                 42.0                41.7
                                                                                                 40.0
                                                                                  35.6
                                                           32.8


                                                    24.5
                              22.4
          19.8
                                                                           17.4
                                                                                          12.5




            MOE                 MOH                     MOSA                   MOLG          PLA


                                            West Bank             Gaza Strip


     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                               4. Key Findings   43




Figure 4.30.
12—Did you seek help from an employee or an official
from outside the ministry to follow up on your complaint?
(percentage of respondents answering yes)

                              79.2

           66.0
                                                                                        60.0
                                                                          50.8

                                                                                 37.5
    32.6                                           34.5

                                            23.6
                                                                   17.4
                       12.3



       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                  MOLG         PLA


                                     West Bank            Gaza Strip



Source: AMAN 2016.            37.5
           34.0
                                               Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of31.0
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                        27.5
                       24.1
                                                                          20.3

Figure 4.31.                     14.0


    5.8 general, are you satisfied with the result of your complaint?
13—In                                          8.7

(percentage of complainants who strongly agree or agree) 0
       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                  MOLG         PLA
                           79.2
                                     West Bank            Gaza Strip
           66.0
                                                                                        60.0
                                                                          50.8

                                                                                 37.5
    32.6                                           34.5

                                            23.6
                                                                   17.4
                       12.3



       MOE               MOH                     MOSA                  MOLG         PLA


                                     West Bank            Gaza Strip



Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
44   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.32.
     15—If a problem relating to the ministry’s services reoccurs, would you
     file it with the complaint unit? (percentage of respondents answering yes)
          77.8
                                                                 72.5
                  64.0                                                                                            62.5 65.0
                                                                         58.6                     59.3
                                                45.8                                       43.5
                                         41.4




              MOE                             MOH                  MOSA                      MOLG                   PLA

                                                       West Bank                Gaza Strip

     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.


     Figure 4.33.
     15_1—If the answer to question 15 is No, why?

     a. West Bank

       MOE        7         7                                                         81                                                 4

      MOH         7                  21                                                      66                                      7

     MOSA             13             5                                           66                                            16

     MOLG              18                        18                                                 64

        PLA                                                                     100




     b. Gaza Strip

       MOE                               36                                     27                                   36

      MOH                                                   75                                                      13          13

     MOSA                                 41                                          32                                  27

     MOLG                       31                                  23                                      46

        PLA            18                                  36                                                45

              0                           20                       40                        60                    80                    100
                                                                            percent

                                          Not satisfied with results                                Procedures are slow
                                          The complaint unit’s team is not serious                  Other

     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                                                                                  4. Key Findings      45




Figure 4.34. 1
6—If you encounter another problem and do not wish to file your
complaint with the ministry, to whom would you direct your complaint?

a. West Bank

 MOE                        36                          3        7            10                                       43

 MOH          21                      12            3       10            3                                   50

MOSA             22                       6    3   5         9                                         55

MOLG                            43                                   4                22                  4                  26

  PLA                                50                                                           38                                 13
        0                       20                          40                             60                           80                       100
                                                                          percent


b. Gaza Strip

 MOE                  26                           16            4                  18                                  30                   6

 MOH                       33                                                 38                              4         8    4          13

MOSA         16                           24                         16                    14                      17              12            2

MOLG          19                      14                14                     17                                 27                 10

  PLA       15              5                 18                     18                                       40                             5

        0                       20                          40                             60                           80                       100
                                                                          percent


             Complaint unit—Council of Ministers                                   Private institutions
             Member of Parliament—Legislative Council                              State Audit and Administrative Control Bureau
             Anticorruption commission                                             Help from an official
             Other


Source: AMAN 2016.
MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
46   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Figure 4.35.
     17—What actions would you recommend to improve the
     complaint unit’s performance and effectiveness?

     a. West Bank

       MOE 1          9                        29                            10                                  50

      MOH 3               10     2                                                          84

     MOSA         4             20                   13             3                                       60

     MOLG         4        9                                                            87

        PLA                     29                             14                  14                              43
              0                           20                            40                       60                   80                    100
                                                                                  percent


     b. Gaza Strip

       MOE                 22                             24                                           38                        16

      MOH                            38                                                 38                            13             13

     MOSA                       31                                      22                                  34                       12

     MOLG                 19                         25                                           37                           19

        PLA           15                        25                                               43                             18

              0                           20                            40                       60                   80                    100
                                                                                  percent

                      Increasing number of complaint unit employees                         Facilitating procedures of filing a complaint
                      Awareness programs regarding procedures                               Adopting electronic means
                      Other



     Source: AMAN 2016.
     MOE = Ministry of Education; MOH = Ministry of Health; MOSA = Ministry of Social Affairs;
     MOLG = Ministry of Local Government; PLA = Palestinian Land Authority.
                                                                      4. Key Findings   47




Ministry-by-Ministry Findings
Following is a selection of the most significant results of the survey, disaggre-
gated by ministry.

Ministry of Social Development
(formerly called the Ministry of Social Affairs)
Communications and awareness-raising
In the West Bank, awareness levels among citizens regarding the existence
of the Ministry of Social Development’s complaint unit is much lower than
in the Gaza Strip. Only 39.4 percent of face-to-face interviewees in the West
Bank were aware of the unit—the lowest level among ministries in the West
Bank. In the Gaza Strip, 68.7 percent of face-to-face respondents were aware
of the unit. Awareness levels are heavily dependent on a respondent’s educa-
tion level. One hundred percent of face-to-face respondents holding a bache-
lor’s degree were aware of the complaint unit’s existence, but only 74 percent
who had completed intermediate college education, 55 percent who had
completed secondary education, 30 percent with preparatory education, 24
percent with elementary education, and a mere 13 percent of illiterate respon-
dents were aware of the unit, suggesting that access to the complaint handling
mechanism is not adapted to citizens with low levels of literacy.

While the Ministry of Social Development has conducted several aware-
ness-raising initiatives, its communications materials regarding complaint
handling mechanisms could be improved. The ministry developed mate-
rials for the 2015 “Information, Education, and Communication” campaign,
including information for ministry clients and staff regarding their rights and
the process for submitting and handling complaints. In fact, around two-
thirds of citizens who were interviewed face-to-face in the West Bank and in
the Gaza Strip agreed or strongly agreed that they had prior knowledge of
the procedure for filing a complaint. In 2015, with support from the World
Bank, the ministry developed several brochures and a poster (box 4.2). The
Jenin Directorate, one of the two regional directorates to pilot the strength-
ening of complaint handling mechanisms, created a promotional video with
information about the ministry’s programs and the process for submitting
complaints. Similar initiatives should be expanded. When asked about the
sources of knowledge regarding the complaint handling mechanism, less
than 5 percent of survey respondents in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
cited the ministry’s website or its publications.
48   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




         Box 4.2. Improving Citizen Engagement
         in the Ministry of Social Development’s
         Cash Transfer Program

         In May 2014, the World Bank conducted a rapid diagnostic of the existing
         complaint handling mechanism of the Ministry of Social Development (for-
         merly called the Ministry of Social Affairs), the implementing agency for the
         World Bank-supported cash transfer program, at the ministry’s request, to
         identify constraints and areas for improvement. Based on this assessment, the
         ministry has: (i) improved the design of their complaint handling mechanism;
         (ii) developed communication and training materials about it; (iii) created a
         ministry-specific manual; (iv) delivered a number of capacity-building work-
         shops on the mechanism and citizen engagement; and (v) piloted a formal,
         structured, and effective complaint handling mechanism in two pilot regional
         directorates in Jenin and Abu Dees. Two consultants assisted the ministry in
         developing the operating manual, communications and training materials,
         and building the capacity of ministry staff regarding the procedures of the
         complaint handling mechanism. The ministry is planning to launch an infor-
                                                                    mation, education, and commu-
                                                                    nication campaign in the pilot
                                                                    governorates to inform ministry
                                                                    clients about their rights, the
                                                                    new structures in place, how to
                                                                    submit complaints, and the pro-
                                                                    cess for handling them. It is also
                                                                    upgrading its website to allow
                                                                    citizens to submit their com-
                                                                    plaints online.

                                                                    In addition, as part of the effort
                                                                    to engage beneficiaries and
                                                                    other citizens in the cash trans-
                                                                    fer program, the ministry has


                                                                                                (continued)
                                                                       4. Key Findings   49




Box 4.2. Continued

consulted with beneficiaries, civil society organizations, and other stake-
holders; established text message-based two-way communications with the
program’s beneficiaries to proactively share project-related information and
receive feedback; and linked the complaint handling mechanism to the proj-
ect’s management information system and its poverty-mapping efforts (using
geographic information systems) to identify grievance hotspots. In addition,
the ministry has been actively communicating with its beneficiaries through
a revamped website and social media. More recently, with support from the
World Bank, the ministry has secured 38 tablets for social workers, which will
facilitate beneficiary outreach.

Subject to the availability of additional funding, the ministry plans to expand
the complaint handling mechanism pilot in the two governorates in a phased
manner to the remaining governorates. In collaboration with the Complaints
Department at the Cabinet Secretariat, the ministry plans to upgrade the
management information system for its complaint handling mechanism to
improve its capacity to capture, track, address, and monitor complaints and
beneficiary feedback.
50   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Channels for the uptake of grievances
     Over half of the complainants In the West Bank submitted letters of
     complaint in person or by mail; fax and email were more widely used in
     the Gaza Strip. Over half (52.8 percent) of complainants in the West Bank
     interviewed by phone indicated that they submitted their complaints at the
     ministry in person by filling out a special form designed for that purpose; 17.5
     percent submitted their letter of complaints in person at the ministry; and
     15.3 percent sent a letter by fax. The remainder expressed their grievances
     via email, by telephone, or through an NGO or other private body. These fig-
     ures are markedly different from those of the Gaza Strip, where 32.8 percent
     of respondents submitted complaints by email and 24.1 percent by fax.

     Consistency and quality
     Overall, users seem satisfied with the performance of the complaint unit
     staff. The phone survey revealed that around two-thirds of phone survey
     respondents in the West Bank and Gaza Strip agreed or strongly agreed that
     complaint unit staff acted in a respectful and nondiscriminatory way toward
     them. Dissatisfaction was usually related to aspects such as a lack of respect
     for lines and a sense that there was an unequal provision of information to
     complainants. In the Gaza Strip, 38 percent of respondents who were dis-
     satisfied with the customer service felt they had been discriminated against
     based on gender.

     Communication about the progress on complaints by unit staff is often
     considered unsatisfactory. Among the West Bank survey phone respon-
     dents, 47.2 percent agreed and 8.7 percent strongly agreed that the com-
     plaint unit provided them with all necessary information on the progress of
     their complaint. However, 17 percent of respondents disagreed, 7 percent
     strongly disagreed, and 20.1 percent indicated that they “did not know,”
     reflecting the complainants’ uncertainty regarding the amount of informa-
     tion to which the complaint unit has access and how much information could
     or should be communicated to them. Reasons cited for being dissatisfied
     with the unit’s communication regarding the status of their complaint are pri-
     marily linked to the perception that complaint unit staff were not prepared
     to provide information about the complaint. These findings, in addition
     to highlighting the perception that the unit is not sufficiently transparent,
     reveal deficiencies in the complaint tracking system, which is characterized
                                                                    4. Key Findings   51




by missing status updates. Therefore, while the ministry has an advanced
electronic archive system that does a good job of documenting complaints,
there is room for improving the complaint follow-up system.

Citizens think the timeframe for responding to complaints is unreason-
able, and their satisfaction with outcomes is low. Only around one-third
of phone respondents in the West Bank reported that their complaints were
processed in a reasonable timeframe. Over half did not consider the time-
frames to be reasonable, and 10.5 percent “did not know.” Only one-quar-
ter of complainants were satisfied with the result of the process. The Gaza
Strip phone survey revealed similar results. Only 34.5 percent of complain-
ants said the Ministry of Social Development complaint unit handled their
complaint in a reasonable amount of time, and only 34.5 percent were satis-
fied with the result.

There is a widespread belief among citizens that resorting to the com-
plaint unit will not make any difference and that the result will be unsat-
isfactory. Only 50.4 percent of face-to-face interviewees in the West Bank
said they would file a complaint at the ministry if they encountered a prob-
lem; 68.7 percent of interviewees in the Gaza Strip said the same. In the West
Bank phone survey, 68.9 percent of dissatisfied complainants indicated an
intention to appeal; in the Gaza Strip, 56.8 percent did. The remaining inter-
viewees chose not to submit an appeal, mainly because they did not believe
that the results would improve (55 percent in the West Bank; 36 percent in the
Gaza Strip) or they thought mediation was required for an appeal to succeed
(18 percent in the West Bank; 36 percent in the Gaza Strip). In the face-to-
face survey, 51.6 percent of respondents in the West Bank and 70.8 percent
in the Gaza Strip intended to submit appeals if they were dissatisfied with the
result of their complaint.

Capacity building
Significant progress has been made in terms of the capacity of com-
plaint units. In 2015–16, the Ministry of Social Development prepared a
ministry-specific manual that provides detailed guidance to staff on how to
handle complaints. The ministry developed and tested training materials on
complaint handling, including at a three-day training in Jericho held in April
2015 for ministry staff from Jenin and Abu Dees governorates. The training of
52   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     governorate staff greatly increased their understanding of complaints han-
     dling, improved their communications, and increased their morale. In addi-
     tion, facilities and equipment in pilot governorates were improved through
     the purchase of furniture and computers and with office remodeling that
     included reception areas for visitors—including potential complainants—in
     the ministry complaints department and at the pilot directorates of Jenin
     and Abu Dees.

     Coordination and cooperation
     The Ministry of Social Development is successfully cooperating with
     regional directorates. It has agreed to initiate steps to capture as many
     complaints as possible in the complaints module of their management infor-
     mation system and to make the module available to pilot directorates so that
     they can enter complaints directly.

     Ministry of Education and Higher Education
     Communications and awareness-raising
     About two-thirds of respondents in the West Bank and Gaza Strip know
     of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education’s complaint unit, but
     awareness levels are strongly influenced by education levels. In the West
     Bank, 62.1 percent of face-to-face respondents indicated being aware of
     the complaint unit—the highest rate captured by the survey among ministry
     complaint units in the West Bank. In the Gaza Strip, 67.9 percent of face-to-
     face respondents were aware of the ministry’s complaint unit. In the West
     Bank, 75 percent of respondents with a bachelor’s degree were aware of the
     complaint unit, but among those who only completed elementary school,
     100 percent were unaware of it. In the Gaza Strip, 100 percent of respon-
     dents with a bachelor’s degree were aware of the complaint unit, but only 33
     percent of respondents who had only completed elementary school or who
     were illiterate were, suggesting that access to the complaint handling mech-
     anism is not adapted to citizens with low literacy levels.

     Prior knowledge of the procedures to file a complaint appears to be
     widespread. Eighty percent of face-to-face survey respondents in the West
     Bank and 82 percent in the Gaza Strip agreed or strongly agreed that they
     knew about the procedure to submit complaints.
                                                                       4. Key Findings   53




Box 4.3. Recent Interventions by the
Ministry of Education and Higher Education
to Improve Complaint Resolution

The Ministry of Education and Higher Education recently took a number of
steps to listen to citizens, collect their feedback, and improve the complaint
resolution process. The ministry’s complaint unit, empowered by the new
minister who took office in August 2015, has:

•	 Increased staff in the complaint unit;
•	 Adopted the complaint management system piloted by the Directorate
   General of Complaints (DGC), which allows citizens to submit complaints
   online;
•	 Initiated a campaign to increase awareness about the complaint handling
   mechanism through social and electronic media;
•	 Began accepting complaints through email and social media; and
•	 Started using complaints analysis to improve policy and procedures.

As a result of these measures, the complaint unit received 1,160 complaints
in 2015 compared with 314 complaints in 2014. About 100 of the 1,660 com-
plaints were submitted through a newly rolled-out complaint management
system. In September–November 2015, 55 percent of complaints were sub-
mitted through email, 20 percent through the complaint management sys-
tem, and 2 percent through face-to-face meetings at the ministry and regular
mail. The sharp increase in the number of complaints can be attributed to
the minister’s support, the awareness campaign led by the minister, and the
addition of email and the complaint management system as complaint-up-
take channels that make it easier to submit complaints. Some complaints
have led to procedural changes in the ministry, such as a series of complaints
from teachers regarding their transfers, which led to a directive regarding the
matter. Similarly, complaints submitted by a number of teachers about their
firings were investigated and led to the reinstatement of 13 of the 18 teach-
ers whose employment had been unjustly terminated. This then led to fur-
ther enhancements in school oversight and supervision practices, including
instituting a transparent system for the provision of periodical staff appraisal
and performance feedback. The complaint unit has drafted an action plan to
further improve complaint handling practices.
54   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     The Ministry of Education and Higher Education promoted the complaint
     unit and provided information to potential users through posters, bro-
     chures, television spots, and newspaper advertisements, among other meth-
     ods (box 4.3). In the West Bank, only about one-fourth of face-to-face survey
     respondents had received information about the complaint unit through the
     ministry, either through the ministry’s website, publications, or brochures,
     or by calling the ministry. Word of mouth is another important source of
     information about the complaint unit: 35 percent of respondents knew of
     the complaint unit through a friend and 29 percent through a former com-
     plainant. In the Gaza Strip, just under half of the face-to-face respondents
     learned about the complaint unit through ministry-provided information, 18
     percent through friends, and 24 percent through former complainants.

     The media campaign of the ministry’s complaint unit, supported by the
     new minister who took office in August 2015, including social media and
     television outreach efforts, has been effective. In addition, the complaint
     unit has been working with the Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of
     Armed Forces on workshops and brochures aimed at diversifying communi-
     cations materials to increase citizen awareness of the complaint unit and of
     the procedures for submitting complaints. These efforts could explain the
     recent spike in the number of complaints from 314 in 2014 to 1,660 in 2015,
     and are reflected in the survey results regarding knowledge of the proce-
     dure to submit complaints. Indeed, two-thirds of West Bank respondents
     indicated that their knowledge originated from the ministry: 33.3 percent
     through a ministry employee, 20.1 percent through the ministry website or
     publications, and 13.3 percent through a phone call to the ministry. As for
     Gaza Strip respondents, 57.1 percent said that their knowledge came from
     the ministry, 28.6 percent through a ministry employee, 14.3 percent through
     a phone call to the ministry, 14.2 percent through the ministry website or
     publications, and the rest through former complainants (AMAN 2016: 63–64).

     Complaints have been used to drive visible change in terms of the poli-
     cies and procedures of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education
     on topics such as teacher transfers; unfair dismissals; and school oversight and
     supervision practices, including instituting a transparent system for the provi-
     sion of periodic staff appraisal and performance feedback (box 4.3). Despite
     these efforts, when asked about possible ways to improve the complaint unit,
     29 percent of West Bank and 38 percent of Gaza Strip phone survey respon-
     dents continued to suggest: “increasing awareness raising programs.”
                                                                     4. Key Findings   55




Channels for grievance uptake 
The majority of West Bank complainants submitted their complaints in
person by submitting a written letter or by filling out the ministry’s griev-
ance form. Results of the telephone interviews in the West Bank revealed that
32 percent of complainants submitted their grievance by filling out the minis-
try-specific form for complaints at the ministry; and 29 percent by submitting a
written letter of complaint at the ministry. Thirteen percent of complaints were
submitted by email; 13 percent by fax; and 13 percent through other means,
such as by telephone or through an NGO, a third party, a municipality, or a
local council. In the Gaza Strip, 24 percent of complainants used the special
form available at the ministry, 30 percent submitted complaints by email, and
16 and 18 percent by fax and telephone, respectively. In a meeting with parent
councils, participants highlighted that the availability of telephone access to
the ministry was not always optimal. They said the lines were often busy and
expressed a desire for a toll free phone number.

However, these channels for grievance uptake are beginning to expand
due to the rollout of a complaint management system that allows for the
submission of complaints online. Complaints can now also be accepted
through email and social media. In September–November 2015, 55 percent
of complaints were submitted through email, 20 percent through the com-
plaint management system and 2 percent through face-to-face meetings at
the ministry and by mail. These additions have made important contributions
and have facilitated the expression of grievances.

For the most part, citizens are willing to submit complaints to the com-
plaint unit if necessary, and this is a positive trend. Among the respon-
dents exiting the ministry in the West Bank, 67.8 percent agreed that they
would submit a complaint if they had a problem, indicating a fairly well-
established level of trust in the ministry’s complaint unit. Among complain-
ants in the West Bank interviewed by telephone, only 14.3 percent had sub-
mitted complaints to parties other than the ministry. Among those that had,
half said they did so mainly to avoid the bureaucracy. In the Gaza Strip, 80
percent of visitors said that they would be willing to file a complaint with the
complaint unit, and 40.8 percent of those interviewed by phone in the Gaza
Strip said that they submitted complaints to parties other than the ministry
complaint unit. The most important reason expressed by half of the respon-
dents was that they did not know that the complaint unit existed.
56   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Consistency and quality
     Survey results point toward good customer service. Among respondents
     interviewed by phone who had interacted with the West Bank Ministry of
     Education and Higher Education complaint unit, 72.6 percent agreed that
     the unit staff interacted with users in a respectful, neutral, and nondiscrimina-
     tory manner. In the Gaza Strip, 68 percent agreed. In the Gaza Strip, over half
     of the respondents who were dissatisfied with the behavior of the complaint
     unit staff indicated that they believed they had been discriminated against
     based on their gender (56 percent).

     The ministry’s complaint handling mechanism appears to be working
     well—it is registering all received complaints and resolving most of
     them—but more progress can be made in terms of procedures for pro-
     viding information regarding the status of complaints. Since 2007, the
     complaint unit has used a computerized system for tracking complaints with
     Microsoft Excel®. The unit strives to communicate with complainants on a reg-
     ular basis, keeping them updated on the status of their complaints. In fact,
     56 percent of phone respondents in the West Bank and 66 percent in the
     Gaza Strip agreed or strongly agreed that accessing the complaint unit to
     inquire about the status of their complaint was easy. More than half of respon-
     dents in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip who reported that they did not find
     it easy to follow up on their complaints indicated that this was due to a lack
     of information provided by ministry employees or an unwillingness of com-
     plaint unit staff to keep them updated. Significantly, 29 percent of Gaza Strip
     respondents pointed out that there is sometimes no staff present in the office.

     Citizens feel that timeframes should be shortened, and communication
     with users about results systematized. Only 35.7 percent of respondents
     in the West Bank thought the timeframe for resolving complaints was rea-
     sonable; and fewer than half (47.6 percent) reported being informed of the
     result. In the Gaza Strip, however, 66 percent of complainants agreed that
     the unit addressed complaints in a reasonable amount of time, and 74 per-
     cent said they had been informed of the results of their complaints.

     Similarly, satisfaction with results in the West Bank is fairly low. Only
     approximately one-third (32.6 percent) of respondents in the West Bank said
     they were satisfied with the results of their complaint. By contrast, in the Gaza
     Strip, two-thirds (66 percent) of complainants expressed satisfaction with the
                                                                     4. Key Findings   57




results of their complaints: 12 percent very satisfied and 54 percent satisfied.
In the past, in order to evaluate satisfaction levels among users, the com-
plaint unit has taken the commendable initiative to survey a random sam-
ple of 50 complainants to get an understanding of their experience with the
complaint handling mechanism. This was only a one-off undertaking, how-
ever, and there is no institutionalized feedback mechanism for complainants.

Capacity building
The staff of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education’s complaint
unit is rather small, given that it receives more complaints than any other
ministry. The unit used to be staffed by only one person, but since August
2015, with the appointment of the new minister, the number of staff has
increased (World Bank 2016). The lack of staff creates the risk of backlogs
and makes the unit dependent on lower level institutions—e.g., schools—to
resolve complaints. Due to the staff shortage, the unit is not always in a posi-
tion to conduct on-the-ground investigations or monitoring to ensure that
complaints have been satisfactorily resolved.

To date, staff shortages have limited the complaint unit’s ability to use
available data to guide decision making. The management information
system for the complaint unit can facilitate the analysis of trends in perfor-
mance and problem areas at the ministry, but the complaint unit is too busy
to conduct statistical analysis of the complaints beyond what they do for their
reports to the Directorate General of Complaints (DGC).

Cooperation and coordination
Cooperation across administrative levels and departments appears to
be strong in the ministry. The complaint unit seems to cooperate well with
the DGC and with other ministry departments. Ministry complaint unit staff
was involved in the development of DGC’s complaint management sys-
tem. About 95 percent of the recommendations of the complaint unit to the
Minister of Education are approved. In addition, the ability of school staff
and administrators to resolve many complaints means that a good number of
them never reach the ministry complaint handling mechanism.

In the absence of dedicated focal points for registering complaints at
lower levels, the ministry complaint unit relies heavily on the regional
directorates’ internal control units. This is problematic because the
58   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     internal control units do not have the same autonomy or specialized focus as
     the complaint unit—e.g., they lack the authority to conduct on-site investi-
     gations. There are still no dedicated focal points in the regional directorates
     to handle complaints even though the complaint unit has been pushing for
     them for a long time. Many complaints received by the directorates are not
     passed on to the complaint unit.

     Ministry of Local Government
     Communications and awareness-raising
     The level of awareness of the Ministry of Local Government complaint
     unit across the Palestinian territories is fairly high, but the complaint
     unit’s online presence could be strengthened. Fifty-five percent of face-
     to-face survey respondents in West Bank and 70.2 percent in the Gaza Strip
     are aware of the complaint unit’s existence. Knowledge about the complaint
     unit originates from a variety of sources, such as contact with the ministry or
     through a former complainant. Some users also find out about the complaint
     unit independently by spotting the grievance boxes displayed by the minis-
     try. In general, the ministry website and publications are underutilized: only
     9 percent of respondents in the West Bank phone survey, 6 percent in the
     West Bank face-to-face survey, 15 percent in the Gaza Strip phone survey,
     and 6 percent in the Gaza Strip face-to-face survey cited either as a source of
     information about the complaint unit.

     User awareness of the procedures to submit complaints is widespread.
     Eighty-two percent of the face-to-face survey respondents in the West Bank
     and 83 percent in the Gaza Strip agreed or strongly agreed that they knew
     about the procedures. The ministry seems to be a solid source of information
     on the procedures, according to face-to-face respondents in the West Bank:
     29.6 percent said they received the information through a phone call to the
     ministry, 25.9 percent through a ministry employee, 14.8 percent through a
     ministry website or publication, 22.2 percent through a former complainant,
     and 7.5 percent through other means. In the Gaza Strip, 43.8 percent of
     face-to-face respondents received the information they needed through a
     phone call to the ministry, 18.7 percent through a ministry employee, 18.7
     percent through the website, and 18.8 percent through former complain-
     ants (AMAN 2016: 93–94).
                                                                     4. Key Findings   59




These results reflect the efforts made by the complaint unit to produce
materials that would increase citizen awareness of the complaint unit and
the process to submit complaints. Indeed, the Ministry of Local Government
complaint unit conducted a student-led outreach campaign in 2012 that
included the dissemination of printed materials—e.g., brochures and post-
ers—to families explaining the objective of the complaint unit, where and
how to submit complaints, and the appeals process. However, this campaign
lapsed when the Belgian Technical Cooperation financial support ended.

Channels for grievance uptake
While most West Bank complainants submit their grievances in person
with a letter to the ministry, Gaza Strip complainants favor phone, fax,
and email to communicate their complaints to the complaint unit. In the
West Bank phone survey, 61 percent of respondents submitted complaints
by personally delivering a letter of complaint to the ministry, 13 percent by
sending a letter of complaint by fax, 9 percent by filling out the dedicated
ministry form at the ministry in person, and 4 percent by email. The results
of the Gaza Strip phone survey are quite different: 20 percent of respon-
dents submitted their complaints by phone, 20 percent by fax, 19 percent by
email, 19 percent by filling out the ministry form, 14 percent by delivering a
personal complaint letter to the ministry, and 8 percent by channeling their
complaint through an NGO or other private body.

Citizens seem quite willing to submit grievances to the complaint unit.
Among face-to-face survey participants, 73.9 percent from the West Bank and
79.6 percent from the Gaza Strip agreed that they would submit a complaint
if they had a problem, reflecting a fairly high level of trust and confidence
in the ministry and the complaint unit. In the West Bank, 42 percent of the
respondents who said they would not file a complaint to the complaint unit
indicated “highly bureaucratic procedures” as a reason. In the Gaza Strip, 28
percent indicated as the reason for not filing a complaint their conviction that
nepotism and favoritism would determine the complaint’s resolution.

A significant proportion of citizens who address their complaints to enti-
ties other than the complaint unit do so to receive legal advice and addi-
tional support. Results of the telephone interviews in the West Bank reveal
that 26.1 percent of complainants filed their grievances through parties other
60   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     than the ministry’s complaint unit (e.g., an NGOs or the Anti-Corruption
     Commission). Half of these complainants said they did so in search of sup-
     port, backing, and legal advice; 17 percent claimed a lack of awareness of the
     complaint unit, another 17 percent sought to avoid bureaucratic procedures,
     and yet another 17 percent lacked confidence and trust in the performance
     and professionalism of the government. The face-to-face survey in the West
     Bank has similar results: 30.3 percent of respondents submitted complaints to
     parties other than the ministry’s complaint unit. The main factors underlying
     their decisions are the need to receive legal support and advice (44 percent),
     the hope of avoiding bureaucratic procedures (33 percent), and a lack of
     knowledge about the complaint unit (11 percent). The need for legal advice
     was clearly the main reason why many turned to outside parties. This can
     be linked to the services provided by the ministry, municipalities, and local
     councils, which concentrate on issues of construction and building permits.
     In the Gaza Strip, 39 percent of phone survey respondents and 50 percent
     of face-to-face survey respondents submitted complaints to parties other
     than the Ministry of Local Government because they were unaware of the
     complaint unit (phone survey: 18 percent; face-to-face survey: 44 percent),
     bureaucratic procedures (phone survey: 32 percent; face-to-face survey: 33
     percent) and the need for support and technical advice (phone survey: 27
     percent; face-to-face survey: 22 percent).

     Consistency and quality
     Further progress can be made in terms of staff behavior toward com-
     plainants, especially in the West Bank. Indeed, survey results have shown
     that only approximately one-third of West Bank phone survey respondents
     agreed that the Ministry of Local Government complaint unit staff behavior
     was respectful and nondiscriminatory (but none strongly agreed), one-third
     disagreed or strongly disagreed, and one-third did not encounter complaint
     unit staff. In the Gaza Strip, 67.8 percent of respondents agreed or strongly
     agreed that the treatment of complainants by unit staff was respectful, neu-
     tral, and nondiscriminatory. All of the respondents met with a complaint unit
     employee during the process. The main reason for dissatisfaction indicated
     by phone survey respondents in the West Bank was their perception of unfair
     treatment: 43 percent said they felt that some complainants were given
     preferential treatment over others. Similarly, in the Gaza Strip, 50 percent of
     respondents indicated that their negative assessment of staff behavior was
                                                                      4. Key Findings   61




linked to a perception of nepotism or favoritism (wasta) rather than the equal
principle of “first-come first-served,” and 44 percent believed their negative
treatment by staff was due to gender bias.

Although the Ministry of Local Government complaint unit has a data-
base to track complaints, there is room for improvement in terms of
communicating status updates to complainants. The complaint unit issues
receipts for complaints received and has developed a management informa-
tion system that allows for complaint analysis. Even so, the West Bank phone
survey reveals that only 34.8 percent of complainants agreed that accessing
the complaint unit to follow-up on their complaint was easy; around two-
thirds disagreed or strongly disagreed. Many respondents expressed strong
views: 56 percent strongly disagreed that access was easy. The main reason
cited for dissatisfaction with the process was a lack of updated information
(40 percent) and lack of preparedness among complaint unit staff to provide
information regarding the complaints (33 percent). In the Gaza Strip, approx-
imately half of the phone respondents found it easy to get information on the
status of their complaints; half did not. In addition to a lack of updated infor-
mation and staff preparedness, respondents in the Gaza strip (36 percent)
also noted that the process of retrieving complainant files was lengthy. In the
West Bank phone survey, a very significant proportion of respondents—60.9
percent—strongly disagreed, and 26.1 percent disagreed, that the complaint
unit provided them with information about the complaint’s progress. Only 13
percent agreed that they had received the required information regarding
the progress of the complaint. The Gaza Strip phone survey has fairly differ-
ent results. In the Gaza Strip, a total of 66 percent of complainants agreed or
strongly agreed that the complaint unit provided them with required infor-
mation on the progress of their complaint, while 34 percent disagreed or
strongly disagreed.

Complainants in the West Bank were much less satisfied than those in
the Gaza Strip about being informed of the results of their complaint. In
the West Bank, only 26.1 percent of complainants said they were informed
of results, and only 4.3 percent felt that the complaint handling had been
processed in a reasonable amount of time. In the Gaza Strip, however, 62.7
percent of phone respondents said they were informed of the results of their
complaint, and 54.2 percent were satisfied with timeliness of the process.
62   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




         Box 4.4. Complaint Resolution through
         One-Stop Shops in Ramallah Municipality

         Ramallah Municipality is one of four municipal governments in the Palestinian
         Territories that established “one-stop shops” in 2006. It handles about 100
         government services; the most frequently used are paying municipal fees
         and obtaining permits and licenses. The tracking and reporting of service
         requests and transactions is computerized. Citizens filing service requests can
         check the status of their cases online using computer kiosks located in the
         municipality office. This process will soon allow citizens to check the status
         of their requests online from any location. The shop also conducts customer
         satisfaction surveys: three have already been completed.

         The municipality established a complaint handling unit in May 2014 to replace
         its informal system with a formal, effective complaint handling mechanism.
         Although the unit is small, with only two full-time staff, other departments
         assist them in investigating and responding to complaints. For example,
         the engineering department deals with complaints related to property bor-
         ders, encroachments, and building code violations, among other issues. The
         municipality’s complaint handling unit has developed a computerized track-
         ing system. The unit’s presence as well as the rights of citizens to submit
         complaints has been advertised in newspapers and magazines, on billboards;
         in brochures; and in public places, including the one-stop shop.

         The complaint handling unit receives about 500–600 complaints per year,
         by phone, on standardized forms, or as letters of complaint. Complaints
         are entered into a computerized database—the complaint handling mecha-
         nism’s management information system—which includes 15 customized tem-
         plates to record various types of complaints. Depending on the nature of the
         grievance, the complaint handling unit refers it to the relevant government
         department. It can be flagged “urgent.” The department responsible unit
         for investigating and resolving the complaint has 2–3 days to respond to
         the unit, indicating how long the redressal action is expected to take. If no
         response is received, the unit sends the department a reminder. If there is still


                                                                                                (continued)
                                                                        4. Key Findings   63




  Box 4.4. Continued

  no response, the unit alerts the mayor. If the complaint is submitted at the
  one-stop shop, the complainant is given a receipt.

  The complaint handling unit produces monthly reports with separate sections
  on formal and informal complaints. It compiles statistics that include the sta-
  tus of complaints and their resolution. The unit plans to link the complaint
  handling mechanism’s management information system to geographic infor-
  mation systems in order to improve analysis. The unit also conducts random
  spot checks 2–3 times a month to see if complaints are being satisfactorily
  resolved.




Complainants in the Gaza Strip were much more satisfied with outcomes
of their complaints than those in the West Bank. The West Bank phone
survey showed that only 17.4 percent of respondents were satisfied with the
outcome of their complaint, while in the Gaza Strip, satisfaction among citi-
zens was almost three times as high: 51 percent of complainants expressed
satisfaction with the result of their complaint—17 percent were very satisfied,
and 34 percent were satisfied.

Coordination and cooperation
Complaint unit staff seems to cooperate and communicate well with
other departments when investigating complaints. Staff have also been
cooperating with the Directorate General of Complaints by, for example,
providing inputs to improve the complaint management system.

Currently, no complaint officers exist below the ministry level. Existing
focal points for complaint handling in regional offices do not have clearly
defined responsibilities or reporting requirements, so while they do contrib-
ute to complaint handling efforts, their role is not formalized.

Municipalities with citizen service centers at the local government level
often appear to have well-functioning complaint handling mechanisms
(box 4.4), creating opportunities for potential synergies.
64   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Palestinian Land Authority
     Communications and awareness-raising
     Awareness levels of the complaint unit and of procedures to submit
     complaints to the Palestinian Land Authority is lower in the West Bank
     than in the Gaza Strip. Overall awareness levels of the Palestinian Land
     Authority complaint unit in the West Bank are low: only 41.5 percent of face-
     to-face respondents knew of it. In the Gaza Strip, however, 64.9 percent of
     respondents were aware of its existence. Similarly, not all West Bank citizens
     are well-informed about the complaint handling process: fewer than half
     (44 percent) of face-to-face survey respondents in the West Bank agreed that
     they knew about the procedure for submitting complaints. In the Gaza Strip,
     88 percent of the respondents were aware of the process.

     The Palestinian Land Authority provided information about the existence
     of the complaint unit to fewer than half of the survey respondents. Other
     sources of information, such as NGOs, former complainants, and friends,
     dominated. In the West Bank, only 13 percent of phone respondents knew
     of the complaint unit through the ministry. In the Gaza Strip, 41 percent knew
     about it through the ministry—either by contacting it or through their web-
     site or publications. However, it is important to note that the phone surveys
     for the Palestinian Land Authority had very small samples: eight respondents
     for the phone survey in the West Bank and 40 in the Gaza Strip. Fewer than
     half of the face-to-face survey respondents across the Palestinian Territories
     knew of the complaint unit through contact with the ministry, its website, or
     its publications.

     In both the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, over half of face-to-face
     respondents indicated that the information about procedures to submit
     a complaint originated from the Palestinian Land Authority, whether by
     a phone call, a Palestinian Land Authority employee, or the Palestinian Land
     Authority’s website or publications. The main other source of information
     was former complainants: 40 percent in the West Bank, 37.5 percent in the
     Gaza Strip (AMAN 2016: 115–116).

     B. Channels for grievance uptake
     While West Bank complainants have resorted to in-person visits and writ-
     ing letters to the ministry to submit their complaints, Gaza Strip com-
     plainants tend to use email and fax. Results of the West Bank telephone
                                                                     4. Key Findings   65




survey regarding access channels reveal that half of the respondents submit-
ted their grievance by visiting the Palestinian Land Authority and bringing
a letter they had written with them, and the remaining half by visiting the
authority and filling out an official complaint form. In the Gaza Strip, 23 per-
cent of survey respondents submitted complaints by email and 23 percent by
fax, which means that almost half did not submit their complaint in person.
Eighteen percent submitted their own letter at a visit to the authority, 13 per-
cent submitted their grievance through an NGO or private institution, and 13
percent by telephone.

Complainants in the Gaza Strip are much more willing to file complaints
with the Palestinian Land Authority than those in the West Bank. In the
West Bank, 60.4 percent of face-to-face survey respondents agreed that
they would file a complaint with the Palestinian Land Authority if they had
a problem. In the Gaza Strip, 79.4 percent of the survey respondents said
that they would file a complaint if necessary. In the West Bank, the main rea-
sons indicated by respondents who were not willing to file a complaint to the
Palestinian Land Authority were highly bureaucratic procedures (37 percent),
the conviction that personal relations are necessary to reach a favorable
outcome (25 percent), and overall lack of confidence in government perfor-
mance (21 percent). In the Gaza Strip, essential reasons cited were previous
experiences of friends or acquaintances (23 percent), an overall lack of con-
fidence in government performance (21 percent), a conviction that personal
connections are needed (20 percent), a belief that filing a complaint with an
NGO would be more effective (20 percent), and the impression that proce-
dures are too bureaucratic (18 percent).

Many citizens, it would seem, do not trust the Palestinian Land Authority’s
complaint handling mechanism and therefore do not approach their set-
tlement offices for assistance or to report their grievances despite the
huge numbers of citizens using Palestinian Land Authority services and the
fact that valuation procedures have led to hundreds of complaints. This mis-
trust in the system is suggested by the comparatively low number of griev-
ances received by the complaint unit: 17 in 2013 and 20 in 2014.

Citizens turn to third parties for help. In the West Bank, 29.4 percent of
face-to-face survey respondents submitted complaints to parties other than
the Palestinian Land Authority’s complaint unit; in the Gaza Strip, 22.2 percent
66   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     did the same. In the West Bank, half of the respondents did so because they
     were unaware of the complaint unit; half sought to avoid the bureaucracy. In
     the Gaza Strip, 60 percent of respondents who submitted complaints to par-
     ties other than the Palestinian Land Authority’s complaint unit did so because
     they were unaware of the unit’s existence; 40 percent were trying to save
     time and effort—they believed that submitting a grievance to the Palestinian
     Land Authority complaint unit would involve a heavily bureaucratic process.

     Consistency and quality
     Citizens seem generally satisfied with complaint unit staff behavior. Among
     respondents interviewed by phone in the West Bank, 75 percent agreed or
     strongly agreed that their treatment by the complaint unit employees was
     respectful, neutral, and nondiscriminatory. Seventy percent of respondents in
     the Gaza Strip agreed or strongly agreed that they had received fair treatment.

     Satisfaction rates among citizens regarding access to the complaint unit
     and communications about the progress and results of complaints are
     fairly positive. Among West Bank phone survey respondents, 62.5 percent
     agreed or strongly agreed that they found it easy to reach the complaint unit
     and inquire about complaint handling procedures. Half of the respondents
     claimed that the complaint unit had provided them with sufficient informa-
     tion regarding the progress of their complaint. In the Gaza Strip, 57.5 percent
     of phone survey respondents agreed (35 percent) or strongly agreed (22.5
     percent) that it was easy to access the complaint unit to follow up on their
     complaints. Respondents who disagreed cited as reasons that the process of
     searching for their file took too long (44 percent), staff was unavailable (25 per-
     cent), and the staff was not prepared to provide them with information regard-
     ing their complaint (19 percent). In the Gaza Strip, 67.5 percent of respondents
     agreed or strongly agreed that the complaint unit had provided them with suf-
     ficient information for answering their inquiry regarding complaint handling.

     Satisfaction levels with the outcomes of the grievance procedure, com-
     munications regarding results, and timeframes are lower in the West
     Bank than in the Gaza Strip. Only 37.5 percent of phone respondents in
     the West Bank indicated that they were satisfied with the results of their com-
     plaint. In the Gaza Strip, a much higher proportion of respondents expressed
     satisfaction—32.5 percent were very satisfied, and 27.5 percent were satis-
     fied. Similarly, only 37.5 percent of West Bank phone survey respondents said
                                                                      4. Key Findings   67




they were informed of the results of their complaint versus 64.1 percent of
Gaza Strip respondents. Finally, one out of two respondents in the West Bank
phone survey was dissatisfied with the timeliness of the grievance procedure;
and 65 percent of phone survey respondents in the Gaza Strip agreed that
the Palestinian Land Authority complaint unit addressed complaints in a rea-
sonable amount of time.

Almost all of the complaints received by the complaint unit are resolved.
Out of 17 complaints received in 2013, 14 were resolved. Twenty complaints
were received in 2014, and all of them were resolved.

Capacity building
One key barrier to the effectiveness of the Palestinian Land Authority
complaint unit is a shortage of human resources. The unit depends on a
single employee to manage all of the complaints in addition to other tasks.
As a result, most complaints are transferred to the chairman’s office of the
land authority to be solved. There is no separate physical office within the
Palestinian Land Authority to receive complainants.

Coordination and cooperation
The primary issue that the Palestinian Land Authority must solve regard-
ing coordination involves focal points for complaints at levels lower than
the Palestinian Land Authority complaint unit. Settlement offices do not
currently have complaint focal points despite the fact that they are the first
point of contact for most citizens. Complaint focal points would enable the
authority to capture many more complaints because the actual count of com-
plaints only reflects those received by the complaint unit, not those received
by the chairman’s office or a field office.

The relationship between the Palestinian Land Authority complaint unit
and municipalities could be clarified. Many complaints can affect munic-
ipalities given that they are related to land use, buildings, and property
registration.

Coordination and cooperation can be improved within the Palestinian
Land Authority. In particular, departments that receive citizen complaints,
such as the surveying, control, internal audit, and public relations departments,
should know how to react and transfer grievances to the complaint unit.
68   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Ministry of Health
     Communications and awareness-raising	
     Awareness levels of the Ministry of Health’s complaint unit and of proce-
     dures to submit complaints is higher in the Gaza Strip than in the West
     Bank. While only 44.7 percent of face-to-face survey respondents in the West
     Bank were aware of the Ministry of Health complaint unit, 68.4 percent of
     respondents in the Gaza Strip knew of it.

     Fewer than half of the respondents learned about the complaint unit
     from an official ministry source. Regarding sources of knowledge about the
     complaint unit, 33 percent of the face-to-face respondents in the West Bank
     said they learned about the complaint unit by contacting the ministry, 25
     percent through a previous complainant, 17 percent through a friend, 14 per-
     cent through the ministry’s website or publications, and 11 percent through
     an NGO or private body. In the Gaza Strip, 28 percent of respondents knew
     of the complaint unit by contacting the ministry, 24 percent through NGOs
     and private institutions, 21 percent through previous complainants, 17 per-
     cent from friends, and 10 percent from the ministry’s website and publica-
     tions. It therefore appears that the ministry is by no means the primary source
     of information regarding the complaint unit. The results of the phone survey,
     which only included interviews with actual complainants, show similar trends:
     45 percent of respondents in the West Bank and 42 percent in the Gaza Strip
     knew of the complaint unit through a friend.

     At least two-thirds of respondents knew about the procedures to file a
     complaint with the Ministry of Health complaint unit, and while informa-
     tion about procedures has been primarily shared through personal con-
     tacts, the ministry has also played a key role in the dissemination of this
     knowledge. Approximately two-thirds of face-to-face survey respondents in
     the West Bank agreed (35 percent) or strongly agreed (32 percent) that they
     understood the procedures to file a complaint. In the West Bank, 37 percent
     of respondents learned about the procedures from previous complainants,
     33.3 percent from the ministry’s website or from its publications, 18.5 per-
     cent by calling the ministry, and 7.4 percent from a ministry employee. In the
     Gaza Strip, 86 percent of face-to-face survey respondents either agreed or
     strongly agreed that they had previous knowledge of complaint procedures.
     Forty percent said they knew by contacting the ministry on the phone, 36
                                                                     4. Key Findings   69




percent through an employee at the ministry, and 16 percent through the
ministry website or its publications (AMAN 2016: 134–135).

Channels for grievance uptake	
Most citizens file complaints in writing—either by personal letter or ded-
icated ministry form. In the West Bank, 48 percent of phone survey respon-
dents had submitted a personal letter of complaint at the ministry, 28 percent
filled out a dedicated complaint form at the ministry, 12 percent submitted a
complaint by fax, and 12 percent by other means. In the Gaza Strip, 38 per-
cent filed a personal letter of complaint, 21 percent used the form at the min-
istry, 21 percent used email, and 17 percent submitted their complaint by fax.

Complaints filed with parties other than the complaint unit and the reluc-
tance among some to submit complaints to it suggest that citizens do not
yet fully trust the Ministry of Health’s complaint unit. In the West Bank, over
half (54.3 percent) of face-to-face survey respondents agreed that they would
submit a complaint to the ministry’s complaint unit if they were faced with a
problem. In the Gaza Strip, 57.9 percent of complainants said they would file
a complaint to the complaint unit if needed. At the same time, 32.8 percent of
complainants interviewed by phone in the West Bank and 66.7 percent in the
Gaza Strip said that they had filed their complaints through parties other than
the ministry’s complaint unit. The main reasons given by West Bank respon-
dents were: a lack of confidence in the government’s performance and profes-
sionalism (47 percent); they were seeking support, backing, and legal advice
(26 percent); they perceived the process to be highly bureaucratic (16 percent);
and they were unaware of the complaint unit (11 percent). Gaza Strip com-
plainants gave reasons such as: the need for external advice (33 percent), a
lack of trust (27 percent), a desire to avoid the bureaucracy (27 percent); and
a lack of awareness of the complaint unit (13 percent). In the West Bank, 42.9
percent of face-to-face survey respondents filed complaints through parties
other than the complaint unit, but in these cases, the main reason indicated for
getting external help was that they were seeking support, backing, and legal
advice (47 percent); 40 percent indicated a lack of awareness of the complaint
unit. In the Gaza Strip, 48.1 percent of face-to-face survey respondents said
they filed their complaint somewhere other than at the Ministry of Health com-
plaint unit. They too cited seeking support and legal/technical advice as the
main reason (54 percent).
70   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Consistency and quality
     Treatment of complainants seems satisfactory, although a number of
     respondents did not directly interact with complaint unit staff. The West
     Bank phone survey revealed that 43.1 percent of respondents did not meet
     any complaint unit employee in the process of submitting their complaint. Of
     the remaining, 44.8 percent strongly agreed or agreed that they were treated
     in a fair and nondiscriminatory manner; 12.1 percent strongly disagreed or
     disagreed. In the Gaza Strip, 58.3 percent of phone survey respondents
     agreed or strongly agreed that they were treated respectfully, neutrally, and
     without discrimination. For approximately two-thirds of the dissatisfied Gaza
     Strip respondents, the main reason indicated was a perception of unfair
     treatment that privileged some complainants over others. Thirty-three per-
     cent felt they had been discriminated against based on their gender.

     Following up on complaints is not easy. Only 53.3 percent of phone sur-
     vey respondents in the West Bank and 54.2 percent in the Gaza Strip found
     it easy to access the complaint unit to follow up on their complaints. In the
     West Bank, 44 percent of respondents cited a lack of readiness among com-
     plaint unit employees to provide them with information as the main diffi-
     culty. Another 25 percent said the employee simply had no new information
     regarding the status of the complaint, and 16 percent said the search for
     their file took too long. In the Gaza Strip, those who disagreed indicated
     the same reasons as in the West Bank: 27.3 percent cited the employee’s
     lack of readiness to provide information on the complaint, 27.3 percent com-
     plained about the time it took to retrieve their file, 18.1 percent mentioned
     an absence of updated information, and 27.3 percent said the employee
     was not present. In the West Bank, 31 percent of phone survey respondents
     agreed or strongly agreed that they had received sufficient information from
     the complaint unit regarding the progress of their complaint. In the Gaza
     Strip, the rate was higher, with 58.3 percent of respondents saying they were
     satisfied with the quantity of information they received from the unit regard-
     ing their complaint.

     Satisfaction levels with outcomes, timeliness, and quality of communica-
     tion are insufficient in the West Bank. In the West Bank, only 12.3 percent
     of phone survey respondents were satisfied with the outcome of the griev-
     ance process; 50 percent said they intended to appeal. Dissatisfaction with
     outcomes appears to be related to the time it takes to address complaints:
                                                                   4. Key Findings   71




only 24.2 percent of respondents in the West Bank felt that their complaint
had been handled in a reasonable time. Communication about the results
also played a role: only 24.1 percent of respondents in the West Bank were
informed of the outcome of their complaint. In the Gaza Strip, 79.2 percent of
respondents were satisfied with the results of their complaint, only 14.3 per-
cent of dissatisfied complainants were considering an appeal, 58.3 percent
were satisfied with timeframes, and 66.7 percent said they were informed of
the result of their complaint.

Data provided by the Ministry of Health regarding outcomes showed
that almost all complaints were accepted (over 95 percent). In 2014, all
86 complaints received by the complaint unit were resolved, and ministry
officials said that most complaints are resolved quickly due to their urgent
character—e.g., patient treatment.

Capacity building
The Ministry of Health complaint unit has four employees who use the
management information system to help analyze trends in Ministry of
Health performance and problem areas.

Coordination and cooperation
Coordination between the Ministry of Health’s complaint unit and sub-
ministry levels is limited. Most complaints are received and resolved at hos-
pitals, health care centers, and other front-line health care providers. They
do not go to the complaint unit and are thus not tracked—complaints are
captured by the ministry database only if they are not resolved at the health
care facility and therefore received by the complaint unit.

There is no formal complaint handling mechanism at the service-provider
level. Except for the Ramallah Medical Complex (see box 4.5), there is
no dedicated person or system for dealing with complaints at the ser-
vice-provider level. The complaint unit therefore has little information about
the complaints handled and resolved by front-line health care providers.

Other departments of the Ministry of Health are generally cooperative
about handling complaints. About 90 percent of the complaints received
by the complaint unit come from within the Ministry of Health; the remain-
ing 10 percent are referred from outside the ministry, for instance by the
72   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




         Box 4.5. Improved Customer Relations
         Leads to Improved Service Provision:
         Complaint Handling at the Palestinian
         Medical Complex in Ramallah

         In the Palestinian Territories, deteriorating socioeconomic conditions, restric-
         tions on movement, and limitations on the importation of medical equipment
         and medicines prevent the development of a universally accessible, afford-
         able, and responsive health care system. The Palestinian Medical Complex
         (PMC), comprising five hospitals in Ramallah, provides a wide range of ser-
         vices, including neonatal care, maternity care, internal medicine, pediatrics,
         general surgery, and cardiovascular surgery. The PMC has made great strides
         in providing quality health services to its patients by adopting measures such
         as establishing a culture of continuous improvement, adopting patient safety
         goals;a and rolling out a responsive complaint handling system and a patient
         satisfaction assessment.

         In 2013, PMC leadership created a complaint handling system to increase
         patient and family satisfaction with the health services provided by the hos-
         pital. It was based on the Patient Safety Primary Initiative Criteria established
         by the World Health Organization (2008) and the Quality Council Meetings
         in the Palestinian Medical Complex. Prior to 2013, complaints were handled
         informally, without any documentation or data analysis, which often resulted
         in no corrective action being taken and sometimes led to altercations with
         patients and their families.

         In 2013, the PMC adopted a Patient and Relatives Complaints Policy, which
         emphasized the right of patients and their families to express their complaints
         and dissatisfaction. The policy specifies complaint collection and resolution
         procedures as well as staff roles and responsibilities. As a result, complaints
         are now received on standardized forms, face-to-face, or in complaints boxes
         prominently placed inside the PMC. Staff was provided training to assist
         patients and their families in filing complaints and submitting suggestions.
         A complaint management module, which is part of the hospital’s manage-
         ment information system, was developed to allow management to track and
         monitor the resolution of complaints. The PMC’s Head of the Complaints

                                                                                                (continued)
                                                                                              4. Key Findings   73




  Box 4.5. Continued

  Department and Quality Unit administers the complaint system with the sup-
  port of a Patients’ Rights and Ethics Committee. Together, they are responsi-
  ble for receiving and responding to all complaints and suggestions, analyzing
  and reporting on them, and following-up with relevant departments to ensure
  that appropriate corrective procedures are adopted.

  The successful implementation of these reforms have resulted in high patient
  satisfaction, reduction in the number of complaints, and better quality health
  services. This is illustrated through the results of a patient survey in 2015 in
  which 89 percent of respondents rated medical care and nursing as excellent
  or very good, and 70 percent rated food and catering services as excellent
  or very good.

  The key success factors of the complaint handling system are committed
  management; decentralized decision making; a strong belief in the rights of
  patients and their families to voice their concerns; and the adoption of the
  ten-point Your Rights and Responsibilities Charter,b a written policy on com-
  plaints that was widely disseminated to all hospital staff and implemented;
  an emphasis on further learning about the needs of staff and patients after
  analyzing complaints received and taking corrective actions; continuous fol-
  low up on all complaints; and constant communication with complainants.

  a. These safety goals were established by the Joint Commission of Accreditation and the World
  Health Organization.
  b. Patients are asked to sign the charter, which introduces their ten rights: the right to receive
  treatment, the right to receive appropriate medication and to continue it, approval based on
  awareness and understanding, respect for the dignity and privacy of patients, confidentiality, the
  right to ask the identity of the service provider, the right to ask for additional consultation on the
  patient’s situation, and the right to access information and medical records.




Independent Commission on Human Rights. The Minister of Health views
complaint handling as as a high priority. Almost all of the recommendations
offered to the Minister of Health by the complaint unit are approved. The
ministry’s complaint unit staff also participated in the workshops and con-
sultations to develop the complaint management system for the Directorate
General of Complaints.
74   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Directorate General of Complaints
     Communications and awareness-raising
     The Directorate General of Complaints (DGC) has demonstrated great
     enthusiasm for the added value of the complaint management system
     and plans to create communications materials about it. The DGC has pro-
     duced videos for potential complainants explaining how the system works
     and what the entire process looks like, allowing citizens to be fully informed
     before they submit a complaint. A full-fledged communication campaign is
     planned for when the complaint management system is ready to launch.

     Channels for grievance uptake
     The complaint management system will diversify the range of chan-
     nels for grievance uptake. The DGC used to receive only a few complaints
     because most went directly to the complaint units and ministry staff. However,
     the new system will allow complaint units to accept complaints online, which
     is expected to contribute to the capture of a wider range of complaints.

     Consistency and quality
     To a significant extent, the DGC’s provision of guidelines to all ministries
     has standardized complaint handling in the Palestinian Authority, and
     the operationalization of the complaint management system should sig-
     nificantly improve the transparency, public access, efficiency, and effec-
     tiveness of complaint handling. The complaint management system will be
     the cornerstone of the DGC effort to strengthen complaint handling over the
     next couple of years.

     However, apart from rolling out the complaint management system,
     there is no current strategic plan for the DGC with a specific timeline.
     Identification of priority areas may be required to establish a clearer institu-
     tional vision for the directorate.

     The complaint management system is expected to ease the communi-
     cation of status updates for complainants. After being assigned a unique
     identification code by email, a complainant will be able to log into the sys-
     tem and see the status of their complaint. Internal users of the system will
     be able to see exactly where in the ministry’s workflow the complaintis. The
     DGC is optimistic that this will reduce delays in complaint processing. The
     complaint management system will generate automatic “flags” or alerts if
                                                                   4. Key Findings   75




any step in the workflow is taking longer than the allotted time. In the past,
complaints could languish and no one would know where the complaint was
or why it had stalled. Ministers will now have a dashboard view to see the
status of complaints.

The complaint management system will also allow citizens to voice their
opinions about the software. It will include a brief user satisfaction survey
to receive immediate feedback from users regarding their experience with
the system.

Capacity building
To date, donor support appears to have been critical to the DGC’s activ-
ities in terms of capacity. USAID, for example, provided support that led to
the terms of reference for the complaint management system. Democratic
Control of Armed Forces, an international organization based in Geneva,
provided assistance in diagnosing the existing legal framework for complaint
handling mechanisms and helped develop amended bylaws for strengthen-
ing the DGC (DCAF 2014). Each of the DGC’s two sections has one officer and
one secretary—it is a very small organization despite its significant respon-
sibilities. Sometimes, because they are so short-staffed, the DGC must rely
on students and volunteers. the launch of the complaint management sys-
tem will greatly exacerbate the problem of its limited internal capacity and
resources—financial and human—to handle all of its responsibilities.

The DGC’s reporting and recommendations could be strengthened. In
light of the existing regulation’s limits, the DGC submitted amended bylaws
to the Prime Minister’s Office, but over a year since their submission, the
executive has yet to act on them. Furthermore, the DGC can play a strong
role in building the capacity of ministry complaint unit staff.

Cooperation and coordination
Hopefully, the complaint management system will allow for a more stream-
lined handling of complaints across ministries. A progressive phasing-
out of ministry complaint handling mechanism databases is planned to
allow for all ministries to eventually use the complaint management system.
Ministry complaint unit databases are currently being migrated into the sys-
tem, which will use keywords and drop-down menus to help direct the com-
plaint to the correct government unit for submission.
76   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     However, there may be a degree of resistance to the new system. Several
     ministries, such as the Ministry of Interior, have their own management infor-
     mation systems for complaints and may be hesitant to adopt the new system.
     In order to function effectively and be accepted, the new system must be
     adapted to the various ministries. The system will make the ministries trans-
     parent to the DGC regarding complaint processing, and how the ministries
     will feel about being micromanaged in this way is still unknown.
                                 5. Suggestions for
                                     Improvement

Activities undertaken for this technical assistance helped identify several
areas in the existing complaint handling processes of the Directorate
General of Complaints (DGC), the four ministries, and the Palestinian
Land Authority that need to be improved. These recommendations are
summarized below in two parts: (i) cross-cutting areas for improvement rel-
evant to all ministries; and (ii) ministry-specific suggestions, some of which
overlap to emphasize nuances and discussions. All entities requested addi-
tional staff, equipment, furniture, and cars, which would facilitate better per-
formance. The suggestions below exclude these requests and focus instead
on the complaint management process and actions that ministries can take
over the next 1–2 years to strengthen their complaint handling mechanisms.
It is evident from the survey that citizens lack trust in the ministry complaint
handling mechanisms. The steps outlined below will help begin the pro-
cess of building trust and confidence among citizens. Given the evident
resource constraints—both financial and human—it will be key to prioritize
these areas, mobilize internal and external resources from within the ministry
and from development partners, and then implement relevant actions. The
Ministry of Education and Higher Education example (box 4.3) clearly indi-
cates that complaint units can take internal actions. Similarly, lessons can be
learned from the complaint handling mechanism of the Ramallah Medical
Complex (box 4.5), which can be scaled up easily. Such commendable initia-
tives should be further encouraged.




                                       77
78   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Cross-Cutting Areas for Improvement

     Perception and clarity of roles. The dual accountability of the complaint unit
     to the minister and the DGC frequently creates conflict. Complaint units are
     often neglected by other ministry departments. Buy-in by senior management,
     as is the case with the Ministry of Social Development (formerly called the
     Ministry of Social Affairs) and the Ministry of Education and Higher Education,
     can empower complaint units and allow them to compete for internal funds.
     In addition, clarifying the complaint unit’s roles and responsibilities relative to
     other ministry departments and the DGC could improve coordination efforts
     and position it to play a supportive rather than an oversight role.

     Structure and coordination of complaint handling mechanism. The com-
     plaint unit plays a coordinating role and must collaborate with other depart-
     ments and subministerial levels to resolve complaints. Instructions should be
     issued to all ministry departments to ensure this collaboration and to system-
     atically forward complaints to the complaint unit. In addition, focal points for
     the complaint handling mechanism need to be designated at lower levels.
     The complaint unit needs to proactively coordinate with other public, private,
     and nonprofit institutions that receive complaints, such as NGOs and ombuds-
     man, with the goal of making it easier for citizens to redress their grievances.

     Business processes. Each ministry should adapt and customize the DGC-
     issued generic guidelines according to their programs, complaint catego-
     ries, resolution timeframes, and workflows—which should first be mapped
     out. The guidelines should enumerate standard operating procedures for
     each stage of the complaint management process, such as sorting and pro-
     cessing (logging of complaints); acknowledgement and follow-up (receipt
     and progress updates); verification, investigation, and taking action, includ-
     ing mechanisms for escalation; and finally, feedback from the users of the
     complaint handling mechanism and the public at large. These procedures
     would assign clear responsibilities of complaint handling to existing officials,
     especially at the regional directorates, regarding how to receive, log, moni-
     tor, and track complaints, and they would include templates or checklists for
     all staff handling complaints. Through this technical assistance, the Ministry
     of Social Development (formerly called the Ministry of Social Affairs), has
     created a set of ministry-specific guidelines and the Ministry of Health is
     currently doing the same.
                                                         5. Suggestions for Improvement   79




Receipts for complaint. Most complaints are received face-to-face and only
recorded if they are provided in written form as stipulated in the Regulation
on Complaints. Steps should be taken to diversify complaint uptake chan-
nels—email and fax are popular channels for submitting complaints in the
Gaza Strip—and to record all complaints, regardless of whether they were
communicated verbally, in writing, or online through social media. Attempts
should also be made to capture complaints received at lower levels or by
other ministry departments. The complaint management system should be
finalized and rolled out as soon as possible.

Monitoring and analysis. The capacity of the DGC and complaint units to
analyze complaint data and trends should be enhanced so the unit can gen-
erate high quality reports, which would allow senior management to use
the complaint handling mechanism as a performance management tool.
Indicators that measure resolution rates, average resolution times, and com-
plainant satisfaction rates—preferably disaggregated by governorate and
gender—would allow for benchmarking. The inclusion of an indicator on
average resolution times by ministry would allow the DGC to publicize and
enforce stipulated timeframes for complaint resolution.

Communication. In most cases, complaints are not acknowledged, or the
resolution is not communicated to complainants. All complaint units should
inform complainants of actions taken. If not satisfied, the complainant should
be notified of appeal procedures. Materials should explain eligibility criteria for
different ministry programs, how and where to submit complaints for benefi-
ciaries, the appeals process, and how to track complaints, among other topics.

Citizen awareness and facilitation. It is evident from the survey findings
that most citizens—even some complainants—are unaware of the exis-
tence of the complaints unit, contact points, complaint handling processes,
and/or appeals procedures. Those who knew about the complaint unit and
its processes, especially women, learned about it through friends, relatives,
or other complainants, which reinforces the need for an information cam-
paign to enhance awareness of the complaint handling mechanism among
all citizens, including persons with disabilities or low levels of education. The
most popular recommendation by survey respondents to improve perfor-
mance and effectiveness of complaint units in West Bank and Gaza Strip was
to “conduct awareness programs for citizens regarding procedures of filing
80   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     complaints.” Proactive outreach to citizens and users of the services pro-
     vided by ministries would promote citizen awareness about the complaint
     handling mechanism. Furthermore, staff can facilitate the submission of a
     complaint by communicating about the complaint handling mechanism that
     is in place or by assisting users with the process. Developing and implement-
     ing a media plan, accompanied by the necessary communications material
     and activities at both the DGC and ministry levels, will make the complaint
     handling mechanism more citizen-centric.

     Capacity building. The survey revealed that there was high demand from
     staff for training around complaint handling processes, communication, case
     management, data entry, the complaint management system, customer ser-
     vice protocols, data reporting and analyses, and human rights, among other
     issues. Creating a pool of locally available master trainers on the complaint
     handling mechanism who can conduct just-in-time trainings would be use-
     ful. Documenting best practices in complaints handling from the field and
     sharing them with staff would also help. The DGC, in collaboration with other
     complaint units and possibly the Independent Commission for Citizens’
     Rights, is best positioned to lead the training activities. In addition, ministry
     staff do not always share a unified concept regarding complaints and, as a
     result, some complaints are never registered. Training on the complaint han-
     dling mechanism could bring staff together on the same page.

     Complaint satisfaction. A significant number of surveyed complainants
     were not satisfied with the resolution of their complaint, and due to a lack of
     trust and the belief that they needed connections (wasta), they were not will-
     ing to appeal. Periodic rapid satisfaction surveys conducted by the DGC or
     the concerned ministries would help build trust in the state among citizens.
     The complaint management system captures the phone numbers of most
     beneficiaries, which should make it easy to conduct periodic complainant
     and beneficiary satisfaction surveys. The system would also allow citizens to
     easily follow up on their complaints, a process that is currently time-consum-
     ing and frustrating.
                                                         5. Suggestions for Improvement   81




Specific Recommendations for
the Ministry of Social Development

•	 Appoint focal points for the complaint handling mechanism within
   regional offices.

•	 Capture as many complaints as possible in the existing management
   information system, especially those received through social media.
   Make the module available to pilot directorates so that they can also enter
   complaints directly. Issue instructions to other departments to forward
   complaints to the complaint unit. This will help identify repeated com-
   plaints—i.e., the same complaint being submitted at various levels—which
   will, in turn, save staff time and increase efficiency. Consider harmoniz-
   ing the Ministry of Social Development’s complaint handling mechanism
   module with the complaint management system when it is ready to be
   rolled out.

•	 Train staff, especially social workers, on complaint handling mecha-
   nism processes based on the recently developed manual on the com-
   plaint handling mechanism specific to the Ministry of Social Development.

•	 Improve reporting and analysis of complaints by enhancing the capacity
   of staff in the complaints unit and the focal points in the regional offices.

•	 Monitor the quality of complaint resolution by capturing complainant
   and beneficiary satisfaction with the complaint handling mechanism.

•	 Remodel offices, to the extent that funds permit, to create a recep-
   tion area for visitors in all remaining regional directorates, as was done
   for the pilot directorates of Jenin and Abu Dees and the ministry’s com-
   plaint unit.

•	 Develop and implement a media plan to make the complaint handling
   mechanism visible—internally, within the Ministry of Social Development,
   and externally, to citizens. Distribute recently created brochures and post-
   ers to regional offices.
82   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     •	 Launch an awareness campaign in the pilot regional directorates of
        Jenin and Abu Dees that can be expanded in phases to the remaining
        directorates.

     •	 Adapt communications materials to remove barriers to access for seg-
        ments of the population with low education levels, and disseminate
        information to the public in a manner accessible to all, regardless of edu-
        cational background.

     •	 Ensure that complainants receive high-quality customer service and
        the necessary privacy when they submit a written complaint in person at
        the ministry and that they are informed about next steps.

     •	 Modify the management information system for complaints to
        allow for complaint tracking, clearly indicating the current stage of
        the complaint and actions taken. Facilitate access to this information by
        complainants.



     Specific Recommendations for the
     Ministry of Education and Higher Education

     •	 Appoint focal points for complaint handling at the regional directorate
        either in the internal audit units or elsewhere as well as at the university
        level.

     •	 Issue clear instructions to refer and/or report all complaints received
        in other departments and at other levels—e.g., regional director-
        ates—to the complaint unit.

     •	 Develop a media plan, an awareness campaign, and communications
        materials to increase awareness about the complaint handling mecha-
        nism with a special focus on providing effective communications materials
        for citizens regardless of their educational background and on discussing
        gender sensitivity and the rights of complainants among staff.
                                                        5. Suggestions for Improvement   83




•	 Adopt, customize, and strengthen the complaint management sys-
   tem, and capture as many complaints as possible. Most of the com-
   plaints are resolved at the school level and are therefore not tracked by
   the complaint unit. Capturing the lower-level complaints would facilitate
   more a comprehensive analysis, which could then be used by manage-
   ment as a tool to identify problem areas and improve performance.

•	 Include higher education institutions in the complaint handling
   mechanism.

•	 Develop a complaint handling mechanism manual specific to the
   Ministry of Education and Higher Education that addresses educa-
   tion-specific issues, such as complaints related to teacher recruitment and
   student registration in schools and universities.

•	 Train staff involved in complaint handling at the Ministry of Education
   and Higher Education.



Specific Recommendations for the
Ministry of Local Government

•	 Customize existing DCG guidelines for the Ministry of Local Government
   and its programs. These procedures would assign clear responsibilities
   of complaint handling to existing ministry staff, especially in the regional
   offices, and they would include templates and checklists for all staff han-
   dling complaints. The procedures should be incorporated into a manual to
   be shared with all ministry staff who might receive a complaint.

•	 Develop an overarching framework for basic complaint handling sys-
   tems and standard operating procedures that can be shared with
   other municipalities, especially village councils and joint service coun-
   cils. Complaints received by the ministry relate to other local government
   units, so they are often more complicated and require longer resolution
   times. The framework should include a process by which all calls and com-
   munications regarding complaints that require any follow-up action and/
   or investigation are passed to the complaint unit for entry into the man-
   agement information system.
84   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     •	 Strengthen or, where necessary, establish complaint handling mech-
        anisms in municipalities with citizen service centers. Share and dissem-
        inate lessons from municipalities with functioning complaint handling
        mechanisms. Establish complaint handling mechanisms where local gov-
        ernment units do not have citizen service centers by embedding them in
        all local government projects.

     •	 Sensitize senior managers about the importance of complaint handling,
        and encourage them to act on the complaint unit’s recommendations.
        The survey clearly pointed out that many more complainants approach
        other parties with regard to the Ministry of Local Government compared
        with other ministries.

     •	 Designate focal points for the complaint handling mechanism in
        regional offices and local government units.

     •	 Adopt the complaint management system and attempt to capture
        all complaints received directly by ministry staff in writing or, to the
        extent possible, verbally.

     •	 Develop a media plan to increase awareness of the complaint han-
        dling mechanism. Relaunch an outreach campaign like the 2012 one that
        was supported by the Belgian Technical Cooperation, with updated com-
        munications material to inform people about how to submit complaints.

     •	 Create training materials, and train all ministry and local government
        unit staff involved in complaint handling—preferably through joint train-
        ings. The trainings should be centered on the staff manual for dealing with
        complaints and should promote customer-oriented and fair treatment of
        complainants, regardless of their gender.

     •	 Explore opportunities for the complaint unit to provide legal assis-
        tance to complainants, possibly through partnerships with existing
        NGOs, and provide specialized legal trainings to complaint unit staff so
        they can handle complaints related to legal aspects of local government.
                                                         5. Suggestions for Improvement   85




Specific Recommendations for the
Palestinian Land Authority

•	 Sensitize senior staff on complaint handling through information ses-
   sions. This will help provide space for the complaint unit to operate
   and improve coordination with other Palestinian Land Authority depart-
   ments—e.g., so that complaints received by other departments would be
   referred to the complaint unit.

•	 Increase staff in the one-person complaint unit.

•	 Identify focal points for the complaint handling mechanism in all field
   and settlement offices.

•	 Develop and share standard procedures to record and monitor com-
   plaints received in field offices. Clarify the relationship between the
   Palestinian Land Authority complaint unit and settlement offices, munici-
   palities, and other Palestinian Land Authority departments with regard to
   complaint handling.

•	 Build capacity for complaint unit staff, particularly about legal issues
   related to land management.

•	 Adopt the complaint management system.

•	 Develop a media and communications strategy that targets both inter-
   nal (Palestinian Land Authority staff) and external (citizens at large) audi-
   ences. Improve the Palestinian Land Authority website by, for example,
   adding a mention of the complaint unit and methods of reaching it and by
   publishing the Palestinian Land Authority’s organizational structure.
86   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     Specific Recommendations for the Ministry of Health

     •	 Expand the role of the complaint unit from one of receiving complaints
        and establishing committees to one of coordinating and monitoring com-
        plaint handling mechanisms in all health facilities, investigating complaints,
        and conducting spot checks. Assign a person to deal with complaints at
        all health facilities. Lessons from the complaint handling mechanism of
        the Ramallah Medical Complex (box 4.5) should be integrated.

     •	 Complete the development of and implement Ministry of Health-
        specific guidelines for the complaint handling mechanism that build on
        existing DGC guidelines—e.g., taking into account the frequent urgency
        of the complaints, privacy issues related to health care, among other
        suggestions.

     •	 Adopt the complaint management system and capture as many com-
        plaints as possible from the complaint units in Nablus and Ramallah,
        hospitals, health care centers, and facilities. Most complaints resolved at
        these levels are not tracked by the ministry complaint unit. Doing so would
        facilitate a more comprehensive analysis of complaints, which could then
        be used as a tool by management to identify problem areas and improve
        performance.

     •	 Expand the number of uptake channels for complaints to include the
        Internet—e.g., social media.

     •	 Create a media plan and communications materials to launch an infor-
        mation campaign that promotes awareness about the complaint handling
        mechanism and its processes. Communications materials about the min-
        istry’s complaint unit and the procedures to submit complaints are non-
        existent. They should also inform beneficiaries and complainants of their
        entitlements with regard to legal advice.

     •	 Train relevant ministry staff involved in handling complaints.
                                                         5. Suggestions for Improvement   87




Specific Recommendations
for the Directorate General of Complaints

•	 Roll out the complaint handling mechanism to all ministries after mak-
   ing ministry-specific adjustments in a phased manner. The complaint man-
   agement system will be the cornerstone of the DGC effort to strengthen
   complaint handling and will establish a much-needed electronic link
   between the complaint databases of the various ministries. An informa-
   tion campaign will be necessary to make the public and concerned min-
   istry staff aware of the complaint management system and how to use it.
   Manuals, other guidance materials, and training will be necessary if the
   system is to be effectively used by staff.

•	 Coordinate the development of training material on topics such as
   case management, the complaint management system, customer service
   protocols, and data reporting and analyses. In collaboration with ministry
   complaint units, organize workshops and sessions about complaint han-
   dling mechanisms.

•	 Follow up to get approval of amended bylaws to the existing regu-
   lation on complaints. This would strengthen the DGC’s ability to ensure
   that the complaint units are able to resolve complaints in a timely manner;
   coordinate the resolution of complaints that involve more than one min-
   istry; and further clarify the roles of complaint units, making it easier for
   citizens to submit complaints. One frequently repeated issue is that com-
   plaints are not considered official until they are submitted in writing. The
   existing regulation should relax this requirement.

•	 Publish periodic reports, preferably annually, stating the performance
   of all ministries regarding the resolution of complaints. These reports
   should contain information on aspects such as resolution rates, average
   resolution times, success stories, and complainant satisfaction scores to
   foster confidence and trust in ministries by citizens.
                                             6. Next Steps

Given the World Bank’s institutional mandate on grievance redress, the
Palestinian Authority’s commitment and efforts to address complaints from
citizens, and the progress already made in the current technical assistance, a
strong case can be made to continue supporting the efforts of the Directorate
General of Complaints (DGC) to strengthen the country’s complaint handling
mechanism rather than taking a project-by-project approach. An integrated
approach toward strengthening the Palestinian Authority’s complaint han-
dling mechanism is likely to result in cost savings, greater efficiency and
effectiveness, and better implementation of the World Bank institutional
mandate on grievance redress.

There is a great deal of client interest among the concerned ministries
and the DGC regarding the technical assistance, reflected in the ministry-
specific action plans generated by it. Follow-up efforts conducted as part
of a second phase of the technical assistance would help support the tar-
get ministries and the DGC to pilot recommendations from the assessments
and expand activities to additional ministries. The February 2016 mission
included presentations to several development partners, and a few of
them—the British Council, Agence Française de Développement, and the
United States Agency for International Development—expressed interest in
the complaint handling area. Subject to availability of funds, some possible
activities to consider in the second phase of this technical assistance include:

•	 A technical assessment of and support to strengthen and roll-out the
   complaint management system, which is currently being developed by
   the DGC in-house.

•	 Refinement of work flows for complaint handling in target ministries.

•	 Sensitization of senior management of all target ministries regarding com-
   plaint handling mechanisms.



                                       89
90   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     •	 Technical and, to the extent possible, financial support to target ministries
        to implement the suggestions for improvement and their action plans.

     •	 Capacity development of complaint unit staff to improve the manage-
        ment of citizen complaints and to use management information system
        for complaints.

     •	 Development of communications material—internal for ministry staff and
        external for complaint handling mechanism users—for the remaining
        ministries.

     •	 Expansion of strengthening activities for the complaint handling mecha-
        nism to an additional five ministries, subject to the availability of funds.
                                                         References

Agarwal, Sanjay, Warren A. Van Wicklin, III. 2012. “How, When and Why to Use Demand-Side
Governance Approaches in Projects.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Coalition for Accountability and Integrity (AMAN). 2016. “Strengthening Complaints Handling
Mechanisms: Report on Status, Effectiveness and Efficiency of Palestinian Complaint Units.”
Ramallah, West Bank.

Democratic Control of Armed Forces (DCAF). 2014. “Amending the Regulatory Framework for
Handling Palestinian Citizens’ Complaints.” Working Paper, DCAF, Ramallah, West Bank, and
Geneva, Switzerland.

Post, David, and Sanjay Agarwal. 2012. “Feedback Matters: Designing Effective Grievance
Redress Mechanisms for Bank-Financed Projects, Part 2. The Practice of Grievance Redress,”
World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank Group. 2014. “Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in
World Bank Group Operations.” World Bank, Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/handle/10986/21113

———. 2015. “Aide Memoire Strengthening Complaint Handling Mechanisms in Palestine
Territories Inception Mission, May 18–29, 2015,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2016. “Aide Memoire Technical Assistance for Strengthening Complaints Handling
Mechanisms and Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in the Health System Resiliency
Strengthening and Cash Transfer Projects.” World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                            91
                                      Appendix A.
                               Survey Instruments

             Opinion Poll on Status of Complaint Units—
                  Face-to-Face Survey Instrument*

Demographic Data              Work Status:                    Work Sector
Age:                          1.	Employed                     (worker only)
                              2.	Unemployed                   1.	Public/government
Educational Level:
                              3.	Housewife                        sector
1.	Illiterate
                              4.	Student                      2.	 Private sector
2.	 Primary education
                              5.	Retired                      3.	Nongovernmental
3.	 Preparatory education
                              6.	 Unable to work                  organizations (NGOs)
4.	 Secondary education
                                                              4.	UNRWA
5.	College/institute
                                                              5.	 International Institutions
6.	 Bachelor of Arts (B.A.)
7.	 Master’s degree                                           Monthly average income:
    and/or Ph.D.                                                            NIS



                Part 1: Interview with a client filing a complaint

S1_1—How did you know about the                 If your answer is No, skip to question
complaint unit in the ministry?                 S1_3.
1.	 Called the ministry
                                                S1_2a—Why did you file your
2.	 Through a friend
                                                complaint to another party?
3.	 Ministry’s electronic website or
                                                1.	 Did not know about the ministry’s
    brochure
                                                    complaint unit.
4.	 Previous complainant
                                                2.	 Do not trust the performance and
5.	 Through a private institution or NGO
                                                    professionalism of government
6.	 Other (please specify):
                                                    institutions
S1_2—Have you filed your complaint              3.	 To decrease the time needed for the
to another party before heading to the              bureaucratic process
ministry?                                       4.	 Asking for support and legal advice
1.	Yes                                          5.	 Other (please specify):
2.	No


* Survey instruments were designed by AMAN and Qiyas in consultation with the
World Bank team.


                                           93
94   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     S1_2b—With whom did you file your                        S1_4—Did you seek help from an
     complaint?                                               employee or an official from outside
     1.	 Complainants unit at the council of                  the ministry to follow up on your
         ministers                                            complaint?
     2.	 Private institutions/Human Rights                    1.	Yes
         Commission/NGO                                       2.	No
     3.	 Member of Parliament                                 3.	 No opinion
     4.	 State Audit and Administrative
                                                              S1_5—If your answer to the previous
         Control Bureau
                                                              question is yes, why did you seek help?
     5.	 Anti-Corruption Commission
                                                              1.	 To shorten time, bureaucracy, and
     6.	 Other (please specify):
                                                                  procedures
     S1_3—Do you agree with the                               2.	 Do not trust the performance and
     statement: You have previous                                 professionalism of the complaint
     information about the procedures for                         handling unit and/or the ministry
     filing a complaint?                                      3.	 Asking for support and legal advice
     1.	 Strongly agree                                       4.	 Following recommendation of a
     2.	Agree                                                     previous complainant
     3.	Disagree                                              5.	 Other (please specify):
     4.	 Strongly disagree
                                                              S1_6—If you are not satisfied with
     5.	 No opinion
                                                              the result of your complaint, will you
     If your answer is disagree or strongly                   appeal the decision?
     disagree, skip to question S1_4.                         1.	Yes
                                                              2.	No
     S1_3a—How did you know about the
                                                              3.	 No opinion
     procedures for filing a complaint?
     1.	 Called the ministry                                  S1_6a—If the answer is no, why not?
     7.	 Ministry’s electronic website or                     1.	 Do not believe that result could be
         brochure                                                 improved
     2.	 An employee inside the ministry                      2.	 Procedures for filing complaints and
     3.	 Previous complainant                                     follow up and slow/time-consuming
     4.	 Other (please specify):                              3.	 Do not believe there is no need for
                                                                  mediation
     S1_3b—Did you ask for help from any
                                                              4.	 Other (please specify):
     of the ministry’s employees or officials
     before visiting the ministry?
     1.	Yes
     2.	No
     3.	 No opinion
                                                           Appendix A. Survey Instruments   95




               Part 2: Interview with client asking for service,
                    not to file a complaint, and who has
                 never filed a complaint with the ministry.

S2_1—Do you know about the                1.	Yes
complaint unit of the ministry?           2.	No
1.	Yes                                    3.	 No opinion
2.	No
                                          S2_4—If you do not want to file a
S2_2—If you encounter a problem with      complaint with the ministry, would you
the ministry regarding a service you      file it with another party?
requested or a right you are entitled     1.	Yes
to, would you file a complaint with the   2.	No
complaint unit?                           3.	 No opinion
1.	Yes
                                          S2_4a—If yes, with what party?
2.	No
                                          1.	 Complainants Unit at the Council of
3.	 No opinion
                                              Ministers
S2_3—Have you ever had a problem          2.	 Private institution
receiving service from the ministry       3.	 Member of Parliament
and resorted to a party other than the    4.	 State Audit and Administrative
ministry’s complaint unit for recourse?       Control Bureau
1.	Yes                                    5.	 Anti-Corruption Commission
2.	No                                     6.	 Ask for help from an official
3.	 No opinion                            7.	 Other (please specify):

S2_3a—If the answer is yes, was the       S2_5— If you do not want to file a
complaint handled/solved?                 complaint with the ministry, why not?
1.	Yes                                    1.	 Do not trust performance of
2.	No                                         government
3.	 No opinion                            2.	 Believe there is a need of mediation
                                          3.	 Complaints filing and follow-up
S2_3b—If the answer is no, did you
                                              procedures are slow
seek help from an employee or an
                                          4.	 A recommendation from a friend who
official from outside the ministry to
                                              previously filed a complaint
follow up on the complaint before
                                          5.	 Filing a complaint with a private,
visiting the ministry
                                              independent institution is more
1.	Yes
                                              effective
2.	No
                                          6.	 Other (please specify):
3.	 No opinion
                                          7.	 No opinion
S2_3c—Has your complaint been
resolved?
96   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




          Citizens’ Opinion Poll on Status of Complaint Units
        Questionnaire for Telephone Interview with Complainant


     General Information                                      3—Have you filed your complaint to
     Questionnaire No.                                        another party before heading to the
     Researcher No.                                           ministry?
     District:                                                1.	Yes
     Ministry:                                                2.	No

     Place of Residence:                                      3_1—If your answer is yes, why?
     1.	City                                                  1.	 Did not know about the ministry’s
     2.	Village/town                                              complaint unit
     3.	Camp                                                  2.	 Do not trust the performance and
                                                                  professionalism of government
     Gender:
                                                                  institutions
     1.	Male
                                                              3.	 To decrease the time needed for the
     2.	Female
                                                                  bureaucratic process
     1—How do you know about the                              4.	 Asking for support and legal advice
     complaint unit in the ministry?                          5.	 Other (please specify):
     1.	 Called the ministry
                                                              4—Do you agree with the statement:
     2.	 Through a friend
                                                              The complaints unit clearly informed
     3.	 Ministry’s electronic website or
                                                              you of the procedures and follow-up
         brochure
                                                              mechanisms involved in filing a
     4.	 Previous complainant
                                                              complaint.
     5.	 Through a private institution or NGO
                                                              1.	 Strongly agree
     6.	 Other (please specify):
                                                              2.	Agree
     2—How did you file your complaint to                     3.	Disagree
     the ministry?                                            4.	 Strongly disagree
     1.	 Visited the ministry and filed a                     5.	 No opinion
         complaint form.
                                                              4_1—If the answer is disagree or
     2.	 Visited the ministry and submitted it in
                                                              strongly disagree, why?
         writing (but not in a complaint form)
                                                              1.	 Complaints form is difficult
     3.	 Faxed a letter of complaint to the
                                                              2.	 No form provided for filing the
         ministry
                                                                  complaint
     4.	 Emailed a letter of complaint to the
                                                              3.	 Employee of complaint unit was
         ministry
                                                                  uncooperative
     5.	 Filed complaint by telephone
                                                              4.	 Location for filing complaints in
     6.	 Sent complaint through a private
                                                                  unsuitable
         institution or NGO
                                                              5.	 Other (please specify):
     7.	 Other (please specify):
                                                             Appendix A. Survey Instruments   97




5—Do you agree with the statement:           7—Do you agree with the statement:
The unit team treated you respectfully,      The complaint unit provided you with
neutrally, and without discrimination?       all information about your inquiry of
1.	 Strongly agree                           handling a complaint?
2.	Agree                                     1.	 Strongly agree
3.	Disagree                                  2.	Agree
4.	 Strongly disagree                        3.	Disagree
5.	 No opinion                               4.	 Strongly disagree
                                             5.	 No opinion
5_1—If the answer is disagree or
strongly disagree, why?                      8—Do you agree with the statement:
1.	 Complaints unit offers information       Your complaint was handled in a
    and pays more attention to other         reasonable time?
    complainants                             1.	 Strongly agree
2.	 Gender-based discrimination              2.	Agree
3.	 Complaints not handled in proper         3.	Disagree
    order (line is not respected)            4.	 Strongly disagree
4.	 Other (please specify):                  5.	 No opinion

6—Do you agree with the statement:           9—Do you agree with the statement:
It was easy to reach the complaint unit      The unit employee informed you of the
and inquire about the procedures for         result of the complaint?
complaint handling                           1.	Yes
1.	 Strongly agree                           2.	No
2.	Agree
                                             9_1—If the answer is yes, how were
3.	Disagree
                                             you informed?
4.	 Strongly disagree
                                             1.	 In writing
5.	 No opinion
                                             2.	 Orally, in person
6.	 Other (please specify):
                                             3.	 By telephone
6_1— If the answer is disagree or            4.	 By email
strongly disagree, why?
                                             10—If the answer is no, when you
1.	 Took a long time to find the complaint
                                             revisited the unit, was it easy to find
    unit
                                             your file and receive a quick response?
2.	 Unit employee not prepared to offer
                                             1.	 Strongly agree
    information about the complaint
                                             2.	Agree
3.	 Unit employee lacked updated
                                             3.	Disagree
    information on the status of the
                                             4.	 Strongly disagree
    complaint
                                             5.	 No opinion
4.	 The specialized employee is
    frequently not in the office             11—Did you ask any ministry employee
5.	 Must be personally present at the        or official to follow-up on your
    ministry to follow up on a complaint     complaint?
6.	 Other (please specify):                  1.	Yes
                                             2.	No
                                             3.	 No opinion
98   Strengthening the Citizen-State Compact through Feedback:
     Effective Complaint Management as a Pathway for Articulating Citizen Voice and Improving State Response




     12—Did you seek help from an                             15_1—If the answer is no, why, not?
     employee or an official from outside                     1.	 Dissatisfied with result of complaint
     the ministry to follow up on your                        2.	 Filing and follow-up procedures for
     complaint?                                                   complaints are slow
     1.	Yes                                                   3.	 Complaints unit does not take its role
     2.	No                                                        seriously
     3.	 No opinion                                           4.	 Other (please specify):

     13—In general, are you satisfied with                    16—If you encounter another problem
     the result of your complaint?                            and do not wish to file your complaint
     1.	 Strongly satisfied                                   with the ministry, to whom would you
     2.	Satisfied                                             direct your complaint?
     3.	Dissatisfied                                          1.	 Complainants unit of the Council of
     4.	 Strongly dissatisfied                                    Ministers
     5.	 No opinion                                           2.	 Private institutions/Human Rights
                                                                  Commission/NGO
     14—If you are not satisfied with the
                                                              3.	 Member of Parliament]
     result of your complaint, do you plan to
                                                              4.	 State Audit and Administrative
     appeal the decision?
                                                                  Control Bureau
     1.	Yes
                                                              5.	 Anti-Corruption Commission
     2.	No
                                                              6.	 I ask for help from an official
     3.	 No opinion
                                                              7.	 Other (please specify):
     14_1—If no, this is because:
                                                              17—What actions would you
     1.	 You do not trust improving the results
                                                              recommend to improve the complaint
     2.	 Procedures of appeal are complicated
                                                              unit’s performance and effectiveness?
     3.	 I believe there is a need for mediation
                                                              1.	 Increase number of employees in the
         to have the appeal succeed
                                                                   unit
     4.	 Other (please specify):
                                                              2. 	 Facilitate complaint-filing procedures
     15—If a problem relating to the                          3.	 Conduct awareness programs for
     ministry’s services reoccurs, would you                       citizens regarding complaint-filing
     file it with the complaint unit?                              procedures
     1.	Yes                                                   4.	 Adopt electronic means for filing
     2.	No                                                         complaints
     3.	 I do not know                                        5.	 Other (please specify):
