     Report No: ACS12182
 .




     East Asia and Pacific
     EAP Critical Infrastructure Risk Assessment and
     Retrofitting Program

     Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines
     Applications of International Experience

 .
     August 2014


 .
     GSURR
     EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
 .




Document of the World Bank
.
.


.
    Standard Disclaimer:


    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
    World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
    its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance
    Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
    1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Safe and Resilient
Infrastructure
in the Philippines
Applications of International Experience




August 2014
©2014 The World Bank
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
The World Bank Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
August 2014


Disclaimer: This report is a product of the staff of the World Bank with external contributions. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgments on the
part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.

Design: miki@ultradesigns.com
Table of Contents

Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................ 	ii
Acronyms ........................................................................................................................................... 	iii

Executive Summary.......................................................................................................................... 	v

Background........................................................................................................................................ 	ix

Principles of Earthquake Risk Management.................................................................................. 	1
	     Technical Bases of an Earthquake Risk Management Program................................................. 	2
		           Earthquake and Multi-Hazard Mapping.............................................................................. 	2
		           Building Codes and Enforcement........................................................................................ 	3
		           Prioritization of Public Buildings and Infrastructure........................................................ 	7
	     Developing an Earthquake Risk Management Program............................................................ 	9
		           Phase 1: Risk Audit.............................................................................................................. 	9
		           Phase 2: Detailed Risk Assessment and Cost Benefit Analysis.......................................... 	10
		           Phase 3: Implementation.................................................................................................... 	12

Integrated Earthquake Risk Management in the Philippines...................................................... 	13
	     Multihazard Prioritization for Public Buildings......................................................................... 	15
	     Prioritization and Cost-Benefit Analysis of Earthquake Strengthening.................................... 	20
	     Guidelines for Earthquake Strengthening of Public Schools and Hospitals in Metro Manila .	29

International Experience in Earthquake Risk Management......................................................... 	33
	     California: Multidimensional Earthquake risk management..................................................... 	33
	     Romania: Hazard Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project................................ 	36
	     Turkey: Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project.................... 	38
	     Indonesia: pilot implementation in the education sector......................................................... 	40

Conclusion.......................................................................................................................................... 	43
References......................................................................................................................................... 	45
Acknowledgements

T
     his report was prepared by the World Bank Disaster Risk Management Team East Asia and the
     Pacific, under the guidance of Abhas Jha and Jolanta Kryspin-Watson. It is based on contributions
     of technical experts convened by the World Bank in collaboration with the Japan International
Cooperation Agency, including Rafael Alaluf, Fauzan Fauzan, Tatsuo Narafu, Benito Pacheco, Michael
Reyes, and Peter Yanev. Hannah Joy Yi consolidated expert inputs, Artessa Saldivar-Sali provided in-
depth technical editing, and Zuzana Stanton-Geddes provided editorial comments.

The report presents the results of a detailed vulnerability assessment and summarizes the
prioritization methodology developed to guide investment decisions on the strengthening of critical
assets in Metropolitan Manila. With support from the World Bank, the engagement on Safe and
Resilient Infrastructure has carried out a preliminary structural assessment of over seven hundred
public school campuses and twenty hospitals retained by the Department of Health in Metro Manila.

The report also highlights the lessons learned from seismic retrofitting programs implemented
throughout the world, as showcased during the Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure that took
place in Manila, Philippines, in October 2013.

The team extends special acknowledgement to the Philippines Department of Public Works and
Highways and is grateful for funding support from the Australian Government and the Global Facility
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR).
Acronyms

CP         Collapse Prevention
DepEd      Department of Education
DPWH       Department of Public Works and Highways
DRRM       Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
FDD        Facilities Development Division (California)
FEMA       Federal Emergency Management Agency (United States)
GDP        Gross domestic product
GoP        Government of the Philippines
HRMEP      Hazard Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project
IO         Immediate Occupancy
IPCU       Istanbul Project Coordination Unit
ISMEP      Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project
JICA       Japan International Cooperation Agency
LS         Life Safety
M          Magnitude
MMEIRS     Metro Manila Earthquake Impact Reduction Study
MMDA       Metro Manila Development Authority
NSCP       National Structural Code of the Philippines
OSHPD      Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development (California)
PHIVOLCS   Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
TCIP       Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool
UBC        Uniform Building Code
WVF        West Valley Fault
Struggle in strong wind and driving rain produced by monsoon Pedring (Nesat) that killed about 70 people and displaced 635,405.
Photo by ArtPhaneuf/Thinkstock.com
                                                                                                            / v




Executive Summary

T
      he Philippines is among the top disaster hotspots of the world. It is highly exposed to a wide
      range of natural hazards, including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and other geological
      hazards, as well as to typhoons and monsoon rains, all of which limit the country’s sustainable
development. Over the past five years, the Philippines has experienced severe weather events resulting
in considerable damage and losses. Typhoon Yolanda, which struck in November 2013, is considered
among the strongest ever to make landfall, with close to 8,000 dead and missing. An initial estimate
(GoP 2013) puts the total damage and loss from Yolanda at PhP571.1 billion (equivalent to US$12.8
billion).1 Catastrophe risk modeling for the Philippines (AIR/ADPC 2013) shows the country is expected
to incur, on a long-term average basis, PhP206 billion (US$4.6 billion)2 per year in damage to public and
private assets from earthquake ground shaking, wind and precipitation induced by tropical cyclones,
and precipitation induced by nontropical cyclones (monsoons).

Over the past decade, the government of the Philippines (GoP) has taken steps to improve the overall
resilience of the country to the impacts of natural disasters. For example, a multiyear risk assessment—
the Metro Manila Earthquake Impact Reduction Study (MMEIRS)—estimated the physical and human
losses and impacts of different earthquake scenarios in Metro Manila. The MMEIRS was implemented
from 2002 to 2004 by the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), the
Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA), and the Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA) to increase the structural resilience of public assets and infrastructure in Metro Manila. It
evaluated seismic hazards and the potential damage to and vulnerability of the area to various
scenario earthquakes and developed a master plan for earthquake risk management. Following the
release of the MMEIRS report, the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) embarked on
an ongoing program of retrofitting bridges in Metro Manila.

Since 2010, the GoP has focused on developing a comprehensive disaster risk management agenda.
It established the policy framework for disaster risk reduction through the 2010 Philippine Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Act (Republic Act No. 10121), which emphasizes ex-ante
actions—that is, preparedness, prevention, and mitigation—over emergency relief and response.
The strategies for implementing the law are contained in the National DRRM Framework and Plan
(2011–28), which identifies the high-priority areas for engagement of the sectoral agencies of the
government.

	 BangkoSentral exchange rate of US1 = PhP44.637, as of February 25, 2014.
1

2
 Ibid.	
vi / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              Since 2011, the DPWH has been engaged in technical assistance with the World Bank through the
                              Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program to assess the vulnerability of schools in Metro Manila, as
                              step toward strengthening key public buildings against earthquakes. Public schools and hospitals in
                              Metro Manila have different levels of vulnerability to earthquakes, floods, typhoons, tsunamis, and
                              volcanic eruptions. Under the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program, the DPWH has developed
                              (1) a set of guidelines for the seismic evaluation of schools and hospitals in Metro Manila; (2) a
                              methodology for prioritizing buildings to identify the highest risk candidates for upgrade and
                              structural risk reduction; and (3) technical guidelines and tailored design examples for upgrading
                              typical school buildings in Metro Manila.

                              The results of the prioritization show that strengthening the most vulnerable 5 percent of school
                              buildings (186) can reduce the number of student fatalities3 by 25 percent (more than 6,000 lives
                              saved). By strengthening the most vulnerable 40 percent of school buildings (1,466), potential student
                              fatalities can be reduced by 80 percent (more than 19,000 lives saved). In other words, upgrading
                              a relatively small number of systematically selected structures can save a disproportionately large
                              number of lives, and it would be more cost effective than building new schools.4

                              These findings led the DPWH to commit to implementing the cornerstone phase of a Safe and Resil-
                              ient Infrastructure Program in Metro Manila. This would involve upgrading approximately 200 of
                              the most vulnerable public school buildings, with a view toward eventually scaling up to other sec-
                              tors (for example, lifeline infrastructure) and geographical locations and to institutionalizing quality
                              assurance systems.

                              As the GoP formulates an initial strategy for undertaking its earthquake risk management program,
                              international experience can provide insight into the potential challenges and key lessons of devel-
                              oping and implementing structural resilience programs at various scales:

                              ◆◆ Since the early 1900s, California has invested in strengthening key assets through what is now
                                      a large-scale, multidimensional earthquake risk management program. Each major earthquake
                                      the state has faced has given the government a greater understanding of risk that has generated
                                      stronger regulatory codes, legal enactments, and structural retrofitting initiatives in schools,
                                      hospitals, and public infrastructure, such as highways, bridges, and dams. State government
                                      action has catalyzed the creation of structural strengthening programs by the private sector and
                                      the federal government, including the military, to assess and reduce earthquake risk to specific
                                      sectors crucial to the U.S. economy.
                              ◆◆ In 2005, with financial and technical support from the World Bank, the government of Romania
                                      initiated a multisectoral earthquake risk management program. The program took a compre-
                                      hensive approach to earthquake risk management through a forty-four-building pilot project
                                      addressing both structural and functional retrofitting and improving regulatory measures to
                                      mitigate future risk to buildings.
                              ◆◆ In 2002, with financial and technical assistance from the World Bank, the government of Turkey
                                      developed the Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP).
                                      This ongoing, large-scale program has achieved total financing of over US$1.5 billion to date
                                      and has successfully retrofitted over 800 priority public buildings for seismic risk mitigation,


                              3	
                                   From the MMEIRS M7.2 scenario earthquake along the West Valley Fault.
                              4
                                   Generally, experience shows that five to seven schools can be strengthened and renovated for the cost of one
                                   new building.
                                                                                          Applications of International Experience / vii



    improved the legal and regulatory framework and building codes, and strengthened emergency
    management capacity and awareness.
◆◆ In 2011, with funding from the World Bank, Indonesia—a country that faces natural hazards
    similar to those in the Philippines—successfully implemented a local-level pilot project in the
    education sector. The Safe School Pilot Project was a low-cost, five-month initiative covering a
    total of 180 schools in three provinces. It introduced retrofitting techniques focused on low-cost
    materials, such as chicken wire mesh, as well as nonstructural measures, such as evacuation
    simulations and education about disasters.
This report is divided into three sections. First, it establishes the technical principles of earthquake
risk management. Second, it details the experience of the Philippines to date in developing an
integrated earthquake risk management program, focusing on the methodology and results of a
vulnerability assessment and prioritization conducted under the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure
Program. Last, it reviews international experience with earthquake risk management programs of
various scales and scopes, through the cases of California, Romania, Turkey, and Indonesia.

The key messages of the report are as follows:
◆◆ An integrated approach to earthquake risk management can strengthen key buildings and infra-
    structure and reduce the damaging effects of future disasters in the Philippines.
◆◆ Earthquake risk management and strengthening programs initiated by both the public and pri-
    vate sectors in many countries often consist of three phases: risk audit, risk assessment, and
    implementation.
◆◆ Several key technical components must be considered in the design of a phased earthquake risk
    management program, including a prioritization methodology.
Collapsed school in Manila. Photo by Gabriel Mistral/Getty Images
                                                                                                                     / ix




Background

T
      he Philippines is among the top disaster hotspots of the world. It is highly exposed to a wide
      range of natural hazards, which is a limiting factor in its sustainable development. It ranks
      eighth among countries most exposed to multiple hazards and thirteenth among those at high
economic risk from natural disasters, with at least 85 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) gen-
erated in areas at risk (World Bank 2005). Located in the Pacific Ring of Fire,5 it is highly exposed
to earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and other geological hazards, as well as to many typhoons and
frequent monsoon rains.

Over the past five years, the Philippines has experienced severe weather events resulting in consid-
erable damage and losses. Typhoons Ondoy, Pepeng, Sendong, and Pablo claimed over 3,000 lives,
affected more than 10 million people, caused economic damage and losses amounting to approxi-
mately US$5.7 billion, and affected new areas such as Mindanao that historically had not been hit
by strong typhoons.

Typhoon Yolanda, which struck in November 2013, is considered among the strongest ever to make
landfall, with over 6,200 fatalities and over 1,700 people missing. An initial estimate (GoP 2013)
puts the total damage and loss from Yolanda at PhP571.1 billion (equivalent to US$12.8 billion).6 The
total fiscal costs include those of a comprehensive program providing humanitarian relief, recon-
struction, and rehabilitation of public infrastructure, social safety net programs, and targeted inter-
ventions for the poor and most vulnerable.

Catastrophe risk modeling for the Philippines (AIR/ADPC 2014) shows the country is expected to
incur, on a long-term average basis, PhP206 billion (US$4.6 billion)7 per year in damage to public
and private assets due to earthquake ground shaking, wind and precipitation induced by tropical
cyclones, and precipitation induced by nontropical cyclones (monsoons). This analysis takes into
account a 10,000-year catalogue of possible events to provide a more robust quantification of disas-
ter risks than one based on short-term historical records. In the next twenty-five years, the Philip-
pines has a 40 percent chance of experiencing a loss of more than PhP840 billion (US$18.8 billion)
and casualties greater than 70,000 people, and a 10 percent chance of experiencing a loss of more
than PhP2 trillion (US$44.8 billion) and casualties greater than 95,000 people.

5
  	 The “Ring of Fire” is a string of volcanoes and sites of seismic activity, or earthquakes, around the edges of
    the Pacific Ocean; see http://education.nationalgeographic.com/education/encyclopedia/ring-fire/?ar_a=1.
6
  	 BangkoSentral exchange rate of US1 = PhP44.637, as of February 25, 2014.	
7
 	 Ibid.
x / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              These risks are driven, in large part, by unplanned or poorly planned urbanization and the resulting
                              concentration of assets and people in hazardous areas. Urbanization is expected to reach over 60
                              percent of the population in the near future. The increase in people, compounded by inadequate
                              construction quality of the built environment, places these urban areas particularly at risk for
                              catastrophic economic and human losses.

                              The policy framework for disaster risk reduction is reflected in the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction
                              and Management (DRRM) Act (Republic Act No. 10121) of 2010, which emphasizes ex-ante actions—
                              that is, preparedness, prevention, and mitigation—over emergency relief and response. The strategies
                              for implementing the law are contained in the National DRRM Framework and Plan (2011–28), which
                              identifies the high-priority areas of engagement for the sectoral agencies of the government.

                              The Metro Manila Earthquake Impact Reduction Study (MMEIRS),8 implemented from 2002 to 2004
                              by the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), the Japan International
                              Cooperation Agency (JICA), and the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA), was a major
                              initiative to improve the structural resilience of public assets and infrastructure in Metro Manila.
                              MMEIRS evaluated seismic hazards and potential damage to and vulnerability of the area under
                              various scenario earthquakes and developed a master plan for earthquake risk management. From
                              the 105 priority actions identified in the master plan, 40 were selected as high-priority actions.
                              These included (1) securing the emergency road network and (2) strengthening buildings against
                              earthquakes. Following the release of the MMEIRS report, the Department of Public Works and
                              Highways (DPWH) embarked on an ongoing program of retrofitting bridges in Metro Manila. In terms
                              of risk reduction in the building stock, however, implementation was more limited.

                              Prompted by the success and cost effectiveness of large-scale investments in other countries in
                              retrofitting public buildings as a means to reduce risk, DPWH initiated a technical assistance program
                              with the World Bank to assess the vulnerability of Metro Manila schools. A key component of the
                              initiative was the development of a prioritization methodology for the upgrading and retrofitting of
                              critical assets. The results of the prioritization show that strengthening the most vulnerable 5 percent of
                              school buildings (186) can reduce the number of student fatalities9 by 25 percent (more than 6,000 lives
                              saved). By strengthening the most vulnerable 40 percent of school buildings (1,466), potential student
                              fatalities can be reduced by 80 percent (more than 19,000 lives saved). In other words, upgrading a
                              relatively small number of systematically selected structures can save a disproportionately large
                              number of lives, and it would be more cost effective than building new schools.10

                              On October 1–2, 2013, in partnership with the World Bank, DPWH hosted the Forum on Safe and
                              Resilient Infrastructure (World Bank 2013a). The forum provided a venue for the GoP to set a policy
                              and initial strategy for a cross-sectoral program to build the resilience of critical public infrastructure
                              and facilities (in particular, schools). The participants included various stakeholders from relevant
                              national government agencies, local government associations, development partners, the disaster
                              risk management community, and the private sector. Moreover, the forum showcased experiences
                              from a number of regions and countries (including Colombia, Indonesia, Japan, Romania, Turkey,
                              and the United States) that have implemented similar risk reduction programs, from which lessons
                              and best practices can be distilled and applied in the Philippines.


                              8
                               	 See http://www.phivolcs.dost.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=419:mmeirs&catid=66.
                              9
                               	 From the MMEIRS M7.2 scenario earthquake along the West Valley Fault.
                              10
                                	 Generally, experience shows that five to seven schools can be strengthened and renovated for the cost of one
                                  new building.
                                                                                          Applications of International Experience / xi



Such international experience can provide useful insights for decision makers in the Philippines to
address key questions, challenges, and prioritization needs. It demonstrates that many countries,
both developed and developing, are making countrywide earthquake risk management investments,
initiating the enabling legislative actions to support multihazard resilience in design and construction
(beyond revisions to building codes), and applying lessons learned from the impacts of previous
disasters to reduce the vulnerability of communities, facilities, and infrastructure.

As a result of the forum, DPWH committed to implementing the cornerstone phase of the Safe and
Resilient Infrastructure Program in Metro Manila. This would involve upgrading approximately 200
of the most vulnerable public school buildings there, with a view to eventually scaling up to other
sectors (for example, lifeline infrastructure) and geographical locations and to institutionalizing
quality assurance systems.
                                                        Laoag
                                               August 17, 1983




                                                                                   Aurora
                                                                                   August 2, 1968



         Approximate                                             Luzon
         epicenters of                                   July 16, 1990
         the recorded
         earthquakes in the
         Philippines since
         1990
                                                       Mindoro
                                              November 15, 1994                             Ragay Gulf
         Strongest earthquake	 1976                                                         May 17, 1973
         Moro Gulf earthquake

         Deadliest earthquake	 1976
         Moro Gulf earthquake
                                                                                                     Masbate
         Source: Wikipedia                                                                           February 15, 2003


                                                                                 Panay
                                                                                 June 14, 1990
                                                                                                                                  Philippine Trench
                                                                                                                                  August 31, 2012
                                                                                 Caycay
                                                                                 January 25, 1948
                                                                                  Negros
                                                                         February 6, 2012                  Bohol
                                                                                                           October 15, 2013


                                                                                                                               Agusan del Sur
                                                                                                                               June 1999


                                                                                            Bukidnon
                                                                                      November 8, 2011
                                                                                                                                    Mayo Bay
                                                                                                                                    March 30, 1970


                                                                                                             Moro Gulf
                                                                                                             August 16, 1976    Governor Genroso
              <6.0              6.0 – 6.9   7.0 – 7.9       8.0+                                                                December 4, 2013


Brunei               Malaysia
                                                                                                                                               / 1




Principles of Earthquake
Risk Management

T
      he Philippines has a well-documented and long history of destructive earthquakes, among
      other natural hazards. Recent earthquakes there have revealed that many public buildings and
      much infrastructure, including bridges, roads, and ports, are vulnerable to major damage and
collapse, with the potential to cause heavy fatalities as well as economic losses. Many relatively new
commercial buildings are also vulnerable; in the 1990 Luzon earthquake, newly constructed multi-
story hotels collapsed, resulting in approximately 1,700 fatalities (Figure 1). More recently, the Cebu
International Convention Center (built in 2006) suffered heavy damage during the magnitude (M)7.2
Bohol earthquake of October 2013; as of August 2014, it was still not operational.

Catastrophe risk modeling for the Philippines shows earthquake losses are higher than those from
tropical cyclones for larger mean return periods of losses (greater than twenty-five to thirty years).11
Conversely, tropical cyclone losses are greater at smaller mean return periods of losses. This is
primarily because tropical cyclones occur more frequently than earthquakes in the Philippines, but
strong earthquakes typically cause higher losses than large tropical cyclones.

Throughout the world, public buildings such as schools, hospitals, and critical government buildings
have proved to be among the most vulnerable classes of structures. Schools are especially vulnera-
ble, given structural characteristics that typically include large rooms, large windows (particularly
in tropical climates), and corridors, all of which lead to lower stiffness that results in large lateral
displacements of the structure during a major earthquake. In the aftermath of disasters, hospitals,
as well as transportation, power, water systems, and telecommunications network infrastructure,
are functionally critical; swift resumption of public services and hospital operations helps to nor-
malize the situation in affected areas and mitigate a secondary wave of human and economic losses.
Since direct damage to critical infrastructure and associated interruptions in services can account
                                                                                                                        Figure 1.1 Hotels
for more than 50 percent of the overall financial losses from a major earthquake in an urban area
                                                                                                                        collapsed from
(Yanev 2013a), earthquake risk management programs should prioritize assessment and retrofitting                        the 1990 Luzon
of these structures.                                                                                                    Earthquake
◆◆ Over the years, countries facing severe natural hazards have moved beyond piecemeal revisions                        Source: Yanev 2013a.
     of building codes to initiating legislative and regulatory actions toward integrated, countrywide


 	 The “return period of losses” is an estimate of the likelihood of occurrence of a particular level of economic
11

   loss (not of the event that causes the losses). A larger return period indicates less frequent, but a higher level
   of, losses.
2 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                                   approaches to earthquake risk management. For instance, the state of California in the United
                                   States has continuously upgraded building codes over the past several decades to reflect lessons
                                   learned from the types of damage caused by earthquakes. It has also mandated and financed the
                                   strengthening of key public buildings and infrastructure, as well as private structures that are
                                   particularly at risk, and is currently taking the same approach with the remaining private sector
                                   facilities. As a result of its integrated earthquake risk management strategy, California has been
                                   able to reduce the risk to both public and private sectors dramatically, as have several countries
                                   with similar comprehensive approaches.
                              Such an approach to earthquake risk management can likewise strengthen key buildings and
                              infrastructure and reduce the damaging effects of future disasters in the Philippines. An integrated
                              earthquake risk management program would be a vital component of a comprehensive disaster risk
                              management agenda for building the Philippines’s resilience—physical, financial, economic, and
                              social—to multiple hazards.

                              Technical Bases of an Earthquake Risk Management Program
                              Strengthening existing public buildings and infrastructure can significantly reduce human and
                              economic losses in countries that are highly exposed to earthquakes. Recent earthquakes in the
                              Philippines demonstrated that the building stock and critical infrastructure, as well as nonstructural
                              items and equipment, are highly susceptible to damage. This vulnerability can result in significant
                              injuries and disruptions to operations and services, as building codes in the Philippines—as in many
                              countries—do not provide seismic performance standards for these elements.

                              Well-developed capabilities in the Philippines, including a strong professional community, available
                              risk analysis and engineering technology, and lessons learned from international experience, can
                              equip the GoP to improve the assessment and mitigation of structural risk. Lessons learned and
                              challenges revealed by the experience of other countries in implementing large-scale earthquake
                              risk management programs can also help the Philippines implement a more cost-effective and time-
                              efficient program.

                              Several key technical components must be considered in the design of a phased earthquake risk
                              management program:

                              ◆◆ High-resolution hazard mapping, to ensure areas are zoned correctly and at a scale useful for
                                   planning investments
                              ◆◆ Inclusion in the national structural code of standards for retrofitting existing buildings
                              ◆◆ Enforcement of building codes and improved construction quality
                              ◆◆ Prioritization of structures for upgrading and retrofitting

                              Earthquake and Multihazard Mapping
                              Earthquake hazard refers to the estimated probability of exceeding a certain amount of ground
                              shaking, or ground motion, in a specified amount of time (typically, fifty years). The hazard depends
                              on the likely magnitudes and locations of earthquakes, how often they occur, and the properties of
                              the rocks and sediments through which the seismic waves travel.

                              In many areas of the Philippines, earthquake hazard is underestimated and inadequately reflected
                              in building code requirements. Earthquake hazard maps show the distribution of shaking levels with
                              given probabilities of their occurring in specific geographical areas. These maps provide information
                                                                                                      Applications of International Experience / 3



that assists engineers in designing infrastructure, buildings, and utilities that will withstand
earthquake ground motions and are used in creating and updating building and structural codes,
land use planning, and insurance pricing. Since seismic hazard has, in the past, been quantified
at relatively low resolution, many buildings in the Philippines are designed to meet standards
corresponding to earthquake ground shaking of lower intensity than what the area may actually
experience. Areas that have historically experienced a large number of earthquakes, in particular,
tend to have underestimated seismic design requirements because the impacts of the most severe
events that are possible in such areas of high seismicity have usually not been observed in the
relatively short period on record.

The development of high-resolution maps for other hazards, for investment planning, and for resilient
structural design also needs to be fast tracked in the Philippines. Much of the damage to buildings,
roads, bridges, and ports in the 1990 Luzon earthquake, for example, was due to foundation failures
from liquefaction.12 This could have been mitigated through engineering design measures, had
high-resolution liquefaction hazard maps been available. Super Typhoon Yolanda highlighted the
urgency as well of better understanding and mapping storm surge at a high resolution to inform land
use planning and reconstruction.

Building Codes and Enforcement
Existing buildings can be strengthened according to specific requirements developed either as part
of the national structural code or as separate guidelines. In the Philippines, particularly in Metro
Manila, hundreds of tall, multistory buildings have been designed for earthquakes following the
same standards as those for small, low-rise buildings. The building codes generally do not account
for the fact that some of these structures have thousands of occupants; apart from some stricter
provisions for complex high rises, most do not have enhanced structural design requirements.

Retrofitting guidelines in Turkey. In contrast, Turkey (whose earthquake risk management program
is discussed in detail in the international experience section, below) has developed comprehen-
sive structural engineering strengthening and implementation guidelines for public buildings, with
emphasis on schools and hospitals, under the Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Pre-
paredness Project (ISMEP). The Turkish retrofitting guidelines were developed separately from the
Turkish building code, primarily because the code then current did not have any such provisions
for existing buildings. Though based on the provisions of the Turkish building code with input from
U.S. guidelines (ASCE 41-06), the retrofitting guidelines are less stringent—that is, a certain level of
damage is deemed acceptable—to make strengthening possible and cost effective (as compared to
rebuilding) for as many structures as possible. In addition, the building code itself was completely
revised and updated in 2007 to incorporate aspects of performance-based engineering design.

In the Turkish retrofitting guidelines, the engineer for a specific building or groups of buildings is
charged with condition assessment, followed by analysis and determination of deficiencies. The
guidelines present both conventional and state-of-the-art strengthening measures as options and
discuss them in detail. For the assessment, trained structural engineers first identify suspected
building inadequacies using construction documents, analysis and evaluation tools, and site visits.
When the retrofitting guidelines were developed under ISMEP, most of the over 600 existing public

12
     	 Liquefaction is a phenomenon in which a saturated soil loses strength and stiffness in response to an applied
       stress, such as earthquake ground shaking. Drastic and irregular settlement of a building on liquefied soil
       causes structural damage, or it may render the building unserviceable even if no structural damage occurs.
4 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              buildings evaluated had no documentation (such as as-built drawings). Therefore, to assess the
                              earthquake performance of existing buildings and develop the guidelines, teams of engineers under-
                              took in-situ tests, site surveys and walk-throughs, soil investigations, and material testing to gather
                              information about structural system geometry, component cross-sections, characteristics of mate-
                              rials, and soil conditions. The assessment found most of the existing structures lacking in adequate
                              lateral load resisting systems and all lacking in ductility, and almost all structures built before 2000
                              in need of structural strengthening.

                              The key provisions of the retrofitting guidelines are the following:

                              ◆◆ Condition assessment: Data are gathered in sufficient and reasonable detail to identify structural
                                      and nonstructural components that are essential for optimizing earthquake resistance.
                              ◆◆ Structural earthquake deficiencies: Common structural deficiencies, such as irregular configu-
                                      ration, nonductile reinforcement detailing,13 unreinforced masonry infill walls, and so on are
                                      identified.
                              ◆◆ Earthquake hazard (strength of the earthquake motion): The level of seismic design is expressed
                                      in terms of design response spectra or suites of acceleration histories. The hazard due to earth-
                                      quake shaking is defined on either a probabilistic or deterministic basis.
                              ◆◆ Analytical procedures: The use of accepted analytical procedures, ranging from simplified static
                                      to nonlinear dynamic analyses, is allowed based on the building properties, configuration, and
                                      proposed strengthening scheme.
                              ◆◆ Structural performance levels: Various performance levels are defined, and the level of damage
                                      for each level is described. The appropriate performance level for a given earthquake intensity
                                      is identified.
                              ◆◆ Strengthening: Both conventional and innovative techniques are described, and their proper use
                                      and application are elaborated.
                              The retrofitting guidelines and the 2007 Turkish building code introduced three structural perfor-
                              mance levels—Immediate Occupancy (IO), Life Safety (LS), and Collapse Prevention (CP)—relating
                              to damage states for elements of lateral force–resisting systems (see Figure 1.2). Existing public
                              buildings were retrofitted to meet both LS and IO occupancy requirements (see Table 1.1.1).

Figure 1.2. Building
Performance Levels                   Seismic                 Immediate               Life         Collapse
                                      Load                   Occupancy           Safety Level    Prevention
in Turkish Retrofitting
                                                              Level (IO)             (LS)        Level (CP)
Guidelines and 2007
Building Code
Source: Alaluf 2013b.




                                                                                                          Displacement



                              13
                                   	 Nonductile structures lack the detailing necessary to prevent brittle failures and collapse. They are vulnerable
                                     to earthquake damage, and many have collapsed in recent earthquakes.
                                                                                           Applications of International Experience / 5



The IO performance objective implies a level of structural design that will result in limited damage,
given a particular level of ground shaking; the basic vertical and lateral force–resisting systems of
the building retain nearly all their pre-earthquake strength and stiffness. The LS performance level
implies significant damage to the structure is expected to occur, given a particular level of ground
shaking, but some margin against either partial or total structural collapse remains. The CP perfor-
mance level implies the post-earthquake damage state of the building is on the verge of partial or
total collapse.

The “earthquake probability of exceedance” (percentage), shown in table 1.1, is the likelihood that
a particular level of ground shaking will occur over the time period being considered (in this case,
any fifty consecutive years). A 2 percent probability of exceedance means there is a 98 percent
chance the shaking will not exceed the value; hence, a 50 percent probability of exceedance denotes
an event that is far more likely to occur in any given fifty-year period. In the case of weaker ground
shaking associated with a 50 percent probability of exceedance, buildings may be expected to per-
form better than they do in events with lower probability (but stronger shaking). Table 1.1 shows
that under ISMEP, the performance objectives of the retrofitting were such that, for most buildings,
no damage would be expected for ground shaking with 50 percent probability of exceedance. Ret-
rofitting standards for “intensively but short-term occupied buildings” were slightly less stringent,
allowing for limited damage but ensuring immediate occupancy after the earthquake. At 10 percent
probability of exceedance, the retrofitting objectives were such that “buildings to be utilized imme-
diately after the earthquake,” “intensively and long-term occupied buildings and museums,” and
“buildings containing hazardous materials” were strengthened to an IO level, while the remaining
two occupancy types were retrofitted to a Life Safety level (mitigating against partial or total struc-
tural collapse). In the case of extremely strong but rarer ground shaking levels (2 percent probability
of exceedance), “buildings to be utilized immediately after the earthquake” and “intensively and
long-term occupied buildings and museums” are expected to be designed and constructed to the Life
Safety level, while “buildings containing hazardous materials” fall under the less stringent perfor-
mance level of Collapse Prevention.


                                                                       Earthquake probability of             Table 1.1 Building
                     Purpose of occupancy                                exceedence in 50 years              Performance
                                                                                                             Objectives
                                                                       50%        10%         2%
                                                                                                             Source: Alaluf 2013b.
   Building to be utilized immediately after the earthquake              –        IO          LS
 Intensively and long-term occupied buildings and museums                –        IO          LS
         Intensively but short-term occupied buildings                  IO        LS          –
           Building containing hazardous materials                       –        IO          CP
                        Other buildings                                  –        LS          –


Retrofitting guidelines in the Philippines. In the Philippines, a set of technical guidelines similar to
those in Turkey has been developed under the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program to address
the seismic design requirements for upgrading existing public schools and hospitals in Metro
Manila. The guidelines reflect state-of-the-art earthquake retrofitting procedures tailored to local
construction practices. While the Philippines has long had a legal technical seismic design code
for the design of new buildings—the National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP), which was
most recently updated in March 2010 (ASEP 2010)—it has had no such code for upgrading existing
buildings. The new technical guidelines are intended as a supplement to the NSCP to address the
6 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              retrofitting of existing buildings, and they can assist engineers in future earthquake strengthening
                              projects.

                              In the guidelines, the Life Safety (LS) structural performance level is used for evaluating existing
                              buildings. This performance level is equivalent to that specified in the provisions of the NSCP.
                              Seismic performance of a building depends on the characteristics of the earthquake event. A
                              sample structure might perform well when it is subjected to one class of earthquake but experience
                              substantial damage when subjected to another. Determining the seismic hazard before attempting
                              assessment or retrofitting is, therefore, imperative. The seismic hazard is based on the provisions of
                              the NSCP and depends as well on the soil conditions at the site and the proximity of the building to
                              the earthquake source.

                              Since seismic performance also greatly depends on a building’s design and construction, specifying
                              the requirements for detailed site investigations to quantify the critical existing building parameters
                              is important. A review of school and hospital construction drawings has shown a large majority of
                              the school buildings and many hospitals use reinforced concrete construction. The typical lateral
                              load–resisting system consists of reinforced concrete moment-resisting frames. In many of these
                              buildings, hollow concrete block infill panels are used.

                              Although the most recent version of the NSCP generally follows the principles and design requirements
                              of modern seismic design, most reinforced concrete buildings constructed in accordance with the
                              provisions of earlier editions of the national structural code are considered nonductile or of limited
                              ductility. Nonductile structures lack the detailing necessary to prevent brittle failures and collapse.
                              Nonductile reinforced concrete structures are vulnerable to earthquake damage, and many have
                              collapsed in recent earthquakes. For this type of construction, the most economical and structurally
                              viable strengthening option is to apply conventional retrofitting techniques, such as adding new
                              elements (for example, reinforced concrete shear walls) to carry the full seismic load. With this
                              approach, no strengthening of the existing elements is required. The guidelines present sample
                              designs and detailing for such retrofits.

                              The vulnerability assessment and retrofitting methods provided in the guidelines rely on the existing
                              worldwide knowledge base and are further refined to address the specific conditions of the subject
                              buildings in Metro Manila. A great majority of the buildings use reinforced concrete framing with
                              hollow concrete block infill. They are often large, high-occupancy facilities, and their collapse in
                              future earthquakes could result in hundreds or thousands of casualties. Therefore, retrofitting of
                              these buildings is considered a high priority and is emphasized in the guidelines.

                              The guidelines provide strengthening methods that will significantly improve the seismic
                              performance of school and hospital buildings in Metro Manila. To remain cost effective, a certain
                              level of building damage is considered acceptable, but people will be safer and more confident that
                              building collapse will be mitigated. The overall objectives are to achieve acceptable earthquake
                              performance, minimize the cost of retrofitting, and maximize the number of buildings rehabilitated.
                              School and hospital buildings strengthened in accordance with the guidelines are expected to meet
                              their performance targets when they are subjected to the design earthquake14 for Metro Manila, as
                              specified in the NSCP.




                              14	
                                    The ground movement that is used in the calculation of the earthquake resistant design.
                                                                                           Applications of International Experience / 7



Cost effectiveness and enforcement of new structural design requirements. Stricter structural
design requirements constitute a small portion of the overall construction cost of new buildings
and are a cost-effective investment against future earthquakes. A high level of earthquake-resistant
design and construction that preserves the structural and nonstructural elements from major damage
has been found to increase the overall cost of the building by 2–4 percent. This incremental cost
increase is due to the use of additional materials, such as extra reinforcing steel and concrete, for a
more robust structural frame, which brings the cost of the structural system up by approximately 20
percent. The structural system itself is a small portion of the overall cost of a completed building—
usually 10–20 percent for more complex and larger buildings—while the rest is in the architectural
features and exterior finishes, furnishings, and equipment systems.

Better enforcement of structural codes is crucial to reducing structural damage and financial and
human losses, particularly in earthquake-prone areas. A field assessment by the Association of
Structural Engineers of the Philippines after the M7.2 Bohol earthquake of 2013 showed much of
the damage was due to inadequate structural detailing and substandard material quality. Successful
implementation of an earthquake risk management program in the Philippines will be contingent
upon the strict enforcement of structural code requirements, through both the engineering design
and construction processes.

Several countries have successfully strengthened code enforcement, particularly concerning public
buildings and infrastructure, by training and licensing professional engineers and exerting tighter
control over engineering and construction quality. Turkey, for example, recently established detailed
course requirements for obtaining engineering licenses in response to the widespread structural
damage caused by the 1999 earthquakes; many, if not all, of the newer buildings that collapsed
simply did not meet the earthquake requirements of the building codes. Both the engineering designs
and construction were inadequate since no system was in place in much of the affected area to check
whether the designs met the code requirements for earthquake resistance or the construction was of
adequate quality. A further serious problem in Turkey was the absence of professional registration
for structural engineers; anyone who graduated with a degree in civil engineering from the country’s
universities could immediately sign design drawings. The licensing requirements have thus provided
a quality control mechanism for engineering design.

In California, graduate engineers are required to obtain licenses, which involves testing on the subject
of earthquake-resistant design, before they can sign structural drawings. Young engineers typically
practice design under the direction of licensed and experienced engineers for several years before
they take their professional examinations. The licensing process is supported by the profession and
enforced by the state of California, with detailed courses taught to accelerate learning. Such courses
can easily be set up through either professional societies or universities across the Philippines,
similar to what is done in Turkey.

Prioritization of Public Buildings and Infrastructure
From an architectural and engineering perspective, schools are among the most structurally
vulnerable types of buildings. They tend to have large rooms and windows and fewer interior walls
than other structures of similar size and capacity, such as apartment buildings, which have relatively
small rooms encircled by many more walls. As a result, schools are among the first buildings to
collapse in earthquakes, while others built to similar design standards remain standing. To make
matters worse, schools are frequently used as community refuges and emergency shelters, as was the
case in the aftermath of Super Typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines, the Great East Japan Earthquake,
8 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              and Hurricane Katrina in the United States. Fortunately, their architectural and structural simplicity
                              makes strengthening school buildings cost effective and relatively easy.

                              Similarly, hospitals are among the most easily damaged public and private buildings. Along with
                              other medical buildings, they generally have larger rooms, fewer walls, and specialized equipment
                              and supplies that can be costly to replace. They are, moreover, more difficult to evacuate than other
                              types of buildings; moving seriously ill patients can be detrimental and sometimes fatal to them.
                              Hospitals must also be able to resume operations quickly after an earthquake. Without functioning
                              hospitals, the recovery of communities from a disaster can be significantly hampered.

                              Government buildings, such as city halls, emergency response centers, police stations, and fire
                              stations, are critical for emergency response and rescue activities, yet they too are highly vulnerable
                              to earthquakes. In the Philippines, as in much of the rest of the world, these facilities are typically
                              designed to the same earthquake standards as conventional buildings, even though they need to
                              remain operational during emergencies. Fire stations, in particular, have proved highly susceptible
                              to earthquake damage because they have large openings in their ground-floor walls to accommodate
                              the fire engines. It is important to note that government and municipal buildings are often more
                              expensive than others to strengthen, as they are typically one-of-a-kind and larger—often historic—
                              buildings.

                              Finally, transportation and other lifeline infrastructure frequently suffer major damage from
                              earthquakes as a result of their geographical, structural, and functional features. Bridges suffer
                              disproportionate damage compared to other types of transportation infrastructure because they
                              are typically located in areas with poorer soils, such as along rivers, which tend to amplify ground
                              motion. Airports also tend to be vulnerable due to their large size, architectural design, and
                              dependence on equipment and utilities for service. Telecommunications networks, power generation
                              and distribution systems, and water and wastewater systems are usually inadequately protected,
                              despite the critical role functioning utilities services play in normalizing the situation in disaster-
                              affected areas. Building codes around the world have little to no requirements for the protection
                              of critical nonstructural equipment, such as underground pipes or the ceramic components of
                              emergency power systems.

                              Many countries have successfully implemented country- and citywide earthquake risk management
                              programs by prioritizing the upgrading and retrofitting of critical infrastructure (see Box 1.1). In
                              these countries, regulations for schools, hospitals, emergency facilities, police and fire stations, and
                              critical public buildings are in a constant state of improvement; building codes continue to evolve
                              for new construction, while older buildings are strengthened to reduce the risk to levels comparable
                              with that of new construction. In this process of updating building codes, drawing relevant lessons
                              from the performance of structures in each new disaster is vital.
                                                                                              Applications of International Experience / 9




     Box 1.1 Strengthening Schools, Hospitals, and Critical Infrastructure in California

     Since the early 1900s, the state of California has been retrofitting critical types of structures
     to improve their earthquake resistance. The 1906 San Francisco earthquake provided the
     first major impetus for the development of seismic design codes and safety standards.
     Subsequent earthquakes in 1925, 1933, 1971, 1989, and 1994 prompted responses through
     continuous improvement of codes and implementation of retrofitting programs based on an
     increasingly greater understanding of seismic design. In the 1930s, public school buildings
     became one of the first classes of structures to be retrofitted and more strictly regulated.
     Starting in the 1970s, stringent regulatory requirements were expanded to include hospital
     buildings and critical public infrastructure, such as dams and bridges.

     California’s effort to reduce earthquake risk in critical buildings is an ongoing process that
     has spanned decades and cost several billion dollars.15 Earthquake design regulations are
     in a constant state of improvement, as engineers learn new and applicable lessons from
     earthquakes around the world.

     Source: Yanev 2013a.




Developing an Earthquake Risk Management Program
Integrated earthquake risk management programs are typically multiphased, long-term initiatives.
They involve the analysis of earthquake risk to a particular set of assets or infrastructure, followed
by risk reduction programs that can take from a few years to decades to complete. Successful
earthquake risk management and strengthening programs initiated by both the public and private
sectors in many countries have often consisted of three phases—risk audit, risk assessment, and
implementation—elaborated as follows:

◆◆ Phase 1—Risk audit of a specific sector: A sector-specific risk audit (for example, pertaining to
     public school buildings in the education sector or hospitals in the health sector) should be a
     quick study based on engineering judgment and minimal engineering analyses.
◆◆ Phase 2—Detailed risk assessment: Phase 2 includes cost-benefit analysis for the particular sector
     and prioritization of assets.
◆◆ Phase 3—Implementation: Phase 3 involves reducing risks through strengthening and retrofitting
     of the prioritized assets, nonstructural components, and equipment systems. The implementa-
     tion phase mostly consists of construction, accompanied by the establishment of systems for
     quality assurance.

Phase 1: Risk Audit
The risk audit determines the general severity of the problem at hand for the pre-identified sector.
Take, for instance, the education sector in the Philippines: how much damage would occur to schools
in a given city, such as Metro Manila, in a strong earthquake whose expected magnitude and strength
of shaking is based on a realistic assessment of the local seismicity and geology? Which schools,
specifically, would be damaged, and what would be the extent of the damage and the likely casualties?


 	 For more information, see section “International Experience in Earthquake Risk Management,” below.
15
10 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              For many sectors, the risk audit is a relatively simple analysis, conducted in a matter of few
                              weeks to months at a low cost. Many school buildings in the Philippines, for example, particularly
                              the older ones, lack any significant seismic design features and are therefore expected to suffer
                              extensive damage. The risk audit carried out in Metro Manila had to estimate the extent of the
                              potential damage and rate the schools so the most vulnerable and damage-prone buildings would
                              be strengthened first, or possibly rebuilt entirely. This risk audit was conducted in 2011 under the
                              GoP’s long-term engagement with the World Bank, in support of the country’s overall disaster risk
                              management agenda.

                              In such an audit, risks are identified by applying standard screening methods and engineering
                              expertise locally. The screening and analyses are also based on damage information collected for
                              the types of structures of interest from recent earthquakes worldwide. The building structures are
                              then rated in order of priority for strengthening. The relevant line ministry or sectoral agency is
                              typically involved throughout the risk audit process, as it is crucial for them, first, to share ownership
                              of and responsibility for the earthquake risk management program and, second, to integrate risk
                              reduction and management measures into the sector’s overall budgeting and planning. In addition,
                              sectoral agencies typically have detailed information on their assets (for example, location and age
                              of buildings) and on challenges that may arise, enabling them to arrive at politically acceptable and
                              cost-effective solutions reasonably quickly.

                              Phase 2: Detailed Risk Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis
                              Once a risk audit has been completed, the detailed risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis phase
                              is conducted to develop preliminary recommendations for strengthening the prioritized buildings.
                              Vulnerability and economic analyses evaluate the costs and benefits (usually derived from avoided
                              losses) associated with structural upgrades. This is the type of assessment that was conducted in
                              Metro Manila under the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program, which resulted in prioritization
                              of the 200 most vulnerable school buildings. A unique aspect of this vulnerability analysis was
                              the use of avoided life losses rather than avoided physical damages or economic losses as the
                              measure of benefit. Thus, the vulnerability assessment and cost-benefit analyses for Metro Manila
                              schools determined the “number of student lives saved” as the specific criterion for prioritizing the
                              strengthening of existing school buildings.

                              The first task in a seismic vulnerability assessment of a portfolio of assets is to develop a suitable set
                              of earthquake performance goals for the structures. The American Society of Civil Engineers Seismic
                              Evaluation of Existing Buildings ASCE/SEI 31-03 recommends two basic levels of performance—
                              Life Safety (LS) and Immediate Occupancy (IO)—based on the level of post-earthquake service that
                              needs to be provided (ASCE 2003). At the LS performance level, risk of life loss or serious injury
                              to the building occupants during the design earthquake is reduced. Damage is allowed to both
                              structural and nonstructural components of the buildings only to the extent that a partial or total
                              structural collapse does not occur during the design earthquake and that damage to nonstructural
                              components is not life threatening. The IO performance level is more stringent and is used for
                              essential facilities that need to be operational and without loss of life after the design earthquake
                              event. These usually include operation control buildings, hospitals, emergency response centers,
                              police and communication centers, and facilities containing large amounts of hazardous substances.

                              In the technical guidelines developed under the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program, the LS
                              performance level is used as the retrofitting objective for existing buildings. The LS level is equivalent
                              to the provisions of the NSCP (for the design of new buildings) and was selected to align with the
                                                                                                 Applications of International Experience / 11



overall objectives to minimize the cost of retrofitting, achieve acceptable earthquake performance,
and maximize the number of buildings that can be rehabilitated. Using the IO level as the objective,
which would allow for only very limited structural damage in a given earthquake scenario, would
make the program extremely costly. Although greater amounts of damage that do not threaten injury
are considered acceptable at the LS level16 this performance goal is sufficient to safeguard lives and
mitigate building collapse for more schools within the same overall program budget.

In short, the purpose of any detailed risk assessment and cost benefit analysis is to optimize the
number of structures that can be strengthened under the expected program budget while meeting
the selected criterion for the performance of the buildings (for example, performance level or lost
business days or service interruptions resulting from an earthquake). Large programs in which many
similar buildings are strengthened have a big cost advantage over smaller ones due to economies of
scale; during the implementation of such programs, project engineers are often able to optimize the
cost for a large number of buildings, based on their growing experience in program implementation
(see Box 1.2).



        Box 1.2 Turkey: Cost Savings through Implementation of a Large-Scale Program

        The Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP) is
        multifaceted, but its primary component is the strengthening and reconstruction of priority
        public buildings, particularly schools. The government established the Istanbul Project
        Coordination Unit (IPCU) to manage ISMEP with assistance from international experts who
        had varied experience in setting up large seismic retrofitting programs.

        To date, ISMEP has completed the strengthening, reconstruction, and renovation of over
        800 schools, hospitals, and other buildings that were found to have high earthquake risks.
        By the end of the current phase of ISMEP in 2014, more than 1,100 such buildings will have
        been strengthened and/or rebuilt. Tight control of funds throughout the implementation
        phase, along with the size of the program, has resulted in large cost savings through
        economies of scale. Throughout the project, the various international consultants engaged
        in it worked with the ISMEP staff and all of its Turkish engineers and contractors to transfer
        technology and experience from other large retrofitting programs. Capacity building of the
        ISMEP staff and local project engineers occurred naturally during both the design and the
        construction processes.

        Source: Alaluf 2013a, 2013b.




16
     	Constructing a new school building would cost approximately US$580 (PHP25,000) per square meter,
      while upgrading an existing school building, including earthquake strengthening and functional upgrades
      (for example, to bathrooms), would cost approximately US$120–260 (PHP5,200–11,000) per square meter,
      depending on the number of stories and the site requirements. Comparing the two costs shows the cost of
      upgrading is about 20–40 percent that of new construction. Based on the 20 percent estimation, Metro
      Manila can strengthen and renovate nearly five school buildings for the cost of one new one. Cost analyses
      were based on a survey of several Metro Manila contractors.
12 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              Phase 3: Implementation
                              The third and final phase of an earthquake risk management program, and generally the costliest and
                              longest, is its implementation. Construction costs comprise around 90 percent of the total cost, while
                              the remaining 10 percent consists of costs relating to engineering, program administration, and field
                              inspections. The total cost of the program will depend on the final engineering design of the strength-
                              ened buildings, the complexity of their contents and equipment, and the actual construction costs.

                              For this phase to be successful, carrying it out requires qualified project engineers with extensive
                              experience designing and implementing seismic retrofitting and strengthening projects. The added
                              participation in an advisory capacity of engineers with international experience can facilitate
                              technology and knowledge transfer, which is particularly important with regard to construction
                              management and enforcement of standards, as these can greatly affect the quality of implementation
                              of large-scale retrofitting projects (see Box 1.3).



                                   Box 1.3 Current Challenges in Construction Management in the Philippines

                                   Engineering design and construction management in the Philippines are based directly
                                   on U.S. codes, standards, and practices. Both private engineering firms and government
                                   engineering offices have been affected, however, by a significant exodus of experienced
                                   professionals to other countries in response to the global demand for engineers and
                                   technical staff. As a result, the engineering and construction management industries,
                                   particularly in the public sector, are often affected by the following issues:

                                   Lack of training in construction supervision. A significant number of personnel in the
                                   provincial engineering offices lack experience or are not properly trained for construction
                                   management work. In some cases, lack of continuing education results in the use of obsolete
                                   guidelines and practices that are no longer applicable for today’s standards.

                                   Lack of technical training in structural engineering. Particularly in less urbanized areas,
                                   simple infrastructure projects such as low-story buildings, roads, and drainage are designed
                                   by provincial engineering offices, which frequently lack seismic design experience.

                                   Poor quality control and documentation. The integrity and quality of construction depend
                                   on quality tests being conducted and appropriate documentation being kept. Oftentimes,
                                   projects are not executed according to the technical specifications provided in the
                                   structural designs. Moreover, as-built construction drawings sometimes are not properly
                                   filed, affecting future upgrading and retrofitting work.

                                   Poor planning, scheduling, and cost estimation. Many engineers at the provincial level have
                                   inadequate training or background in planning and implementing projects. The consequent
                                   changes to the project implementation schedule can drive up the costs. Building this
                                   capacity for large seismic retrofitting projects, which cover the strengthening of hundreds
                                   to thousands of buildings, is essential.

                                   Source: World Bank 2013.
                                                                                        Applications of International Experience / 13




Integrated Earthquake Risk
Management in the Philippines

E
      arthquake scenario studies can provide policymakers with a direct and to-the-point
      understanding of the potential losses in a given geographical area. Initial studies may be
      simple deterministic scenarios developed in a few months at a moderate cost. The resulting
approximations provide policymakers with a tangible evidence base for political and financial
decision making. Public and private sector entities regularly conduct such scenario analyses to assess
the financial, physical, and human losses that could result from a disaster. Electric power utility
companies, for example, use them to understand how their facilities and business services would
be affected in a given disaster event, and municipal engineers and scientists use them to estimate
the expected effects of major earthquakes in given geographical regions. Oftentimes, earthquake
scenario studies precede earthquake risk reduction and management programs, as they reveal the
extent to which major losses and business interruptions could be incurred in the absence of such
programs. For instance, the University of California’s Berkeley campus initiated an earthquake
strengthening program after completing a comprehensive earthquake scenario analysis that rated
all campus buildings in order of overall risk, based on criteria such as number of occupants, building
function, and financial impact from loss or damage to the building (see box 2.1).

In 2004, a multiyear earthquake risk assessment called the Metro Manila Earthquake Impact
Reduction Study (MMEIRS) estimated the potential physical and human losses and impacts of
different earthquake scenarios in Metro Manila. The assessment evaluated the vulnerability of
residential, commercial, and public buildings and lifeline infrastructure (such as bridges and water
systems); economic and political impacts; and emergency response capacity. The MMEIRS identified
105 priority action plans, of which 40 were selected as high priority. Included among the 40 key
recommendations were (1) to strengthen buildings against earthquakes and (2) to enhance the
emergency health and medical response system

The recommendations for earthquake risk management in the 2004 MMEIRS were broad and high-
level, but the report was short on details on how to prioritize the strengthening of buildings and
lacked concrete operational guidelines for developing an earthquake risk mitigation program.
Following its release, the DPWH embarked on an ongoing program of retrofitting bridges in Metro
Manila, but implementation of a risk reduction program for the building stock was more limited in
the ensuing ten years.

The Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure provided a broad platform to present the findings
of the technical assistance, which aimed to create a methodology for assessing in detail the
14 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience




                                   Box 2.1 Earthquake Risk Management Program for the University of California, Berkeley
                                   Campus

                                   With its population of about 30,000 students and its large faculty, administration, and
                                   support community, the University of California’s Berkeley campus is equivalent in many
                                   ways to a small city. Built on hilly terrain, the campus contains particularly complex systems
                                   for running its varied operations and straddles one of California’s main earthquake faults—
                                   the Hayward Fault (a branch of the larger and famous San Andreas Fault), which is similar
                                   to Metro Manila’s West Valley Fault in that it transects the city.

                                   The UC Berkeley campus, which dates back to the early 1870s, thus faces one of the highest
                                   earthquake risks in the world. The fault can generate an earthquake with a magnitude in the
                                   low to mid-sevens. The probability of such an earthquake’s occurrence is believed to be one
                                   of the highest known through a major area—on the order of 1 to 2 percent per year, which is
                                   comparable to, for example, that for Istanbul, Turkey.

                                   With state and federal funding, the campus and its earthquake risk have been transformed
                                   over the past thirty years. (The surrounding city of Berkeley, with a population of about
                                   110,000, has also implemented a wide-ranging earthquake risk reduction program that,
                                   in itself, would be an excellent “best practices” example, but it will not be discussed here.)
                                   Structural strengthening of some of the oldest and most dangerous buildings on campus
                                   (constructed with unreinforced masonry) began in 1978. In 1997, the university created the
                                   Seismic Action Plan for Facilities Enhancement and Renewal (SAFER) as a comprehensive,
                                   long-term framework for devoting more resources to strengthening or replacing vulnerable
                                   buildings.

                                   By 2006, half of the total floor space identified in SAFER as needing retrofitting had been
                                   strengthened to various performance standards, depending on occupancy and other factors.
                                   By 2011, about 75 percent of the work had been completed. Most existing buildings were
                                   strengthened, some of the older ones at great expense because the work could not easily
                                   be done without affecting their historical architectural features. Many buildings built in
                                   the 1960s and ’70s were also strengthened, illustrating the progress made in earthquake
                                   engineering over the past several decades. Retrofitting of numerous multistory dormitory
                                   buildings found to be dangerous substantially reduced potential future losses of life.

                                   The retrofits include a variety of state-of-the-art techniques for providing additional
                                   protection to existing buildings of many types. Some buildings were torn down and
                                   replaced. The campus became a laboratory for the implementation of the latest techniques
                                   for strengthening buildings. The work continues and, hopefully, will be completed before
                                   the next major earthquake occurs on the Hayward Fault.

                                   Source: Yanev 2013a.
                                                                                         Applications of International Experience / 15



vulnerability of school buildings to multiple hazards, prioritize them for upgrading, and provide
technical guidance on structural strengthening and upgrading. It also provided tailored design
examples for upgrading typical school buildings in Metro Manila. The DPWH also discussed an initial
strategy for the implementation phase of the cross-sectoral Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program
with development partners and various stakeholders in relevant national government agencies, local
government associations, the disaster risk management community, and the private sector.

Multihazard Prioritization for Public Buildings
Public schools and hospitals in Metro Manila have different levels of vulnerability to earthquakes,
floods, typhoons, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions. One task carried out for the detailed vulnerability
assessment was development of a prioritization methodology to help identify the highest risk
candidate structures for upgrading and risk reduction. Below is a summary of the key natural hazards
that affect Metro Manila and their resulting impacts.

Typhoon and Flood
The Philippines and its surrounding seas are affected by an annual average of nineteen tropical
cyclones, or typhoons (Aquino 2005), which bring strong winds, heavy rainfall, storm surges,
floods, landslides, and mudslides. In recent years, Metro Manila has been directly affected by severe
winds, most notably Typhoon Milenyo (international name, Xangsane) in September 2006; Typhoon
Ondoy (international name, Ketsana) in September 2009; and a heavy southwest monsoon rain
event (locally known in Filipino as “Habagat”) in August 2012. The last of these was associated with
Typhoon Haikui, which passed through north of Taiwan.

In Metro Manila, Typhoon Milenyo was said to have reached a recorded maximum sustained wind
speed of 35 meters per second and a gust speed of 45 meters per second (Pacheco et al. 2006).
These were below the basic gust wind speed (that is, the fifty-year return period) of 55 meters
per second for Metro Manila, as prescribed by the 2010 National Structural Code, which makes
the Milenyo wind speeds in Metro Manila equivalent to approximately a twenty-year return period
wind speed, according to the procedure in the ASCE/SEI 7 commentary for hurricane-level winds
(ASCE 2010). The amount of damage, death, and injury caused by the winds of Typhoon Milenyo
was among the worst in more than a decade, particularly for Metro Manila, which had approximately
US$24 million in damage and about 200 deaths.

Typhoon Ondoy brought the highest rainfall and flooding in the history of Metro Manila, causing
floodwaters to rise to a height of more than two meters in the span of just a few hours in some
locations. Ondoy was actually just a tropical storm (maximum sustained wind and gust speeds of
no greater than 28 meters per second and 31 meters per second, respectively) when it affected the
Philippines; it became a typhoon only when it approached Vietnam. As a windstorm, Ondoy may be
said to represent only a one- or two-year return period event for Metro Manila, but the return period
for the rainfall it brought is estimated at a hundred to a hundred and fifty years (Liongson and Tabios
2009). A total of 465 deaths resulted from Ondoy.

The Habagat storm of 2012 brought perhaps the second-worst flooding since Typhoon Ondoy in
2009, but the rains spread over a few days instead of hours and caused landslides in one part of
Metro Manila. In one area, the floodwaters reached a height of approximately 1.8 meters because
of Ondoy, but only about 1.5 meters because of the Habagat storm. In other areas of Metro Manila,
for both storm events, floodwaters rose to at least 3 meters. The maximum twenty-four-hour rainfall
16 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              brought by the Habagat was 472 millimeters—higher than the maximum twenty-four-hour total for
                              Ondoy (455 millimeters). Considering the limitations of current rainfall modeling, the Habagat can
                              be considered a rainfall event with a return period greater than one hundred and fifty years.

                              These storms caused flooding and wind damage to Metro Manila buildings. Based on interviews
                              with Department of Education and hospital staff, the resulting deaths and injuries at schools and
                              hospitals were minimal, even though schools are sometimes used as shelters in such events.

                              Typhoon Pablo (international name, Bopha) of 2012 made landfall on the southern island of Mindanao
                              as a Category 5–equivalent super typhoon, with one-minute sustained wind speed of 280 kilometers
                              per hour. It was one of the costliest reported typhoons ever to strike the Philippines, causing over
                              US$600 million in damage and 1,020 deaths (NDRRMC 2012). The costliest was Super Typhoon
                              Yolanda. It made landfall in the Visayas (Central Philippines) in November 2013 with Category 5–
                              equivalent winds and storm surges of five to six meters. Considered to be the strongest typhoon ever
                              to make landfall, Typhoon Yolanda resulted in approximately 8,000 dead and missing. The total
                              damage and loss from typhoon Yolanda has been initially estimated at PhP571.1 billion (equivalent
                              to US$12.9 billion).

                              Volcanic Activity
                              The Philippines is an archipelago of more than 7,100 islands, most of which are of volcanic origin.
                              Of the thirty-seven volcanoes in the Philippines, eighteen are active. The rest are dormant and
                              not expected to erupt in the near future. The best-known volcanoes are Mount Pinatubo (eighty
                              kilometers northwest of Manila), Mount Banahaw (sixty kilometers southeast of Manila), and Taal
                              (forty kilometers south of Manila); all are on the northern island of Luzon.

                              The last major eruption (the second largest of the twentieth century) was that of Mount Pinatubo in
                              June 1991. Evacuation zones ten to forty kilometers from the volcano’s summit (affecting a population
                              of about 40,000) were established before the eruption, thereby significantly reducing casualties. A
                              reported 847 people were killed, mostly by roofs collapsing under the weight of accumulated wet
                              ash, a hazard that was amplified by the simultaneous arrival of Typhoon Yunya. Some schools in the
                              evacuation zone were damaged by the ash fall, thereby disrupting education (Martí and Ernst 2005).
                              Metro Manila was well outside the forty-kilometer evacuation zone and reported only minor damage
                              and injuries. The impact to Metro Manila schools and hospitals was similarly light.

                              Earthquakes and Tsunamis
                              Because the Philippines is located along the Ring of Fire (see above), it faces major risks from
                              earthquakes and tsunamis. Significant earthquakes in 1976 (Mindanao, M7.9) and 1990 (Luzon, M7.7)
                              killed up to 8,000 (Soloviev, Go, and Kim 1992) and 1,666 people (Rantucci 1994), respectively.
                              West of Metro Manila is the Manila Trench, which can generate large subduction-type earthquakes
                              that can cause destructive tsunamis. Major tsunamis, with waves one to one and a half meters in
                              height, struck Metro Manila in 1677, 1744, 1824, 1852, and 1863 (Nakamura 1978).

                              The MMEIRS report (PHIVOLCS/JICA/MMDA 2004) estimated losses from a M7.2 scenario nighttime
                              earthquake on the West Valley Fault at 168,300 heavily damaged buildings, 33,500 deaths, and
                              113,600 injured. Of schools and hospitals, 10 percent are expected to collapse or sustain significant
                              damage, and 25 percent are expected to have moderate damage. Tsunami risk was analyzed by using
                              Model 13, a M7.9 subduction faulting event on the Manila Trench. Under this scenario, tsunami waves
                              of two to four meters are expected to reach Metro Manila in seventy minutes. The 2013 population
                                                                                        Applications of International Experience / 17



of Metro Manila was 12 million and the population of Greater Manila 25 million. Extrapolating the
MMEIRS numbers results in approximately 83,750 deaths and 284,000 injured if that nighttime
earthquake were to strike today. Numbers for a daytime earthquake on the West Valley Fault are
expected to be much higher.

Both the 1976 Mindanao and 1990 Luzon earthquakes damaged schools, but because they struck
in the evening when school was not in session, they caused few student deaths. Similarly, the M7.2
Bohol earthquake in 2013 struck during a school holiday and, as a result, no students died. The
MMEIRS estimates, as mentioned, are also based on an evening earthquake scenario, when schools
are not in session. A daytime event would be catastrophic. Recent local education reforms to add
the eleventh and twelfth grades to secondary schools will add 2 million students to existing school
buildings in two years. This will dramatically increase the number of two-shift schools, which in turn
will make a class-time earthquake the likely scenario.

Estimates of high casualties among students from a daytime earthquake are supported by data from
the 2008 earthquake in Sichuan, China, which killed 19,000 (Swiss Re 2009), or a little over 1
percent of the student population (see figure 2.1). Metro Manila school buildings have earthquake
vulnerabilities similar to those in China (for example, nonductile concrete construction, infilled
masonry walls, and variable construction quality). In 2013, Metro Manila’s public school population
was approximately 2.15 million students; a 1 percent fatality rate would equate to 21,500 student          Figure 2.1 Schools
deaths at this population level. The number of injuries would be significantly higher. In 2017,            collapsed in the
following full implementation of the educational reforms, the number of students is expected to            2008 Sichuan, China,
increase to 2.4 million. If school buildings are not strengthened by then, the number of children at       Earthquake (M8.0)
risk of dying will increase to 24,000.                                                                     Source: Miyamoto 2008.




Multihazard Prioritization
The U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Applied Technology Council (ATC),
PHIVOLCS/MMDA/JICA (which conducted the MMEIRS study), and others typically use sophisticated
computer models, such as Hazus, to estimate portfolio losses from different natural hazards. The
results are used for policymaking, disaster response planning, and other planning exercises. For the
Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program, a simplified prioritization methodology was developed to
demonstrate the disaster impacts at a qualitative level, with the goal of showing that, if buildings
18 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              are not strengthened against earthquakes, associated life losses will be orders of magnitude greater
                              than those from other natural disasters. A first-order analysis of the natural hazards and potential
                              consequences for schools and hospitals in particular, based on a review of Philippine natural hazard
                              loss history, highlighted the significantly greater threat that is presented to them by earthquakes, as
                              compared to other natural hazards.

                              Typhoons and floods. Since the Philippines is struck by major floods and typhoons frequently, its
                              people are prepared for and its buildings generally resistant to major damage from these events;
                              most damage is nonstructural (for example, strong winds can cause damage to a building’s roof but
                              are unlikely to cause collapse). Most schools and hospitals are constructed of reinforced concrete—
                              one of the construction types most resistant to typhoons and floods—so structural damage in these
                              events is rare. Also, the warning system in the country for both typhoons and floods is sophisticated,
                              so citizens can prepare for them and/or evacuate to avoid them. For major typhoons, schools are
                              typically closed but are sometimes used as shelters. Typhoon and flood casualties in, and property
                              damage to, Metro Manila public schools and hospitals have historically been low.

                              Volcanic eruptions. The three known “active” volcanoes, Taal, Mount Banahaw, and Mount Pinatubo,
                              are too far away from Metro Manila to cause lahar damage (that is, damage from landslide or mudflow,
                              the greatest hazard from volcanoes) to the area. They also are not expected to deposit enough ash on
                              public school or hospital buildings to cause structural damage or failure. Although risk of property
                              damage and injury is high next to an erupting volcano, Metro Manila schools and hospitals are far
                              enough away that they are expected to below.

Figure 2.2 Concrete
Buildings Standing
after the Tsunami
Induced by the 2011
Japan Earthquake
(M9.0)
Source: Miyamoto 2011.




                              Tsunamis. Earthquake-induced tsunamis from the west have an impact on coastal areas. As
                              mentioned above, tsunami waves following a major earthquake on the Manila Trench are expected to
                              take about seventy minutes to reach Metro Manila, which gives people in low coastal areas some time
                              to evacuate or move to upper floors of multistory concrete buildings. As seen in Japan from tsunami
                              induced by the M9.0 earthquake in 2011, property damage can be significant. In the Japanese event,
                              however, reinforced concrete buildings performed much better than other building types when struck
                              by tsunami waves (see Figure2.2). For the approximately 30 percent of Metro Manila schools and
                              hospitals located in the western part along low-lying coastal areas, moderate damage is expected.
                              Casualties are expected to be low, provided sufficient warning is given for evacuations.
                                                                                                                                              Applications of International Experience / 19



   Earthquakes. Earthquakes present the greatest risk of death to occupants of Metro Manila schools
   and hospitals. The M7.2 West Valley Fault (WVF) scenario earthquake in the MMEIRS has a return
   period of 200 to 400 years, and the last earthquake on WVF was over 300 years ago (Daligdig
   et al. 1997; PHIVOLCS/JICA/MMDA 2004). This means the WVF M7.2 earthquake can strike at any
   time. In addition to putting people in danger, this impending hazard affects building stock that is
   particularly vulnerable to earthquakes. Metro Manila school and hospital construction is mostly
   reinforced concrete frame, and many of these structures are of the nonductile variety, which has
   been associated with the highest death rates in past earthquakes (see Figure 2.3, green squares).

                          1,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 2.3 Casualties
                                                                                                                                                                 Associated with
                                           	 Timber frame, Japan
                                                                                                                                                                 Reinforced Concrete
                                           	 Weak masonry                                                                                                        Structures in
                                           	 Brick masonry                                                                                                       Earthquakes
                                                                                                                                     Tangshan, China 1976
                                           	 Timber with heavy infill                                                                                            Source: PHIVOLCS/JICA/
                           100,000                                                                                                                               MMDA 2004.
                                           	 Deaths caused primarily
                                             in collapse of RC
                                             structures                                                                               Model 08

                                           	 Scenario for Metro                                               Manjil, Iran 1990
                                             Manila
                                                                                 Kocaeli, Turkey 1999                               Gujarat, India 2001


                            10,000
                                                                             Mexico City 1985                                     Kobe, Japan 1995
                                                                                                        Armenia, USSR 1986

                                                                                                          Model 18
Number of people killed




                                                                                Chi Chi, Taiwan 1999
                                                                                                                                     Haicheng, China 1975


                              1,000                                            ElAsnam, Algeria 1980                Luzon, Philippines 1990
                                                                                                                   Bazce, Turkey 1999




                                                                                                                                     Both evening
                                                                                                                                     events
                                                                              Loma Prieta, USA 1989
                                                                                       Model 13
                               100




                                                                                  Kalamata, Greece 1986
                                                    Newcastle,
                                                    Australia 1989
                                10




                                  1
                                      10               100                1,000                   10,000                  100,000                    1,000,000
                                                                     Number of buildings heavily damaged
20 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              A WVF M7.2 daytime event associated with 20,000 deaths, annualized at 0.01 (that is, with a 1
                              percent chance per year of occurring), would result in a long-term average of 200 deaths per year for
                              Metro Manila schools and hospitals—an order of magnitude greater than those resulting from flood,
                              hurricane, and volcanic events (typically a long-term average of less than 10 per year).


                              Prioritization and Cost-Benefit Analysis of Earthquake
                              Strengthening
                              The main objective of prioritizing the more than 3,000 distinct school buildings (on more than 700
                              school campuses) in Metro Manila was to identify whether a subset of these buildings needed to be
                              retrofitted and, if so, determine what criteria could be used to prioritize investments and quantify
                              the range of costs and associated benefits of an earthquake strengthening program. The status quo—
                              no strengthening—was used as the baseline.

                              Prioritization
                              The prioritization and selection for earthquake upgrade of the buildings at highest risk were based
                              on building vulnerability and expected casualties derived from the M7.2 West Valley Fault MMEIRS
                              scenario and drew from the methodology of earthquake risk management programs in other
                              countries, such as the World Bank–supported ISMEP in Turkey. Because most of the school buildings
                              in Metro Manila are of similar construction type (reinforced concrete frame with masonry infill
                              walls), the vulnerability ranking is directly correlated with the resulting fatalities from structural
                              damage and collapse.

                              Vulnerability and fatality calculations were based on the probabilistic methods developed in ATC-13
                              (ATC 1985) and FEMA Hazus (FEMA 2001) and were used to rank the buildings under investigation.
                              To estimate vulnerability and fatalities for a particular building, four distinct parameters were used
                              as input: seismic hazard, exposure, building vulnerability, and fatality index.

                              For this prioritization, a database of buildings was developed incorporating these parameters. The
                              following is a summary of the definitions and procedures used to determine these variables.

                              Seismic hazard. The seismic hazard used in the analysis was based on the design response spectrum
                              as defined in the National Structural Code of the Philippines. This spectrum is similar to the
                              “Scenario 8” (M7.2, West Valley Fault) event that was examined previously by the MMEIRS project
                              and designated as the critical event for investigation.

                              Development of the elastic response spectrum was based on the procedure outlined in the NSCP
                              and included such factors as the seismic zonation (zone 4 for Metro Manila), the classification of
                              subgrade soil at the site, and the shortest distance from the building site to the fault.

                              Data for the type of soil (typically, class D or E) at various school campuses were determined from
                              the available PHIVOLCS liquefaction maps. Hence, the prioritization methodology takes liquefaction
                              potential into account.

                              Geographical coordinates (latitude and longitude) were provided in the database of school buildings
                              that was furnished by the Department of Education (DepEd). Because the geometric coordinates of
                              the West Valley Fault are known, the perpendicular distance to the fault line was calculated for each
                              school campus. With this value, the near-field effects for various campuses could be computed.
                                                                                          Applications of International Experience / 21



The design spectrum for an individual building was then developed based on the procedure listed
in the NSCP, modified for the site class and near-field effects. The resulting site-specific spectrum
comprised the seismic hazard for each building.

Exposure. The exposure for each building was based on its student population (used to estimate
fatalities), floor area (in square meters), and construction characteristics (used to estimate potential
structural damage). To estimate the exposure for each building, the DepEd database was modified
to address the following:

◆◆ The existing DepEd database was incomplete (the population and building data for a number of
    buildings were missing).
◆◆ More recent DepEd estimates indicate the student population is larger than the values shown
    in the database.
◆◆ An independent survey of 130 random buildings conducted on twenty-two campuses showed
    the existing database underestimated the number of stories and the floor areas of the surveyed
    buildings.
The database entries were thus modified as follows:

◆◆ Because the populations of individual buildings within a given school campus were unknown,
    the campus population was distributed to the buildings in proportion to the floor area of each.
◆◆ When the year of construction of a given building was unknown, it was assumed to have been
    constructed after 1990 but before 2001 and in compliance with the edition of the National
    Structural Code adopted in that period.
◆◆ The number of students in each building was multiplied by the ratio of the most recent estimate
    of the total student body in Metro Manila divided by the total student population indicated in
    the database.
◆◆ The number of stories of individual buildings was multiplied by the ratio of the observed number
    of stories for the 130 surveyed buildings divided by the total number of stories indicated in the
    database for those 130 buildings.
◆◆ The floor area of buildings was multiplied by the ratio of the actual total floor area for the
    130 buildings surveyed divided by the total floor area indicated in the database for those 130
    buildings.
The revised database was then used for synthesis. It should be noted that more complete facility
information is needed to define better the top candidate (highest risk) buildings for earthquake
strengthening and upgrading. Over 25 percent of the data fields (that is, a quarter of the informa-
tion) used for this analysis were blank or unknown, and the remaining data often did not match the
information gathered during the field surveys. There were also no data on the number of students
per school building, just a total for each campus.

Building vulnerability. Structural vulnerability for the analysis was based on fragility data from
Hazus, which shows the probability of exceeding a damage state as a function of the building drift
ratio. In other words, the parameters (means and variances of the lognormal curves) for the fragility
functions (that is, damageability) of a given building, at a particular intensity of ground shaking,
were based on the following factors:

◆◆ Construction material (for example, reinforced concrete)
◆◆ Lateral load–resisting system (for example, moment frame)
22 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              ◆◆ Number of stories
                              ◆◆ Construction date and design data (used to determine code compliance)
                              ◆◆ Construction practices
                              In this simulation, the default parameters from FEMA Hazus were used and the following was noted:

                              ◆◆ The buildings were almost exclusively constructed of reinforced concrete.
                              ◆◆ Moment frames were the primary lateral force–resisting system for the buildings.
                              ◆◆ In terms of FEMA Hazus classifications, the buildings were either low-rise (one to three stories)
                                   or mid-rise (four to seven stories).
                              ◆◆ The buildings were constructed according to the version of the NSCP adopted at the time of their
                                   design and construction. Three separate vintages were identified: post-2001, 1991–2001, and
                                   pre-1991. The post-2001 NSCP was based on the 1997 Uniform Building Code (UBC), and earlier
                                   versions were likewise based on previous editions of the UBC.
                              ◆◆ Onsite surveys during construction showed the construction quality control was inadequate,
                                   and construction practices did not closely follow the design plans and specifications. Therefore,
                                   the code compliance for each design vintage was downgraded by one level for the analysis.
                              Thus, using the FEMA Hazus methodology, the Metro Manila buildings were assigned the seismic
                              design levels listed in Table 2.1.


                              Table 2.1 Hazus Building Seismic Design Level Classifications

                               Construction data                  FEMA Hazus code compliance assignment
                               Post-2001                          Moderate code
                               1991–2001                          Low code
                               Pre-1991                           Pre-code
                              Source: Miyamoto 2014.



                              The analysis also used four damage states defined by FEMA Hazus, typically with corresponding fra-
                              gility functions (see Figure 2.4). Their definitions for a reinforced concrete moment-frame building
                              (referenced as C1 below) are as follows:

                              ◆◆ Slight structural damage: Some beams and columns have flexural or shear-type hairline cracks
                                   in, near, or within joints.
                              ◆◆ Moderate structural damage: Most beams and columns exhibit hairline cracks. In ductile frames,
                                   some of the frame elements have reached yield capacity, indicated by larger flexural cracks and
                                   some concrete spalling. Nonductile frames may exhibit larger shear cracks and spalling.
                              ◆◆ Extensive structural damage: Some frame elements have reached their ultimate capacity, indi-
                                   cated by large flexural cracks, spalled concrete, and buckled main reinforcement. Nonductile
                                   frame elements may have suffered shear failures or bond failures at reinforcement splices or
                                   broken ties or buckled main reinforcement in columns, which may result in partial collapse.
                              ◆◆ Complete structural damage: Structure has collapsed or is in imminent danger of doing so
                                   because of brittle failure of nonductile frame elements or loss of frame stability.
                                                                                                                    Applications of International Experience / 23



                                                                                                                                       Figure 2.4 Sample
                                                  1                                                                                    Fragility Curves For
                                                                                                                                       Various Structural
                                                0.9                                                                                    Damage States
                                                                                                                                       Source: Miyamoto 2014.
                                                0.8
    Probability of exceeding the damage state




                                                0.7


                                                0.6


                                                0.5


                                                0.4


                                                0.3


                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                              	Slight
                                                                                                                                              	Moderate
                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                              	Extensive

                                                 0                                                                                            	Complete
                                                      0   2             4       6              8         10   12          14
                                                                                    Drift ratio, %




Fatality index. The Hazus indoor fatality rates (FEMA 2001, chapter 13) for concrete moment-frame
low-rise (C1L) and concrete moment-frame mid-rise (C1M) buildings are summarized in Table 2.2.


Table 2.2 Hazus Indoor Fatality Rates for Concrete-Frame Buildings

                                                                               Complete structural damage
                                                              Fatality rate,            Fatality rate,         Collapse
 Building type                                                 no collapse                collapse               rate
 C1L                                                             0.01%                       10%                   13%
 C1M                                                             0.01%                       10%                   10%
Source: Miyamoto 2014.



Hazus building-collapse rates for “complete structural damage” are 13 percent for C1L and 10
percent for C1M. Collapse rates for unreinforced masonry are 15 percent for URML (low-rise) and
for URMM (medium-rise). Hazus fatality rates are uniform across all building types, so fatality
estimates must factor in the collapse rates. Based on this logic, fatality rates for reinforced concrete
buildings should be slightly lower than for unreinforced masonry buildings. MMEIRS findings on the
relationship between fatalities and building damage are quite different from Hazus findings, however
(PHIVOLCS/ JICA/MMDA 2004). The MMEIRS findings show fatality numbers in reinforced concrete
buildings are actually between 5 and 100 times (an average of 20 times) those in unreinforced
masonry buildings, consistent with post-earthquake observations in Sichuan, China (2008, M8.0),
24 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              and Haiti (2010, M7.0). Therefore, the fatality numbers were adjusted for the analysis by a factor of
                              6 and the collapse rate by a factor of 2.5. The adjusted rates for C1L and C1M buildings used in the
                              ranking algorithm are summarized in Table .

                              For each level of damage defined earlier, a percentage of the population was assigned as the fatality
                              rate. For each building, the probable fatality ratio was then considered by aggregating the probability
                              of exceeding a damage state and the fatality rate associated with that damage state. It should be
                              noted that only indoor fatalities were used in this study. Fatalities outside of buildings due to falling
                              hazards were not included, but they can add 5–10 percent to the indoor fatality rates.


                              Table 2.3 Adjusted Hazus Indoor Casualty Rates for Metro Manila Concrete-Frame Buildings

                                                                                Complete structural damage
                                                            Fatality rate,               Fatality rate,             Collapse
                               Building type                 no collapse                   collapse                   rate
                               C1L                             0.06%                         60%                      33%
                               C1M                             0.06%                         60%                      25%
                              Source: Miyamoto 2014.



                              The following is a summary of the key steps for determining the top candidates for earthquake
                              strengthening, based on the prioritization process discussed above:

                              ◆◆ For each building, compile the following information:
                                   •• Building identifier
                                   •• Building coordinates
                                   •• Seismicity
                                   •• Occupants and area
                                   •• Fragility parameters (mean and standard deviation) for each damage state
                              ◆◆ Compute probabilistic values for damage states by using the fragility functions corresponding
                                   to the building construction type, lateral load framing system, number of stories, and vintage.
                              ◆◆ Compute fatality ratios by using the fatality rate for each damage state and the probability of
                                   exceeding that damage state.
                              ◆◆ Compute earthquake strengthening costs by using the cost estimate per square meter and build-
                                   ing floor area.
                              ◆◆ For Metro Manila schools, use a total student population of 2.15 million.
                                                                                    Applications of International Experience / 25



The earthquake hazard assessment and building upgrade prioritization process is summarized in
Figure 2.5.

                                                                                                       Figure 2.5
      Seismic hazard                   Facility input data              Hazus adjustments
                                                                                                       Earthquake Upgrade
    Fault characteristics              From DepEd and DOH               Poor earthquake design         Prioritization Process
     Soil characteristics                                                 Poor construction            Source: Miyamoto 2014.
       Fault distance                                                   Concrete collapse ratio
    Attenuation relation                                                      Death ratio
    (MMEIRS scenario 8)              Augmented facility data

                               Building data: Construction type, year
                               built, number of stories, foundation
                               system, and roof type.
                               Occupancy data: Number of occupants
                               by building




                                      Hazus-type program




                                     Fatality determination
   Aggregate fatalities
                                            By building




                                      Building risk ranking

                                  Based on fatalities per building




                               Earthquake upgrade prioritization
26 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              Analysis Results
                              The prioritization process revealed that public school buildings in Metro Manila are at high earth-
                              quake risk. For a M7.2 earthquake scenario as simulated in the 2004 MMEIRS, approximately 50
                              percent of the 3,821 public school buildings evaluated from available databases were found to be
                              high-risk structures that will incur significant damage or collapse. Student fatalities in a daytime
                              earthquake were estimated at 24,400 out of 2.15 million students in Metro Manila, based on 2013
                              figures (Miyamoto 2013; see figure 2.6).

Figure 2.6 Student
Fatality Distribution
in Metro Manila Public
Schools, M7.2 West
Valley Fault Daytime
Earthquake
Source: Miyamoto 2014.
                                                                                                                          Applications of International Experience / 27



Based on the ranking of these buildings according to risk levels, the risk assessment distilled the
following results (see Figure 2.7):

◆◆ 18 percent of all fatalities will occur in less than 3 percent of the assessed school buildings.
◆◆ 25 percent of all fatalities will occur in less than 5 percent of the assessed school buildings.
◆◆ 80 percent of all fatalities will occur in less than 40 percent of the assessed school buildings.


A short-term goal may be to upgrade 100 to 200 of the buildings at highest risk immediately. Doing
so will reduce the death toll by 25 percent, or 6,385 students. School upgrades will enhance safety
and improve the functionality of older and higher-risk structures. Seismically upgraded school
structures will also provide more resilient disaster shelters for typhoons and floods.

                                                                                                                                             Figure 2.7 Estimated
                  120                                                                                                                        Metro Manila Student
                                           3,821 school buildings evaluated                                                                  Fatality Rates for a
                                           24,400 fatalities (of 2.15 million)                                                               M7.2 West Valley Fault
                100                                                                                                                          Daytime Earthquake
                                                                                                                                             Scenario

                                                                                                                                             Source: Miyamoto 2014.
                         80
                                  18% of fatalities (4,320) in less
  NUmber of fatalities




                                  than 3% of buildings (100)

                         60
                                                       25% of fatalities (6,385) in less
                                                       than 5% of buildings (186)

                                                                                           80% of fatalities (19,330) in less
                         40
                                                                                           than 40% of buildings (1,466)



                         20




                         0
                              0      500           1000         1500         2000          2500         3000         3500        4000
                                                 Assessed buildings in order of decreasing number of fatalities




Cost-Benefit Analysis
The cost-benefit analysis revealed that up to five existing school buildings can be strengthened and
renovated for the cost of one new one. Public schools and hospitals in Metro Manila are generally
multistory, reinforced concrete constructions. They have insufficient detailing based on older
seismic design codes. School strengthening would therefore enhance the safety and improve the
functionality of older and higher-risk structures. Moreover, seismically upgraded school structures
would serve as more resilient disaster shelters for typhoons and floods.

Based on analysis of both conventional retrofitting techniques (that is, adding shear walls or braced
frames; improving the existing component detailing) and innovative methods (such as seismic isolation
28 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              and energy dissipation), a school building in Metro Manila could be upgraded for approximately 20–40
                              percent of the total cost of constructing a new or replacement school.17 Upgrading the most vulnerable
                              5 percent of school buildings would cost approximately US$40 million–80 million and save nearly
                              6,400 student lives, and upgrading the most vulnerable 40 percent would cost approximately US$178
                              million–356 million and save over 19,000 student lives (see Table 2.4).


                              Table 2.4 Cost-Benefit Analysis for Upgrading and Strengthening Metro Manila School Buildings

                               Number of buildings                Costs                                 Student lives saved
                                (out of 3,821 total)
                               186 most vulnerable                US$40 million–80 million              6,390 (25% of predicted
                               buildings (5%)                     (PhP1.7–3.5 billion)                  casualties)
                               1,466 most vulnerable              US$178 million–356 million            19,330 (80% of predicted
                               buildings (40%)                    (PhP7.7billion–15.3 billion)          casualties)
                              Source: Miyamoto 2013.



                              Data on hazards and building exposure were collected for the risk assessment from various gov-
                              ernment agencies, while an initial pool of buildings was documented through site visits, visual sur-
                              veys, and photos. The documentation was reviewed, assessed, and categorized and aggregated with
                              available facility data collected from the government agencies, including the National Disaster Risk
                              Reduction and Management Council, the Department of Education, the Department of Health, the
                              Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration, and the Philippine
                              Institute of Volcanology and Seismology. To develop a ranking for each building, internationally
                              accepted methods of risk assessment algorithms were used to correlate the earthquake hazards with
                              probable human loss metrics.

                              Prioritization of buildings in risk assessment studies is essential to ensure the optimal allocation of
                              available funds during the implementation phase of an earthquake risk management program. Using
                              the prioritization methodology described above, each of the 3,821 school buildings in Metro Manila
                              was ranked, factoring in such key parameters as construction type and vulnerability, construction
                              date (age of the building), number of stories, number of occupants, and site geology.

                              Also relevant to the budget of an earthquake risk management program are institutional, political,
                              and regulatory considerations. For example, to calculate cost parameters as accurately as possible,
                              a program that retrofits school buildings in the Philippines would necessarily incorporate the priori-
                              ties, budget, data, and other resources of the relevant line agency or department. An implementation
                              strategy might be designed according to the following steps and could be accomplished within an
                              overall time frame of three to four years:

                              1.	 To optimize the selection of buildings under consideration, coordinate with the Department
                                  of Education and the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology to collect the most

                              17
                                   	Constructing a new school building would cost approximately US$580 (PHP25,000) per square meter,
                                    while upgrading an existing school building, including earthquake strengthening and functional upgrades
                                    (for example, to bathrooms), would cost approximately US$120–260 (PHP5,200–11,000) per square meter,
                                    depending on the number of stories and the site requirements. Comparing the two costs shows the cost of
                                    upgrading is about 20–40 percent that of new construction. Based on the 20 percent estimation, Metro
                                    Manila can strengthen and renovate nearly five school buildings for the cost of one new one. Cost analyses
                                    were based on a survey of several Metro Manila contractors.
                                                                                         Applications of International Experience / 29



    up-to-date building data (two months). Engage universities, technical agencies, and practicing
    engineers for basic data collection. A cornerstone retrofitting program could target, for instance,
    a selection consisting of the 100 to 200 most structurally vulnerable school buildings.
2.	 Concurrently, establish a separate project management office to manage the cornerstone retro-
    fitting program (two months). The office would handle the procurement and contracting process
    for structural analysis, design, and construction (two months).
3.	 In parallel, establish an expert panel to develop and conduct a short course (four months) to
    train Philippine structural engineers on the use of the earthquake strengthening guidelines to
    upgrade high-risk schools. The panel could be composed of representatives from DPWH, the
    University of the Philippines, the Association of Structural Engineers of the Philippines, and
    other technical organizations.
4.	 Establish a quality control system (two months) for engineering design (for example, to review
    designs and check plans) and construction (for example, to test materials and inspect construc-
    tion) to ensure high-quality and well-built schools.
5.	 Perform detailed seismic analysis of the highest risk buildings to identify vulnerabilities, deter-
    mine upgrading needs, and develop construction cost estimates (six months).
6.	 Develop construction plans (twelve months).
7.	 Construct the earthquake upgrades (eighteen months).

Upon completion, such a program will have reduced the potential student fatality rate in a major
earthquake by approximately 20–25 percent, based on the M7.2 MMEIRS earthquake scenario, and
strengthened disaster shelters for the safety of communities in future typhoons and floods. The
program could then be scaled up and implemented nationwide.


Guidelines for Earthquake Strengthening of Public Schools
and Hospitals in Metro Manila
The guidelines for earthquake strengthening of schools and hospitals in Metro Manila were developed
with technical assistance from the World Bank under its Safe and Resilient Infrastructure Program to
help address the seismic upgrade requirements for public buildings in Metro Manila. The guidelines
are recommended for use as a supplement to the 2010 edition of the National Structural Code of the
Philippines (NSCP), which is the legal technical seismic design code in the Philippines for the design
of new buildings. The NSCP was updated in March 2010, and its seismic requirements closely follow
the provisions of the 1997 Uniform Building Code (ICBO 1997).

Although the most recent version of the NSCP generally follows the principles and design requirements
of modern seismic design, most of the reinforced concrete buildings that were constructed in
accordance with the provisions of earlier editions are considered nonductile or of limited ductility.
As mentioned earlier, nonductile structures lack the detailing necessary to prevent brittle failures
and collapse. Nonductile reinforced concrete structures are vulnerable to earthquake damage, and
many have collapsed in recent earthquakes.

For this type of construction, the most economical and structurally viable strengthening option is
the application of conventional retrofitting techniques, such as the addition of new elements (for
example, reinforced concrete shear walls) to carry the full seismic load. Using this approach, no
strengthening of the existing elements would be required. The guidelines present example designs
and detailing for such retrofits.
30 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              The risk assessment and retrofitting methods used in the guidelines rely on the existing worldwide
                              knowledge base and are further refined to address the specific conditions of the subject buildings in
                              Metro Manila. A great majority of the buildings use reinforced concrete framing with hollow concrete
                              block infill. These types of buildings are often large, high-occupancy facilities, and their collapse in
                              future earthquakes could result in hundreds or thousands of casualties. Therefore, retrofitting of
                              these buildings is considered a high priority and is emphasized in the guidelines.

                              The strengthening methods provided in the guidelines will significantly improve the seismic
                              performance of school and hospital buildings in Metro Manila. To remain cost effective, a certain
                              level of building damage is considered acceptable, but greater life safety will be ensured, and
                              people will be more confident that building collapse will be mitigated. School and hospital buildings
                              strengthened in accordance with the guidelines can be expected to meet their performance targets
                              when they are subjected to the design earthquake for Metro Manila.

                              The guidelines are divided into three volumes (see Figure 2.8):

                              ◆◆ Volume I provides a prescriptive methodology for evaluating and upgrading school and hospital
                                   buildings.
                              ◆◆ Volume II provides detailed background information and advanced analysis and evaluation
                                   techniques, including the use of performance-based engineering.
                              ◆◆ Volume III provides design examples for use in evaluating typical Metro Manila school and hos-
                                   pital buildings. The examples illustrate the upgrade methods prescribed in volume I.
                              For a great majority of the buildings, the provisions of volume I and the design examples and detailing
                              provided in volume III most likely will be used. Volume II is intended to be used for unique structures
                              or when alternative approaches are required—for example, for buildings with irregularities for which
                              the linear static procedure is not allowed, or when alternative or innovative upgrade options that are
                              not covered in volume I have been selected.

                              Many technical sections of the guidelines are based on the provisions of FEMA 356 (NEHRP 2000).
                              As reinforced concrete frame construction is prevalent in Metro Manila for most school buildings and
                              many hospitals, the guidelines focus on that type of construction.

                              The procedure specified in the guidelines for assessing and upgrading a given building is as follows:

                              ◆◆ Determine the seismic hazard for the building per the National Structural Code of the Philip-
                                   pines.
                              ◆◆ Perform a condition assessment.
                              ◆◆ Perform linear static analysis.
                              ◆◆ Assess the performance of the building.
                              ◆◆ For inadequate buildings, design upgrade options as defined in volume I, based on the proce-
                                   dures of the NSCP, to carry 100 percent of the lateral load and limit story drift ratios to 1 per-
                                   cent. Provide detailing as presented in volume III.
                              ◆◆ Check nonstructural component anchorage and nonbuilding structures, such as water towers.
                                                                                                     Applications of International Experience / 31



                                                                                                                        Figure 2.8 Flowchart
                                                  Structure                Ch. 2                                        for Application of the
                   Prioritization                 selection
                                                                                                                        Guidelines (Chapter
                                                                                                                        Citations Refer to
                                               Typical                        Nontypical
                                                                                                                        Volume I)
                                    Examples
                                                                                       VOL II                           Source: Miyamoto 2014.
                  VOL III                            VOL I
                                    Location
                                                                                   Ch. 5
                     Site
Geotechnical        class         Seismic                Plans                                   Condition
investigation                     hazard                                                        assessment

                            Seismic                                                    Materials &     Chs. 7 & 8
                Ch. 4       demand                  Building                            framing
                                                     model

                            Analysis & evaluation            Chs. 6, 7 & 8


                                                      OK?
            Yes
                                                               No

                                                Select upgrade


                        BRBF                      Chs. 3 & 9                       RCSW


                                                  Ch. 9, 7 &
                                                National Code
       Example                                                                               Example
                                                Design new &
                                                check existing


                                                            Chs. 10 & 11

                                                  Check non-
                                                 structural &
                                                 non-building
Burbank, California, US Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthorne (C) and United States Geological Service (USGS) Seismologist Lucy
Jones (L) participate in a region-wide simulation of an expected catastrophic 7.8 magnitude earthquake on the San Andreas Fault
during the Great Southern California ShakeOut earthquake drill. Photo: David McNew/Thinkstock.com
                                                                                                         / 33




International Experience in
Earthquake Risk Management

I
    nternational experience can provide insight into the potential challenges and key lessons of
    developing and implementing earthquake risk management programs. The Forum on Safe and
    Resilient Infrastructure held on October 1–2, 2013, provided an opportunity for the government
of the Philippines to exchange knowledge with several countries that had implemented their own
seismic retrofitting and upgrading programs. As the GoP formulates the implementation strategy of
its earthquake risk management program, the following examples of different structural resilience
programs worldwide (including large-scale, pilot, countrywide, and region-wide) can inform the
scope and design of the implementation strategy in the Philippines.


California: Multidimensional Earthquake Risk Management
Since the early 1900s, the state of California has been retrofitting critical classes of structures to
strengthen them and mitigate the impacts of disasters.18 The 1906 San Francisco earthquake was the
first major impetus for the development of building design codes and safety standard regulations. The
reactive measures, driven by a greater understanding of risk following each major earthquake, has led
to a large-scale, ongoing earthquake risk management program that encompasses structural retrofitting,
regulatory codes, and legal enactments to address the risk to critical buildings and infrastructure.

Schools
The 1933 Long Beach earthquake (M6.4) destroyed most of the schools in the city of Long Beach,
despite their having been mostly new buildings designed to the earthquake standards then current.
Seventy schools were destroyed, 120 suffered major damage, and 300 received minor damage The
event catalyzed enactment one month after the earthquake of the Field Act, mandating special
earthquake designs for schools.19 The act, which established the Office of the State Architect (now
the Division of the State Architect, or DSA) to regulate the design and construction of all public
school buildings throughout the state,20 includes the following provisions:

◆◆ School building construction plans must be prepared by qualified California-licensed structural
     engineers and architects.

18
  	 Unless otherwise specified, the information in this section is from Yanev 2013a.
19
  	 For more information, see http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_2004-04_School%20Safety.pdf.
20
  	 For more information, see http://www.dgs.ca.gov/dsa/home.aspx.
34 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              ◆◆ Designs and plans must be checked by DSA for compliance with the act before a contract for
                                      construction can be awarded.
                              ◆◆ Qualified inspectors, independent of the contractors and hired by the school districts, must
                                      continuously inspect construction and verify full compliance with plans.
                              ◆◆ The responsible architects and/or structural engineers must observe the construction periodi-
                                      cally and prepare changes to plans (if needed), subject to approval by DSA.
                              ◆◆ Architects, engineers, inspectors, and contractors must, under penalty of perjury, file reports to
                                      verify compliance of the construction with the approved plans, emphasizing the importance of
                                      testing and inspections to achieve seismically safe construction.
                              Based on state bureau regulations, review of the engineering design is conducted by independent
                              third parties, and the construction process is supervised by state and private industry engineers.
                              Private licensed and prequalified engineers do most of the plan checking and review for the state
                              (or local) agency. The costs to DSA of plan checking and review are passed on to the owner through
                              construction permit fees.

                              For many years, the regulatory requirements for schools in California significantly exceeded those
                              for all other types of buildings. The schools have performed much better in strong earthquakes than
                              any other type of building, and no public school building has collapsed in an earthquake in California
                              since the passage of the Field Act.

                              Hospitals
                              The collapse of major hospital buildings during the 1971 San Fernando earthquake (M6.5) in the
                              Los Angeles metropolitan area was the impetus for stronger regulations for hospital buildings. As
                              a direct response to the disaster, which included damage to hospitals considered state-of-the-art
                              at the time, California’s legislature passed in 1973 the Alfred E. Alquist Hospital Seismic Safety
                              Act, which requires that hospitals be designed and constructed to withstand a major earthquake
                              and remain operational immediately afterward (box 3.1). The Alquist Hospital Act established
                              the Facilities Development Division (FDD) within the Office of Statewide Health Planning and
                              Development to regulate the earthquake design and construction of hospitals.21 In the aftermath of
                              the 1994 Northridge earthquake (M6.7), the act was expanded in scope to require that all hospitals
                              survive earthquakes without collapsing or posing the threat of significant loss of life and that all
                              critical equipment within hospitals remain functional.

                              Critical Public Infrastructure
                              Advances in strengthening public infrastructure followed a similar pattern to efforts to strengthen
                              schools. The destructive effects of the San Fernando earthquake prompted major changes in the
                              earthquake design, regulation, and construction of power transmission facilities and highway
                              structures. The California Department of Transportation initiated a bridge seismic safety retrofitting
                              program focused on strengthening existing highways and bridges, and the currently operating Caltrans
                              Seismic Retrofit Programs were established following the unprecedented damage to transportation

                              21
                                   	 In a move that it executed in 1983 and further clarified in 1991, the California state legislature transferred
                                    all responsibility related to hospital construction plan review from local building departments to the newly
                                    created FDD. FDD became the single point of accountability and authority for design review and construction
                                    observation activities relating to hospitals. For more information, see http://www.oshpd.ca.gov/FDD/About_
                                    Us/History/.
                                                                                           Applications of International Experience / 35




     Box 3.1 Subsequent to the Alquist Hospital Seismic Safety Act of 1973

     The moderate (M6.7) Northridge earthquake in 1994 cost US$3 billion in hospital-related
     damage and evacuations. While hospitals built in accordance with the 1973 Alquist
     Hospital Act very successfully resisted structural damage, many older (pre-1973) hospital
     buildings performed poorly and sustained extensive nonstructural damage (for example, to
     plumbing and ceiling systems). As a result, the Alquist Hospital Act was amended by Senate
     Bill (SB) 1953, which was signed into law in September 1994. Under SB 1953, all hospitals
     are required to survive earthquakes without collapsing or posing a threat of significant loss
     of life. In addition, all existing hospitals are to be seismically evaluated and rated according
     to seismic resistance.

     Although the law mandated replacement or retrofitting by 2013 of the buildings most
     at risk to meet seismic safety standards, the economic recession caused the California
     legislature to pass a law in 2009 delaying the deadlines until 2020 or 2030. For more
     information, see http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_2001-04_Hospital.pdf and http://
     www.californiahealthline.org/think-tank/2010/california-hospital-seismic-safety-rules-
     center-stage-again.



infrastructure throughout the San Francisco region caused by the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake
(M6.9).22 The Caltrans Seismic Retrofit Programs have been focused on identifying and retrofitting
existing bridges statewide, bringing them up to the latest seismic safety retrofit standards to prevent
collapse during future earthquakes.

The Northridge earthquake was another wakeup call, with costs exceeding US$50 billion in direct
damage, several times greater than the cost of the Loma Prieta earthquake. The California legislature
mandated further review and strengthening, as necessary, of all highways and other bridges in the
state.23 The Division of Safety of Dams in the Department of Water Resources was strengthened
as the enforcement agency charged with ensuring dam safety by reviewing designs and plans and
conducting inspections of all new and existing dams in California.24 As a result, most dams have
been strengthened or replaced entirely based on detailed risk assessments and cost-benefit analyses
carried out over the last forty-two years.

California’s ongoing large-scale programs for reducing earthquake risk to schools, hospitals, other
buildings, and public infrastructure have spanned decades and cost several billion dollars. The
efforts of the state have led to greater public awareness, and the federal government, including the
military, is undertaking similar programs to assess and reduce existing earthquake risk to specific
sectors crucial to the U.S. economy. Driven by the realization that massive business interruptions
and production losses caused by earthquakes could be dramatically reduced or eliminated, private
companies in California have also been engaged in structural strengthening programs since the
1980s to evaluate and reduce the existing risks to their buildings, including building contents,
production and service equipment, and inventory.


22
  	 For more information, see http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/paffairs/about/retrofit.htm.
23
  	 For more information, see Caltrans Seismic Advisory Board (2003).
24
  	 For more information, see http://www.water.ca.gov/damsafety/FAQAnswer/index.cfm.
36 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience




                              Romania: Hazard Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness
                              Project
                              The 1977 Vrancea earthquake (M7.2) prompted the development of substantive building codes and a
                              seismic risk management system in Romania.25 Most fatalities and property damage were concentrated
                              in Bucharest, where most buildings had been built before World War II and were not structurally
                              reinforced (See Figure 3.1). Overall, approximately 35,000 buildings were damaged, with total costs
                              estimated at over US$2 billion.26 Immediately following the earthquake, the Romanian government
                              imposed more stringent construction standards. Not until well into the 2000s, however, did it begin to
                              address the country’s vulnerability to earthquake risk in a more comprehensive manner.

                              In 2005, the Romanian government requested World Bank financial and technical support to imple-
                              ment a comprehensive and multisectoral earthquake risk management program, consisting of both
                              structural and institutional measures to reduce the vulnerability of high-priority technical and social
                              infrastructure. The program identified key infrastructure and high-priority public buildings for struc-
                              tural retrofitting and, in parallel, developed institutional strengthening measures, such as building
                              design codes, to increase the capacity of central and local institutions to perform their related func-
                              tions. The multisectoral earthquake risk management program was developed and implemented
                              as one component of the broader Hazard Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project
                              (HRMEP) to reduce the country’s overall financial, economic, social, and environmental vulnerability
                              to natural disasters. The total cost of the program was approximately US$150 million.

                              Retrofitting Key Buildings
                              Under HRMEP, more than 300 key public buildings were identified, of which 84 were selected for
                              retrofitting based on a prioritization methodology consisting of social, economical, technical, and
                              functional criteria. During the implementation phase of the program, several key factors affected
                              the overall procurement and contracting plan in terms of cost, complexity, and duration. First, the
                              scope of retrofit upgrades was substantially expanded to ensure buildings would quickly recover
                              full functionality following earthquakes (that is, Immediate Occupancy performance level). Second,
                              with Romania’s accession to the European Union (EU), building designs had to be reviewed based
                              on stricter technical requirements and quality regulations to comply with EU structural safety and
                              functionality standards. The 2010 European economic crisis affected the state budget, and some
                              buildings had to be dropped from the program due to funding constraints. As a result, the number of
                              buildings was ultimately narrowed down to 44 (see table 3.1).


                              Table 3.1 Building Facilities Selected for Retrofitting under the Romania HRMEP

                                                                                                               Number of facilities
                               Category of building facilities
                                                                                                           out of 44 buildings total (%)
                               Emergency and disaster response facilities                                             17 (38%)
                               Hospitals (national and provincial level)                                              14 (32%)
                               Educational (universities, child protection centers)                                   10 (23%)
                               Essential public buildings                                                                 3 (7%)
                              Source: Petrescu 2013.



                              25
                                   	 Unless otherwise specified, the information in this section is from Petrescu 2013.
                              26
                                   	 For more information, see http://gemecd.org/event/170.
                                                                                       Applications of International Experience / 37




                                                                                                          Figure 3.1 Building
                                                                                                          Collapse and Damage
                                                                                                          in Bucharest from
                                                                                                          the 1977 Vrancea
                                                                                                          Earthquake (M7.2)
                                                                                                          Source: Petrescu 2013.




Finally, a risk assessment of electricity, gas, and oil facilities was developed to support potential
future structural improvement projects for key lifeline infrastructure.

Building Codes and Capacity Building
In addition to physically strengthening key buildings, the HRMEP addressed the institutional
and regulatory weaknesses that constrained development of a more resilient building stock. The
retrofitting methodology implemented under the project was based on stricter provisions in a new
building code, and innovative building designs used new, cost-effective techniques. To transfer
knowledge and technology and build the capacity of Romanian earthquake engineers and structural
specialists, an international engineering firm was engaged for project implementation and worked
in partnership with Romanian engineers and designers. The international firm also developed a
38 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              comprehensive guidebook on innovative retrofitting methods and implemented a series of three
                              professional training seminars with thirty to forty stakeholder participants.

                              While the Romanian experience was a small-scale, forty-four-building pilot, the lessons learned
                              throughout its implementation phase can be informative for earthquake risk management programs
                              in the Philippines and worldwide. For example, involving the engineering community in Romania
                              throughout implementation in partnership with the international engineering firm was crucial.

                              Also instructive is the program’s comprehensive approach to earthquake risk management, which
                              encompassed multiple sectors, addressed both structural and functional retrofitting, and improved
                              regulatory measures to mitigate future risk to buildings.

                              Most significantly, the implementation models developed through this pilot program can be scaled
                              up in similar projects for other sectors or cities.

                              Turkey: Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency
                              Preparedness Project
                              Over 80 percent of Turkey’s population lives in areas exposed to earthquake risk.27 These areas also
                              generate more than 80 percent of the country’s gross national product (GNP). The 1999 Marmara
                              earthquake (M7.4), the most destructive in recent years, resulted in 17,500 fatalities, nearly 675,000
                              people displaced, and 113,000 collapsed and 264,000 damaged buildings. Fiscal costs were in
                              the range of US$2.4 billion–2.9 billion. The largest direct cost (estimated at US$1.6 billion) was
                              attributed to the reconstruction and repair of housing stock, much of which was owned by middle-
                              and high-income residents (World Bank 1999).

                              Many, if not all, of the newer buildings that collapsed did not meet the earthquake requirements of
                              the building codes that were in force in 1999. The earthquake brought to the government’s and the
                              public’s attention the lack of building code enforcement, inadequate engineering designs, improper
                              construction inspection, and governance issues related to obtaining building permits and licenses.

                              Following this experience, the government of Turkey developed a new disaster risk management
                              model that shifted the priority from reaction and response to proactive risk reduction and mitigation.
                              Under the integrated disaster risk management system, the Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and
                              Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP) was developed to reduce the structural vulnerability of
                              existing buildings and infrastructure in Istanbul. With financial and technical assistance from the
                              World Bank, risk audits and preparation for implementation began in 2002.

                              With total financing of over US$1.5 billion to date, ISMEP is an ongoing, large-scale program consist-
                              ing of three key components:
                              ◆◆ Strengthening emergency management capacity and awareness
                              ◆◆ Retrofitting priority public buildings (mainly schools and hospitals) for seismic risk mitigation
                              ◆◆ Improving the legal and regulatory framework and building codes
                              To date, ISMEP has completed the strengthening, reconstruction, and renovation of over 800
                              schools, hospitals, and other critical public buildings prioritized for their vulnerability to earthquake
                              risks. The program recently received much additional financing from several other sources to greatly
                              expand its scope, and by the end of the current project phase in 2014 more than 1,100 such buildings
                              will have been strengthened and/or rebuilt (Figure3.2).

                               	 Unless otherwise specified, the information in this section is from Elgin 2013.
                              27
                                                                                        Applications of International Experience / 39



                                                                                                           Figure 3.2 School
                                                                                                           Buildings under
                                                                                                           Strengthening/
                                                                                                           Construction in
                                                                                                           Istanbul
                                                                                                           Source: Yanev 2013b.




Institutional Arrangement
To manage its flagship investment initiative efficiently, the government of Turkey established a
separate government unit, the Istanbul Project Coordination Unit (IPCU), under the Istanbul Special
Provincial Administration to supervise and manage the implementation of ISMEP.28 The IPCU is
responsible for project coordination, procurement, financial management, contract management,
monitoring, evaluation, and reporting. It is headed by a technically qualified project director who
reports directly to the governor of Istanbul, and a senior staff member from each government agency
(including health, education, and public works) functions as a liaison between the IPCU and the
respective stakeholder agencies. The IPCU is staffed primarily by professionals with technical
experience in earthquake, civil, structural, geotechnical, electrical, or mechanical engineering who
review building and construction designs for quality assurance.

Implementation Guidelines for Retrofitting
Since the building code at the time of the 1999 Marmara earthquake lacked specific requirements
for upgrading existing structures, comprehensive guidelines for strengthening structures had to
be developed for each type of public building, with an emphasis on schools and hospitals.29 Key
provisions of the implementation guidelines included, for instance, instructions for data collection
and technical procedures to determine the appropriate strengthening method. Most of the buildings
had no existing documentation, and entire datasets were developed by teams of engineers—both
local and international experts—based on site surveys, construction documents, material testing,
and soil investigations. The building code was completely revised and updated alongside the
implementation guidelines.

Collaboration with International Consultants
A collaborative arrangement between Turkish engineers and international engineering firms leveraged
the relative strengths of both groups. Local engineers are familiar with local design and construction
practices and can readily identify vulnerable structures, while international consultants may have


 	 The information in this subsection is from Alaluf 2013a.
28

 	 The information in this subsection is from Aluluf 2013b.
29
40 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              more diverse experience in large-scale, cost-effective earthquake strengthening and be able to
                              identify deficiencies quickly in proposed retrofitting schemes, having worked on similar projects.
                              Throughout the implementation phase, international engineers reviewed, or directly participated
                              in the development of, the building designs to ensure the robustness of the structural plans and
                              calculations. They also provided oversight during the construction phase.

                              An integrated approach to disaster risk management and strong ownership and commitment at
                              national, regional, and local government levels have been vital to the sustainability and success
                              of ISMEP. In parallel to initiatives of the central government, considerable efforts and resources
                              have been invested at the regional and local levels to better prepare at-risk communities for future
                              disasters. A number of governorships and municipalities have taken the initiative to upgrade
                              local emergency response systems, conduct seismic microzonation studies, and initiate planning
                              processes that incorporate natural disaster risk. For instance, Istanbul Province has initiated
                              numerous earthquake risk assessment and planning activities in collaboration with national and
                              international experts. The Earthquake Master Plan for Istanbul, in particular, has been highlighted
                              by the international community as a useful strategic instrument for addressing earthquake risks in
                              highly vulnerable megacities.

                              Since the devastating 1999 Marmara earthquake, Turkey has been able to enhance its overall
                              resilience to natural disasters significantly through an integrated disaster risk management system
                              with structural, financial, legal, and regulatory measures that complement each other. In 2000, the
                              government established the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool (TCIP), a public–private partnership
                              with the domestic insurance industry that provides earthquake insurance to homeowners (Gurenko
                              et al. 2006). The government made earthquake insurance compulsory for homeowners and
                              abolished its legal obligation to finance the reconstruction of residential dwellings in the aftermath
                              of an earthquake. This move successfully institutionalized a system that holds homeowners and
                              the private sector financially accountable for the risk they incur. The government also enhanced its
                              building codes and construction supervision standards. As a result, the TCIP increased catastrophe
                              insurance coverage from less than 3 percent of residential buildings to 23 percent nationwide and
                              over 40 percent in urban areas. As of January 2014, the TCIP had sold more than 6 million policies,
                              compared to only 600,000 covered households when it was initially set up. The TCIP has paid out
                              nearly 21,000 claims to date, totaling over US$70 million.30

                              Indonesia: Pilot Implementation in the Education Sector
                              The frequency and magnitude of extreme hazard events, including earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes,
                              and landslides, are increasing around the world, taking many lives and damaging many buildings,
                              including schools.31 In Indonesia, which is among the top thirty-five countries for mortality risks
                              from multiple hazards, about 40 million students go to school in areas at risk of earthquakes, and
                              approximately 75 percent of schools are located in hazardous areas.

                              While the government of Indonesia has made successful efforts to increase awareness of disaster
                              risk since the 1990s, the devastations of the December 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and the signing
                              of the Hyogo Framework for Action in 2005 were catalytic toward development of disaster risk
                              management measures and regulations, including enhancing the structural resilience of critical
                              buildings against natural disasters.

                              30
                                   	 For more information, see http://www.tcip.gov.tr/zorunlu-deprem-sigortasi-istatistikler.html.
                              31
                                   	 Unless otherwise specified, the information in this section is from Fauzan 2013.
                                                                                         Applications of International Experience / 41



In 2011, with funding from the World Bank, the government of Indonesia established the National
Secretariat for Safe Schools and initiated the low-cost, five-month Safe Schools Pilot Project to test
the cost-effectiveness of a quick and simplified local-level structural strengthening initiative. The
project was designed in part to support the National Secretariat for Safe Schools, along with the
Ministry of Education and Culture and the National Agency for Disaster Management, in developing
safe school guidelines involving both structural principles (concerning school rehabilitation and
retrofitting to meet the standards for safe and resilient buildings) and nonstructural principles
(concerning school communities’ ability to identify potential risks and prepare for a response).

School Selection

The guidelines developed under the Safe School Pilot Project were implemented in a total of 180
schools, spread over three provinces that had recently experienced deaths and heavy damage to
school buildings from earthquakes and tsunamis: West Java, West Sumatra, and West Nusa Tenggara.
The district education office of each province selected sixty schools based on the following key
criteria: need for rehabilitation, vulnerability to natural disasters, and location of the schools and
their proximity to one another. Given the short duration of the project and the budgetary constraints,
the distance of the schools from the home base of the pilot project teams also factored into
prioritization.

Local-level Implementation

The project teams comprised technical and social facilitators chosen from the community to provide
assistance to the sixty schools in each pilot province. The project trained both technical and social
facilitators, the former in repair and retrofitting of school buildings and the latter in early warning
and disaster evacuation systems. Training sessions focused on simple retrofitting techniques with
low-cost local materials, such as chicken wire mesh, whose use could be easily understood by local
workers (see figure 3.3). Pilot schools established disaster preparedness committees and regularly
conducted evacuation simulations based on standard operating procedures and guidelines.


                                                                                                            Figure 3.3
                                                                                                            Strengthening Old
                                                                                                            Unreinforced Masonry
                                                                                                            Walls with Chicken
                                                                                                            Wire Mesh and Tie
                                                                                                            Beams
                                                                                                            Source: Fauzan 2013.
42 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              Outputs of the Pilot
                              The pilot produced the following outputs:

                              ◆◆ Simple guidelines on school retrofitting to guide school rehabilitation design and construction
                              ◆◆ Establishment of school disaster preparedness teams
                              ◆◆ A standard operating procedure for evacuation, including an evacuation map for each school,
                                   and regularly conducted evacuation simulations
                              ◆◆ Various media for safe schools, including posters and books about disasters
                                                                                                                  / 43




Conclusion


S
      ince 2010, the GoP has aimed to develop a comprehensive agenda that addresses the
      institutional, legal, physical, and financial dimensions of disaster risk management. To this
      end, the DPWH, in cooperation with the World Bank, has developed the following:

◆◆ A set of guidelines for the seismic evaluation of schools and hospitals in Metro Manila
◆◆ A technical manual and methodologies for prioritizing buildings to identify the highest risk
     candidate structures for upgrade and risk reduction
◆◆ Tailored design examples for upgrading a typical school building in Metro Manila


The results of the prioritization show that strengthening the most vulnerable 5 percent of school
buildings (186) can reduce the number of student fatalities32 by 25 percent (more than 6,000 lives
saved). By strengthening the most vulnerable 40 percent of school buildings (1,466), potential student
fatalities can be reduced by 80 percent (more than 19,000 lives saved). In other words, upgrading a
relatively small number of systematically selected structures can save a disproportionately large
number of lives, and it would be more cost effective than building new schools.33

As a result of these findings, the DPWH committed to implementing the cornerstone phase of a Safe
and Resilient Infrastructure Program in Metro Manila. This would involve upgrading approximately
200 of the most vulnerable public school buildings in Metro Manila, with a view toward eventually
scaling up to other sectors (for example, lifeline infrastructure) and geographical locations and to
institutionalizing quality assurance systems. As the GoP formulates an initial strategy for undertaking
its earthquake risk management program, international experience can provide insight into the
potential challenges and key lessons of developing and implementing structural resilience programs
at various scales.

Moving forward with the implementation of a cornerstone phase of the Safe and Resilient
Infrastructure Program will depend on the active support of stakeholders, including the affected
communities and public institutions; local and national government agencies; and the practicing
technical community. Stakeholder advisory workshops can help maintain close coordination and
instill ownership among government agencies and technical organizations involved in the program.


 	 From the MMEIRS M7.2 scenario earthquake along the West Valley Fault.
32

 	 Generally, experience shows that five to seven schools can be strengthened and renovated for the cost of one
33

   new building.
44 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              Furthermore, communication and training can help raise awareness within the local community on
                              the severity of earthquake risk in Metro Manila and the degree of potential financial and human
                              impact that can be mitigated by an earthquake strengthening and upgrading program. Overall,
                              integrating the following key messages into the implementation strategy will be essential:

                              ◆◆ An integrated approach to earthquake risk management can strengthen key buildings and infra-
                                   structure and reduce the damaging effects of future disasters in the Philippines.
                              ◆◆ Earthquake risk management and strengthening programs initiated by both the public and pri-
                                   vate sectors in many countries have often consisted of three phases—risk audit, risk assess-
                                   ment, and implementation.
                              ◆◆ Several key technical components must be considered in the design of a phased earthquake risk
                                   management program, including a prioritization methodology.
                                                                                                        / 45




References

AIR/ADPC . 2014. The Philippines Catastrophe Risk Profile. AIR/ADPC on behalf of DOF-IFG.
ATC (Applied Technology Council). 1985. Earthquake Damage Evaluation Data for California. Palo
   Alto, CA: ATC.
Alaluf, R. 2013a. ISMEP Implementation Model: Rationale, Lessons Learned and Applicability to the
   Philippines Context. Washington, DC: World Bank.
    . 2013b. Seismic Strengthening of Existing Public Buildings in Istanbul, Turkey. Washington, DC:
   World Bank.
Aquino, R. E. R. 2005. “Philippine Wind Information for Engineering, Research, and Mitigation.”
   COE-TPU Country Report. http://www.wind.arch.t-kougei.ac.jp/info_center/APECwind/philip-
   pines.pdf.
ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers). 2003. Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings. Reston,
   VA: ASCE.
    . 2010. ASCE/SEI 7-10: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures. Reston, VA:
   ASCE.
ASEP (Association of Structural Engineers of the Philippines). 2010. National Structural Code of the
   Philippines, Volume 1: Buildings, Towers, and Other Vertical Structures. Quezon City, Philippines:
   ASEP.
Boardman, A. E., D. H. Greenberg, A. R. Vining, and D. L. Weimer. 2010. Cost-Benefit Analysis: Con-
   cepts and Practice, 4th ed. NJ: Prentice Hall.
California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. 2005. California’s Hospital Seismic
   Safety Law: Its History, Implementation & Progress. Sacramento, CA: California Office of Statewide
   Health Planning and Development. http://www.oshpd.ca.gov/fdd/seismic_compliance/SB1953/
   SeismicReport.pdf.
Caltrans Seismic Advisory Board. 2003. The Race to Seismic Safety: Protecting California’s Transpor-
   tation System. Sacramento, CA. http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/esc/earthquake_engineering/seismic_
   advisory_board/racetoseismicsafety.pdf.
Daligdig, J. A., R. S. Punongbayan, G. M. Besana, and N. M. Tungol. 1997. “The Marikina Valley Fault
   System: Active Faulting in Eastern Metro Manila.” PHIVOLCS Professional Paper 01. Quezon City,
   Philippines.
Elgin, Kazim G. 2013. “Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project.” Pre-
   sentation at the Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and Government Executive Meeting,
   Manila, Philippines, October 1–2.
46 / Safe and Resilient Infrastructure in the Philippines: Applications of International Experience



                              Fauzan, Fauzan. 2013. “Indonesia Safe Schools Program.” Presentation at the Forum on Safe and
                                 Resilient Infrastructure and Government Executive Meeting, Manila, Philippines, October 1–2.
                              FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2001. Hazus-MH 2.1, Multi-hazard Loss Estimation
                                 Methodology, Earthquake Model. Washington, DC: FEMA.
                              GoP (Government of the Philippines). 2013. Reconstruction Assistance on Yolanda. http://reliefweb.
                                int/report/philippines/reconstruction-assistance-yolanda-ray.
                              Gurenko, E., R. Lester, O. Mahul, and S. Gonulal. 2006. Earthquake Insurance in Turkey: History of the
                                 Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                              ICBO (International Conference of Building Officials). 1997. 1997 Uniform Building Code, Vol. 2:
                                Structural Engineering Design Provisions. Whittier, CA: ICBO.
                              Liongson, L. Q., and G. Q. Tabios. 2009. “Typhoon Ondoy (Ketsana) and the Marikina River Flood of
                                 September 26, 2009.” UPCOE-ICE-NHRC Public Presentation.
                              Martí, J., and G. G. L. Ernst, eds. 2005. Volcanoes and the Environment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
                                University Press.
                              Miyamoto International. 2008. “2008 M8 Sichuan, China Earthquake Field Investigation Report.”
                                 Miyamoto International, West Sacramento, CA.
                                    . 2011. “2011 Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami Field Investigation Report.” Miyamoto Interna-
                                  tional, West Sacramento, CA.
                                   . 2014. Development of Earthquake Strengthening Guidelines and Prioritization Methodology.
                                  Washington, DC: World Bank.
                              Miyamoto, Kit. 2013. “Earthquake Disaster Risk in Manila: Feasible Solutions to Save Lives in Schools
                                 and Hospitals.” Presentation at the Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and Government
                                 Executive Meeting, Manila, Philippines, October 1–2.
                              Nakamura, S. 1978. “On Statistical Tsunami Risk of the Philippines.” Southeast Asian Studies 15 (4):
                                 581–90.
                              Narafu, Tatsuo. 2013. “Japanese Experience in Seismic Design and Retrofitting.” Presentation at the
                                 Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and Government Executive Meeting, Manila, Philip-
                                 pines, October 1–2.
                              NDRRMC (National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council). 2012. Update No. 29 re
                                Effects of Typhoon “Pablo” (Bopha). http://www.ndrrmc.gov.ph/attachments/article/835/29%20
                                Update.pdf.
                              NEHRP (National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program). 2000. FEMA 356: Prestandard and Com-
                                mentary for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings, National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Pro-
                                gram. Washington, DC: FEMA.
                              Petrescu, Stela. 2013 “Hazard Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project: Earthquake
                                 Risk Reduction Component.” Presentation at the Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and
                                 Government Executive Meeting, Manila, Philippines, October 1–2.
                              Pacheco, B. M. 2013. “Resilience in the Philippines: A Cross-Sectoral Effort.” Paper presented at the
                                 Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and Government Executive Meeting, Manila, Philip-
                                 pines, October 1–2.
                              Pacheco, B. M., R. E. R. Aquino, W. T. Tanzo, and N. E. Rosaria. 2006. “Wind Loads and the Wind Envi-
                                 ronment in the Philippines: Recent Developments in 2006.” Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
                                 Regional Harmonization of Wind Loading and Wind Environmental Specifications in Asia-Pacific
                                 Economies (APEC-WW-2006), New Delhi, India.
                                                                                        Applications of International Experience / 47



PHIVOLCS/JICA/MMDA (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology/Japan International
   Cooperation Agency/Metropolitan Manila Development Authority). 2004. Metro Manila Earth-
   quake Impact Reduction Study. Manila, Philippines. http://www.phivolcs.dost.gov.ph/index.
   php?option=com_content&view=article&id=419:mmeirs&catid=66.
Rantucci, G. 1994. Geological Disasters in the Philippines: The July 1990 Earthquake and the June 1991
   Eruption of Mount Pinatubo. Dipartimento per l’Informazione e l’Editoria, Presidenza del Consi-
   glio dei Ministri.
Soloviev, S. L., Ch.N. Go, and Kh.S. Kim. 1992. Catalog of Tsunamis in the Pacific, 1969–1982. Soviet
   Geophysical Committee, Academy of Sciences of the USSR.
State of California Seismic Safety Commission. 2001. Findings and Recommendations on Hospital
   Seismic Safety. Sacramento, CA, USA. http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_2001-04_Hospital.
   pdf.
     . 2004. Seismic Safety in California’s Schools: Findings and Recommendations on Seismic Safety
   Policies and Requirements for Public, Private, and Charter Schools. Sacramento, CA. http://www.
   seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_2004-04_School%20Safety.pdf.
Swiss Re. 2009. “Natural Catastrophes and Man-Made Disasters in 2008.” T. Hess, ed. Swiss Rein-
   surance Company, Ltd., Zurich, Switzerland.
World Bank. 1999. Project Information Document: Turkey-Marmara Earthquake Emergency Recon-
  struction (MEER) Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     . 2005. Natural Disasters Hotspots—A Global Risk Analysis. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     . 2013a. Forum on Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and Government Executive Meeting. Proceed-
   ings Report. Manila, Philippines, October 1–2. Washington DC: World Bank.
     . 2013b. Review of Current Practices in Construction Supervision/Inspection (Quality of Works):
   Recommendations for Improvement. Washington DC: World Bank.
Yanev, P. 2013. Developing and Implementing Regional and Countrywide Strengthening Programs for
   Vulnerable Structures: Critical Considerations for Program Design and Implementation Based on
   Lessons from Turkey, California, Japan, Romania and Other Countries. Washington DC: World Bank.
     . 2013b. “International Experience in Structural Retrofitting.” Presentation at the Forum on
   Safe and Resilient Infrastructure and Government Executive Meeting, Manila, Philippines, Octo-
   ber 1–2.
Disaster Risk Management Team
East Asia and the Pacific
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice
The World Bank Group

1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433
E-mail: eapdrm@worldbank.org
Web: www.worldbank.org/eapdisasters
