  Report No: ACS13067




  Republic of Indonesia

  Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity
  Building in Indonesia




  March 2015




  GWASE

  EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC




Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any
map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work
promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                             Synthesis Report
                      Technical Assistance P132118:
Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity Building
                        in Indonesia




                                    Final

                                28 March 2015




Document of the World Bank
Abbreviations


BAPPENAS        : Badan Perencanaan Pembangunan Nasional - State Ministry of National
                  Development Planning
CLTS            : Community-Led Total Sanitation
EH              : Environmental Health Unit of the MoH
GDP             : Gross Domestic Product
HAKLI           : Association of Environmental Health Professionals
JMP             : Joint Monitoring Programme
MDG             : Millennium Development Goal
MoH             : Ministry of Health
PAMSIMAS        : Third Water and Sanitation for Low-Income Communities Project
PPSDM           : Pusat Pengembangan Sumber Daya Manusia Kementerian Kesehatan - Agency
                  for Development of Human Resources, MoH
PPSP            : Program Percepatan Pembangunan Sanitasi Permukiman - National Sanitation
                  Acceleration Development Program
Poltekes        : Health Polytechnic Schools
Promkes         : Health Promotion Board
Puskesmas       : Community Health Center
RPJMN           : Medium-Term Development Plan
RPJPN           : Long-Term Development Plan
STBM            : National Strategy for Community-Based Total Sanitation
TA              : Technical Assistance
ToT             : Training of Trainers
TSSM            : Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing
WSP             : Water and Sanitation Program, the World Bank
WSLIC-2         : Second Water and Sanitation for Low-Income Communities Project
Acknowledgements


This report is a synthesis of the technical assistance (TA) ‘Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity
Building in Indonesia’ (P132118) carried out by the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program (WSP).
The synthesis including lessons and recommendations has been developed through consultations and
meetings with several departments of the Ministry of Health (MoH) including the Directorate of
Environmental Health, Directorate General of Communicable Disease and Environmental Health, and
the Agency for Development of Human Resources of MoH. The authors acknowledge the valuable
contributions made by Wilfried Purba (Director of Environmental Health, Ministry of Health) and Eka
Jusuf Singka (Centre for Education and Training for Health Official, PPSDM). The Task Team Leader for
this TA is Deviariandy Setiawan. The following World Bank staff and consultants have provided valuable
contributions: Susanna Smets, Almud Weitz, Rahmi Kasri, and I Nyoman Oka. The peer reviewers were
Puti Marzoeki, Christophe Prevost, and Steffen Souleman Janus.

In addition to the synthesis report, the following material has been produced and made available to the
client under the TA:

   5 accredited trainings modules for the National Strategy for Community-based Sanitation (STBM):
    (i) Training of STBM Facilitators, (ii) Training for Trainers of STBM Facilitators, (iii) STBM Training for
    Polytechnic Lecturers, (iv) STBM Entrepreneur Training, and (v) Training for Trainers of STBM
    Entrepreneurs
   4 e-learning modules: (i) Introduction and Basic Concept of STBM, (ii) STBM Facilitator, (iii)
    Sanitation Entrepreneurship, and (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation – these are available both in English
    and Bahasa Indonesia
   Prezi presentations to launch e-learning program by MoH in September 2014
   2 brochures introducing (i) e-learning modules, and (ii) training accreditation
   Handbook for integration of STBM with MoH’s ‘Desa Siaga’ training




                                                      v
Contents
 Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................... iv
 Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................................. v
 Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................... viii
 1.      Rural Sanitation Context in Indonesia ............................................................................................. 1
 2.      Technical Assistance for the Institutionalization of the STBM Capacity Building .......................... 4
 3.      Implementation Process .................................................................................................................. 8
      3.1.       Introduction and Roll Out of the Technical Assistance ........................................................... 9
      3.2.       Development of Instruments and Incentives ........................................................................ 10
      3.2.1.        Standardization and Accreditation of STBM Training ....................................................... 10
      3.2.2.        Integrating STBM into Health Polytechnic Curriculae ....................................................... 14
      3.2.3.        The STBM E-Learning System ............................................................................................. 16
      3.2.4.        Incentives Mechanism........................................................................................................ 18
      3.3.       Implementation and Scaling Up............................................................................................. 19
 4.      Achievement of Interim Outputs and Outcomes of the TA .......................................................... 23
      4.1.       Intermediate Outcome 1: Rural Sanitation Capacity Building Institutionalized .................. 24
      4.2. Intermediate Outcome 2: Instruments for the Standardization and Certification of Rural
      Sanitation Human Resource Capacity Building Developed .............................................................. 25
      4.3. Intermediate Outcome 3: Incentive System for Rural Sanitation Human Resources
      Developed........................................................................................................................................... 26
 5.      Conclusions and Recommendations .............................................................................................. 28




                                                                            vi
List of Figures

Figure 1: Indonesia Access to Sanitation 2000-2013 (Statistics Indonesia, 2014) ..................................... 1
Figure 2: The Organizational Structure of the Ministry of Health, Republic of Indonesia ........................ 3
Figure 3: Institutionalization of Capacity Building for Rural Sanitation Human Resources ...................... 7
Figure 4: TA Implementation Phases ........................................................................................................... 9
Figure 5: Formal Training Process .............................................................................................................. 11
Figure 6: Process of Accreditation of STBM Training ................................................................................ 13
Figure 7: STBM Distance Training Scheme (ONLINE and OFFLINE).............. Error! Bookmark not defined.
Figure 8: Official Certificate with National Logo and National Registry Number .................................... 19
Figure 9: Distribution of E-Learning Participants ...................................................................................... 20


List of Annexes

Annex 1: Relationship of Technical Assistance Projects under Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Hygiene
in Indonesia ................................................................................................................................................ 30
Annex 2: Summary of Timeline of Technical Assistance ........................................................................... 31
Annex 3: Credit Point Requirement: Case of Sanitarians ......................................................................... 32
Annex 4: Summary of the Accredited STBM Curriculum and Modules .................................................... 34




                                                                              vii
Executive Summary


Indonesia has made significant increase in rural sanitation access and services from 20.64% in 2006 to
44.09% in 2013. The piloting of Community-led Total Sanitation (CLTS) approach in 2005, adopting a
National Community-Led Total Sanitation Strategy (Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat or STBM) in
2008, and issuing STBM as the national approach Minister of Health Regulation No.3 in 2014 are the
basis of this achievement. However, Indonesia is still not likely to meet its sanitation Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) of 55.5% rural sanitation access by 2015. With access increase in recent years
improving markedly, Indonesia has now adopted a new National Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-
19 which targets to provide universal access to sanitation for all by 2019.

Human resources are a key bottleneck to successful implementation of STBM. A study conducted in
2012 estimated a capacity gap of 12,000-18,000 sanitation professionals (from engineers to community
workers) to meet the 2015 MDG targets, with 30% of community health centers not having frontline
sanitation personnel. The adoption of the more ambitious target going forward represents exponentially
increased human resource gaps as of this year.

Capacity building programs have so far been largely conducted by technical units, projects, and local
government offices. However, the absence of formal standards, quality control, and incentive
mechanism has led to sub-optimal training outcomes, with only a fraction of people trained with the
right skill sets to continue performing their proposed task.

Against this background, in 2012 the STBM Secretariat and the Environmental Health Unit of MoH
approached WSP for TA to strengthen and expand the capacity building program for STBM
implementation. Following an assessment on how and where to best address the issues, the TA
recommended a transformative approach, away from project-based ‘cascading’ training where training
is done at national level and then repeated/’cascaded’ to provincial, district, sub-district and village
levels to an institutionalized capacity building program. Instead of establishing a new mechanism
through projects which only last as long as projects last, the TA strengthened and collaborated with the
existing MoH unit mandated to provide capacity building, the Agency for Development and
Empowerment of Human Resources of MoH (PPSDM). The institutionalization of capacity building
program targeted two primary audiences: future professionals (pre-service) addressed through
integrating STBM modules into health polytechnic schools curriculae and current professionals (in-
service) addressed through accredited and certified training programs, with an additional e-learning
scheme to reach out to a wider group of professionals and interested parties.

Between January 2013 and February 2015 the framework, instruments, and incentives mechanisms for
STBM capacity building programs have been developed and implemented. About 1,500 students from all
24 government-run health polytechnic schools and 4 private health schools have received STBM
modules integrated in their three mandatory subjects; 5 curriculae, modules, and incentives schemes for
training, including the e-learning have been developed and implemented; 269 people have received
official “credit point” rewards upon completion of accredited training; and almost 500 people from all


                                                  viii
provinces in Indonesia have participated in the e-learning. Additional scale up is expected upon
evaluating these results as part of a 5-year curriculae assessment program implemented by
PPSDM/MoH in 2015.

Given the enormity of the challenges of sanitation development in Indonesia and the associated human
resources needed, the institutionalization of capacity development programs is a must for reaching the
desired scale, efficiencies, and quality. The three above-mentioned instruments could help the
Government of Indonesia to accelerate fulfilment of those objectives. The two years of implementation
of this TA have yielded a first round of key lessons, among them: first hand observations in the field and
interaction between practicioners and academicians have strengthened integration of STBM in the
health schools’ curriculum and helped produce competent future human resources; accredited training
based on planning and preparation helps improve and maintain the quality of training and the official
“credit point” reward generates more demand to use the accredited training; and the e-learning has
given everyone an opportunity to learn independently about STBM with an interactive and standardized
method, while at the same time overcoming quality ‘leakages’ compared to the cascading training
method (where quality gets reduced as training is ‘cascaded’ through the system) and potentially
reducing the number of required face-to-face training days, thereby cutting training costs by up to 30%.

To scale-up, sustain, and generate better outcomes, the STBM Secretariat and PPSDM will need to
provide support to manage the STBM capacity building as well as facilitate stronger collaboration
between local government and health schools in implementing STBM. The support to scale-up the use of
the STBM human resource capacity building system can be provided via a circular letter of MoH to local
health offices and STBM partners. Continuous support through the MoH system to follow-up and
evaluate outcomes of training and education will be key to sustainability and roll-out across all provinces
of Indonesia.




                                                    ix
1. Rural Sanitation Context in Indonesia

Indonesia is the world's largest archipelagic country, consisting of 17,058 islands and inhabited by a
population of 250 million, half of which (50.4%) lives in rural areas. Administratively, Indonesia consists
of 34 provinces, which are divided into 97 municipalities and 414 districts. Provinces, districts and
municipalities (commonly known as local governments) have autonomy in setting policy and
administering their governance.1

Indonesia’s economy grew by an average of 5.8% per year over the last decade, resulting in per capita
income increasing from US$ 2,200 in 2000 to US$3,580 in 2013. The poverty rate has steadily fallen over
the same period and is now at 11.4% as of 2013, and the debt to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) ratio
decreased from 61% in 2003 to 24% in 2012. Indonesia is now lower-middle income country.2

While the economy grew substantially, basic service provision lagged behind for much of the decade, in
particular compared to peer countries in the region. However, recent acceleration of basic access to
sanitation has been impressive following a shift in the development approach from building
infrastructure towards an emphasis on community empowerment, behavior change, and creation of a
sanitation market. As a result, while between 2000 and 2006, rural sanitation access in Indonesia
increased by a mere 0.85% per annum, access growth rates have been over 3% since then.
                Figure 1: Indonesia Access to Sanitation 2000-2013 (Statistics Indonesia, 2014)




1
Ministry of Home Affairs , May 2013 (http://www.kppod.org/datapdf/daerah/daerah-indonesia-2013.pdf)
2
World Bank, 2014 ( http://data.worldbank.org/country/indonesia) accessed on 10 October 2014

                                                          1
Following successful piloting of community-led total sanitation (CLTS) in 2005-6, in 2008, the
Government signed off on a new National Sanitation Strategy called Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat
(STBM), which adopted three key strategies: demand creation, supply/market improvement, and
creation of an enabling environment. STBM has five pillars: Stopping Open Defecation, Hand washing
with Soap, Household Drinking Water and Food Management, Household Waste Management, and
Household Wastewater Management. In 2012 MoH set up the STBM Secretariat to manage and
coordinate the implementation of STBM nationally.

A key rationale behind STBM is large-scale, broad-based implementation as Indonesia is trying to catch
up with its neighbors to address high levels of open defecation (54 million people or 22% of the
population) and unimproved toilets.3 While the sanitation Millennium Development Goal is likely to be
missed by some margin, Indonesia has recently adopted more ambitious targets as part of its 2015-2019
National Medium-Term Development Plan to reach universal access to improved sanitation by 2019,
which requires redoubling efforts to substantially increase yearly access rates if the target is to be
achieved.

A key bottleneck in implementing STBM is the capacity of locally available sanitarians, facilitators,
entrepreneurs, and community empowerment workers in this highly decentralized country where
responsibility for the provision of water and sanitation services rests with local government. A study
conducted by the National Planning Development Agency (BAPPENAS) and the World Bank’s Water and
Sanitation Program (WSP) in 2012 estimated that there was a need for between 12,000 and 18,000
STBM professionals to meet the 2015 MDG targets4; the new target of universal access by 2019 will see
this capacity gap figure rise substantially.

Capacity building has been largely confined to project-specific training carried out over the life of various
rural water supply and sanitation projects over the past decade, with no formal standards, quality
control, incentive, and reward mechanisms in place. In line with project planning and budgeting as well
as the good intention to accelerate provision of skilled human resources, training was typically carried
out through a mass-scale, cascading method through Training of Trainers (ToT) going down from
national to provincial to district level, with eroding training quality and selection of trainees along the
pathway. Alongside project-funded training, for STBM implementation local governments directly
manage capacity building without much coordination or supervision from any quality unit within MoH,
with capacity building initiatives targeted at sanitarians and existing community volunteers generally
adopting conventional classroom-based training methods, with little two-way interaction between the
trainees and trainers, and content and duration varying substantially from one local government to
another depending on budget availability.

Against this background, in 2012 the STBM Secretariat and the Environmental Health (EH) Unit of MoH
approached WSP for TA to address and expand the capacity building program for STBM implementation.
Following an assessment on how and where to best anchor or ‘institutionalize’ such a capacity building
3
 Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2014 Update. WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP)
4
 PT. Qipra Galang Kualitas (2012): Sanitation Personnel: Capacity Development Strategy, Final Report of the Sanitation Training
and Capacity Study.

                                                               2
program in the future, the Unit and WSP approached the Agency for Development and Empowerment of
Human Resources of MoH (PPSDM).5 PPSDM is the agency responsible for the development and
empowerment of health professionals and carries out its mandate through 1) development and
empowerment of health professionals; 2) education and training for civil servants; 3) education and
training for health workers; 4) standardization, certification and building the competency of health
professionals; and 5) professional development, staff empowerment policy, and management. The
PPSDM has the strengths and capacities, in terms of budget, availability of educators and trainers at
various levels, setting quality standards, and offering institutionalized incentives for STBM
implementers. Partnership with PPSDM for STBM implementation was deemed to provide broad and
sustainable support for the training and development of STBM professionals.

                Figure 2: The Organizational Structure of the Ministry of Health, Republic of Indonesia




                                                                                 Minister of Health




    Disease Prevention Directorate    Environmental Health Directorate
                                                                           PPSDM
                                                                                         Health Promotion
                                             STBM Secretariat




5
 A second potential unit that was assessed was MoH’s Health Promotion Unit with key strengths in community empowerment
and communication, however without attached training school outlets it was deemed less of a fit than PPSDM.

                                                           3
2. Technical Assistance for the Institutionalization of the STBM Capacity Building

In response to these challenges and recognizing the critical role of PPSDM, TA support was designed
around three components:
    1. Standardization and accreditation of STBM training modules, per PPSDM standards;
    2. Integration of STBM contents into health polytechnic school curriculum; and
    3. Development of the STBM e-learning training scheme.

The TA under P132118 is part of a set of wider TA support on rural sanitation to the Government of
Indonesia including Scaling Up Rural Sanitation (P132007) and Rural Sanitation Market Creation
(P143165). The development of STBM training modules was based on evidence and learnings generated
under the other 2 TAs, and implementation was set to rely on networks and capacity developed by
these TAs simultaneously. A chart describing in more detail the relation among these three TAs is
available in ANNEX-1.

The development objective of this TA was to integrate capacity building programs/curriculae for
management and implementation of STBM into PPSDM, an institution that is mandated and has
competencies to develop human resources for health (including environmental health) development in
Indonesia. Key intermediate outcomes and indicators were set and achieved as follows:

    Intermediate Outcome                          Indicators                          Achievements

Rural sanitation capacity    Baseline:
building program                  Training and capacity building program are
institutionalized.                    conducted       decentralized    by     local
                                      governments without quality standards and
                                      measurement against standards.
                                  Rural        sanitation    capacity     building
                                      framework as basis for capacity building
                                      program has not been legalized and is not
                                      used as main reference for capacity
                                      building program.
                             Target:
                                  Ministry of Health’s HR Development                   Achieved
                                      Center (PPSDM) has developed a
                                      standardization and quality assurance
                                      process for rural sanitation capacity
                                      building program --Target FY14 (December
                                      2013).
                                  Sanitation capacity building framework has            Achieved
                                      been approved and is used as the basis for
                                      a national capacity building program that
                                      differentiates the role of institutions at
                                      each level of government; development
                                      partners are aware of it with expectation of
                                      adjusting their TA accordingly --Target FY14
                                      (December 2013).
                                  Selected STBM curriculum is integrated in

                                                    4
                                             at least three health schools (Poltekes)          Achieved
                                             under PPSDM (and other interested
                                             universities) for early introduction of
                                             students to rural sanitation sector
                                             challenges and employment opportunities -
                                             -Target FY14 (June 2014).
Instrument and tools for            Baseline:
standardization and                      Instruments and tools to standardize
certification of rural sanitation            capacity building program are not available.
expertise developed.
                                    Target:
                                         Instruments and tools to standardize
                                            capacity building program developed and
                                            implemented, such as:
                                            - Curriculum, class-based modules and
                                                tools approved and endorsed for usage          Achieved
                                                by other institutions.
                                            - electronic learning modules (E-
                                                learning) and certification attached to        Achieved
                                                PPSDM/STBM Secretariat portal as
                                                standardized system --Target FY14
                                                (March 2014).
                                            - Monitoring system to track progress in
                                                implementation        of    nation-wide        Achieved
                                                capacity building --Target FY14 (March
                                                2014).

Incentive systems for certified     Baseline:
rural sanitation personnel               No certification and no structured incentive
developed.                                   system in place.

                                    Target:
                                         Well structured incentive system for
                                            certified rural sanitation personnel
                                            developed. This will include:
                                                                                               Partially
                                             i. certification requirement for staff
                                                 included in the      national projects         achieved
                                                 operational guidelines (for non civil
                                                 servants --Target FY14 (June 2014).
                                            ii. certification of capacity building
                                                 program linked with “credit point             Partially
                                                 system” implemented by government              achieved
                                                 and mandatory --Target FY15 (June
                                                 2015).
                                         Network of alumni of certified rural
                                            sanitation professionals developed—Target          Partially
                                            FY15 (June 2015).                                   achieved




                                                          5
Overall, the intermediate outcomes and indicators have been largerly achieved or even exceeded (see
section 4 for further details). Key results can be summarized as follows:
      Rural sanitation capacity building program institutionalized: The capacity building framework
       has been adopted as Ministerial Regulation (Permenkes) No. 3, 2014 which explains the roles
       and responsibilities of government institutions at each level with regard to the implementation
       of STBM. The regulation also mentions step-wise STBM implementation and is the basis for
       institutionalizing the STBM capacity building program.

       Capacity building is targeting two primary audiences: future professionals (pre-service) and
       current professionals (in-service), as well as other professionals interested in learning more
       about STBM as a secondary audience (figure 3). Based on the target audience, the STBM
       capacity building framework is delivered through three methods: 1) integration of STBM
       capacity building into at least three public polytechnic health schools out of the total 24 in the
       country that offer environmental health studies, 2) accredited training for those already in the
       system to strengthen their capacity and reward their performance, and 3) distance learning
       through an e-learning system to reach a larger audience beyond health professionals.

       Sanitarians are key actors of STBM as implementers of environmental health-related programs
       at community level. According to Regulation 32/2013 of the Minister of Health, sanitarians must
       have graduated from a health polytechnic school, positioning these schools as the critical in
       building up a new cadre of sanitarians. The recent Law No. 36/2014 on Health Workforce Act
       states that all students from health professional institutions have to pass the competency
       examination prior to graduation for health workforce registration. Hence, integrating the STBM
       approach in the health polytechnic curriculum was a strategic and cost-effective way to ensure
       that this new cadre will have gained insights into the challenges of community-based sanitation
       development and understands the Government’s STBM program to respond to these
       challenges.




                                                   6
                Figure 3: Institutionalization of Capacity Building for Rural Sanitation Human Resources


                                                            STBM
                                                        Human Resources



                           Pre Service                                                   In Service
                   Health Polytechnic Students                                Civil Servant and Professionals


            Integration of STBM into Curriculum                              Standardization & Accreditation
                  Subject credits                                                     Certificate
                  Early involvement in local government programs                      Credits



                 STBM E-Learning: Health Polytechnic students, Civil servants and Professionals,
                                   and wider public with interest in STBM

                                                            Certificate of participation




       Instruments and tools for standardization and certification of rural sanitation expertise
        developed: Systematically designed for specified targets, indicators, instruments, and a support
        system for capacity building programs to help ensure capacity building quality going forward,
        including measured quality of training arrangement and participants’ knowledge and skill,
        reaching a wider audience, and accelerating the number of qualified STBM human resources.
        The standardized and accredited curriculae and modules are expected to not only improve the
        quality of delivery but also to motivate trainees through formal recognition and linking the
        completion of training to the MoH incentive system for career development opportunities of
        civil servants and enhanced training opportunities for non-civil servants.
        The development of the distance learning program aims to increase outreach of learning
        opportunities and resolve geographical and financial challenges around face-to-face training.
        Internet access has grown rapidly in Indonesia and it is estimated that by 2015 more than 50%
        of the Indonesian population has access to the internet. 6 It is divided into two stages: e-learning
        (online) focusing on the concept of STBM or cognitive aspects, and conventional learning
        (offline) emphasizing STBM skills such as triggering, marketing, and monitoring. The e-learning
        has limitations in building and evaluating practical competencies; hence the module is
        positioned as an entry point for further practical STBM training. Trainees of e-learning will
        receive a certificate of participation, which is a requirement to participate in the off-line

6
 http://kominfo.go.id/index.php/content/detail/4174/Menkominfo+Paparkan+Capaian+Kinerja+Kementerian+Kominfo+2009-
2014/0/berita_satker#.VCl49fmSxa8

                                                                    7
       training. Trainees who complete the off-line training can then receive a certificate of
       competence from the PPSDM.

      Incentive systems for certified rural sanitation experts developed: The performance of
       sanitarians and many of the STBM implementers is evaluated by government (for civil servants)
       and project management units (for non-civil servants). For civil servants, as the training is
       recognized under existing evaluation mechanisms, the incentive is to receive ‘credit points’
       required for career advancement. For non-civil servants, training certificates can be used as
       documentation to become a certified trainer for STBM training or to become an STBM
       implementer. Standardization, accreditation and record-keeping of the training program is a
       must for improving and developing future training models, as well as for mapping the
       geographical distribution and competencies of STBM professionals.
This TA was implemented through
      facilitating the formation of a working group consisting of representatives from the STBM
       Secretariat, PPSDM, the Health Promotion unit of MoH, the National Acceleration Program for
       Settlement Sanitation, and WSP to review and structure STBM curriculae;
      facilitating the design, development, and first implementation of the accredited training whilst
       ensuring the STBM concept was properly accommodated;
      providing master trainers to train and backstop selected health schools in carry out teaching for
       their students;
      designing e-learning modules and a monitoring system to map newly skilled human resources
       for STBM implementation; and
      facilitating the process of integrating certification requirements into relevant government and
       donor-funded projects and the staff administration bureau by a) including the certification
       requirement for non-civil servant staff in operating guidelines of projects; and b) lining
       certification of civil servants to MoH’s mandatory credit point system.


3. Implementation Process

The implementation process under this TA is summarized in the flowchart below (figure 4), with three
distinct phases that are further described below. The timeline of the process is given in ANNEX 2.




                                                  8
                                   Figure 4: TA Implementation Phases




    Jan-May 2013                                                        Nov 2013-Jan 2015
                                              Development of
                                              Instruments and
                                                 Incentives
   •Advocacy, socialization                                               •Implementation
   •Roll-out of concept                                                   •Evaluation
   •Development of the               •Training accreditation              •Scaling up
    model                            •Integration into health
                                      polytechnic curriculae
                                     •E-learning
                                                                                  Implementation,
       Introduction and Roll Out
                                                                               Evaluation, and Scaling
                 of TA
                                        Jun- Oct 2013                                    Up




3.1. Introduction and Roll Out of the Technical Assistance
PPSDM was an entirely new TA partner on environmental health training for both the STBM Secretariat
of MoH itself as well as WSP. To get their buy in, a series of meetings and ‘roadshows’ were conducted
aimed at explaining the concept of the STBM approach and the collaboration and integration models
being offered to PPSDM. WSP supported the STBM Secretariat in preparing a series of advocacy
documents, including talking points, STBM success stories (particularly from East Java where WSP had
provided a 4-year, at-scale TA program on rural sanitation), and outlining the benefits of
institutionalization to both STBM and PPDSM against targets and the long-term framework of both
units. Although both units of MoH, the latter was not familiar with the STBM strategy and program due
to differences in functions, target audiences, and the organizational set up of MoH. Moreover, both
carry out their activities in different ways, with Environmental Health emphasizing the adaptability of
technical implementation issues to different situations in the field while PPSDM works to standardize a
system and mechanism with more rigid procedures and less room for modification. However, intensive
communication and outreach by the STBM Secretariat over several months resulted in reaching a shared
understanding of the significant benefits to the parties involved and created solid support for and
commitment to working together.

The STBM Secretariat and WSP then went on to officially launch the TA in January 2013 to solidify this
agreement by discussing sanitation development challenges in Indonesia, building a common
understanding of the HR gap and acceleration needs, consulting on the concepts and mechanisms of
institutionalizing such capacity building, and agreeing on collaboration mechanisms and the capacity
building framework. This event was attended by 50 sanitation development stakeholders in Indonesia

                                                    9
and it was agreed to form a working group that would facilitate this process of institutionalization,
consisting of nine members representing the Directorate of Environmental Health, PPSDM, the Center
for Health Promotion, the STBM Secretariat, the Center for Public Communication, and WSP. The two
centers were deemed key partners because they play key roles in health promotion and community
empowerment activities and have a wide network of partners extending to the village level where STBM
implementation takes place. For example, the Center for Health Promotion collaborates with the
Ministry of Home Affairs’ Rural Community Empowerment Unit, which has personnel and networks for
the Desa Siaga7 program in the villages, while the Center for Public Communication has access to MoH’s
official communication unit and mass media that can help support demand creation for STBM.

The working group was provided with evidence from the implementation of STBM in East Java, and
meetings and visits with program implementers and beneficiaries were organized to support the written
evidence with actual testimonies and on-the-ground experience. The field visits aimed to provide a
comprehensive understanding of the STBM concept and practices, identify factors required for the
successful and sustainable integration of STBM into PPSDM’s curriculae, and inform strategies and
action plans to move forward. The result of this process was the identification and agreement to follow
the two-pronged approach described above: i) to integrate STBM into the environmental health
curriculum at health polytechnic schools, and ii) standardize and provide accredited training.


3.2. Development of Instruments and Incentives
The institutionalization of capacity building of STBM human resources has three distinct target groups,
as outlined above: (i) current STBM implementers (in-service) and (ii) environmental health students at
health polytechnic schools as future sanitation human resources (pre-service), both as primary
audiences, and (iii) those interested in STBM and other members of the general public as secondary
audience. To reach these target groups, three instruments were developed: (i) accredited training for
STBM implementers, (ii) integrating of STBM into environmental health curriculums at health
polytechnics, and (iii) e-learning for both groups and for the general public.


3.2.1. Standardization and Accreditation of STBM Training
Based on the MoH Decree No. 725/2003, accreditation is conducted to value eligibility of health training.
A training program is accredited if it has passed the required components and received an accreditation
letter preceding a training that include curriculum, (requirement of) participants and trainers, organizer,
and venue. Accreditation is important to ensure quality of training because based on PPSDM’s
assessment along with the development of the health industry, health trainings were mushrooming.
However, many of those trainings are not being conducted with clear (if any) quality planning, control,
and improvement, resulting in little strengthened knowledge, attitute, and skills of the health workers.8


7
  Desa Siaga is a national program managed by MoH and MoHA to create empowered communities which have
resources and capability to prevent and overcome health, disaster, and health emergency situation independently.
8
  Kemenkes RI Badan PPSDM (2014). Pedoman Manajemen Pelatihan di Bidang Kesehatan, Kemenkes RI.

                                                      10
The accredited training process as per PPSDM standard as shown in the figure 5 below involves three
stages: before training, during training, and post training.

                          Figure 5: Management of Accredited Training Process




                                        Training Needs
                                           Assessment




                                                                          Develop
                  Evaluation
                                                                    Training Goals

                                         Quality
                                         Control




                       Implementation                    Design Program




The training need assessment is aimed at clarifying the gap between existing and expected competence
of current health human resources and is used as a basis to develop training goals and the program
design. How the training is conducted would be evaluated during and after the training to ensure quality
of the training. The length of the process of accreditation varies depending on quality of the curriculum
and modules, organization of the training, and evaluation after the training. The first stage is usually the
most difficult one, as it can take between 6 months to 2 years to develop a curriculum and module that
passes the quality standard of PPSDM to allow for accreditation. The accreditation is valid for one year
with possible extension.

The accreditation process did not require funding from the TA as PPSDM has an allocated budget for the
process. To prevent long process and ensure quality as well as acceptance of curriculum and modules
developed, the STBM Secretariat convinced PPSDM that the required materials, training needs
assessment, curriculae, and training modules were, by and large, already available, and the target users
and supporting partners had already been identified and consulted. Led by the STBM Secretariat and
guided by the PPSDM, the 5 modules were developed simultaneously, with contributors divided into

                                                           11
three groups: lecturers, facilitators and entrepreneurs representing 11 key STBM partners: UNICEF,
Waspola, SHAW-SIMAVI, High Five, IUWASH, Plan Indonesia, USDP, HAKLI, WVI and Yayasan
Pembangunan Citra Insan Indonesia; representatives from 6 health polytechnic schools from Jakarta,
Bandung, Purwokerto, Yogyakarta, Surabaya, and Bali; and representatives of Ciloto and Cikarang civil
service training centers.

Instead of developing new modules, the team reviewed existing and strengthened the existing modules
and fitted these in accordance with PPSDM standard. The biggest challenge was that PPSDM has
standards in pedagogical terminology, dictions, way of delivery, learning tools, composition of time for
theory, task, and practices, and attachements, which were not familiar and easily understood by the
training practitioners. Along with PPSDM’s work to ensure standardization, WSP had a central role in
facilitating and ensuring that inputs from all stakeholders were accommodated and aligned with the
principles of STBM. It was a constructive process for both field practitioners and PPSDM to learn and
understand each others’ ways in conducting training. Representatives from PPSDM said that they had
limited experience working frequently with non-government agencies in designing a training program
and this process had been valuable for them.

The draft modules developed were then discussed with a number of representatives from provincial,
district and municipal health authorities as the main beneficieries of the training. This enabled the
completion of the key stages of the accreditation process in a very short period: by November 2013, the
STBM curriculum and training module for lecturers was accredited, and the other 4 curriculae and
modules were accredited in March 2014.

Following receipt of the accreditation letter before implementation, training organizers are required to
provide detailed arrangements of the training program to PPSDM one month prior to the actual training
to ensure quality of the arrangement such as trainers, expected participants, suitability of venue, etc.
However, these requirement and process are sometime not in line with project cycles, hence thwart
their interest to conduct the accredited training and proceed with their customized model of training. To
mitigate this, the STBM secretariat increased its efforts to disseminate information on accredited
training and requested its partners to use the accredited curriculum and modules. Concurrently,
understanding that accredited training was a new method to the STBM players, PPSDM was less strict on
the submission of required documents and instead of one month accepted the documents up to few
days before the training.

Considering that some of the STBM projects/partners already have their training modules prior to the
initiative to make this accredited training, it was decided that at this initial stage, some modifications in
devilering the methods were acceptable as long as the contents in the accredited modules were fully
delivered and training hours were not less than required in the accredited training. With regard to the
competence of trainers that needed to be proven with official certificate, while many of the STBM
trainers did not have that, PPSDM evaluated their competence upon evaluating their background
experience (curriculum vitae) in facilitating STBM training.




                                                     12
Ideally, PPSDM monitors the implementation, however budget limitation prevents PPSDM to do that
systematically. Following the training, PPSDM will require the organizers to conduct a post-training
evaluation to ensure quality improvement for the next training round; however, this is also not done
systematically due to budget restrictions and HR limitations given the large number of decentralized
training programs in Indonesia. To facilitate PPSDM conducting its role in evaluation, the STBM
secretariat and/or its partners provide support and engage them in the training process (pre-during-
post). A thorough evaluation for improvement will be conducted in April 2015 followed by improvement
of the modules if deemed necessary in 2016.

The detailed process is outlined in figure Process of the accreditation appears in figure 6 below.

                             Figure 6: Process of Accreditation of STBM Training


                                     1. Training Needs Assessment
 - Assessment of Sanitation Human Resources Training&Capacity Building, Waspola-WSP, March 2012
                   -Pre-training meetings with health polytechnic schools, May 2013

                         2. Development of Curriculae and Training Modules
                           - Curriculum review workshop (September 2013)
                               - Module review workshop (October 2013)
        - Socialization and gathering of inputs on draft curriculae and modules (October 2013)
                     - Editing and finalizing curriculae and modules (October 2013)

                        3. Pilot (IUWASH and YPCII) (October-November 2013)

                              4. Accreditation (October-November 2013)

               5. Implementaton of Accredited Training (November 2013-March 2014)


                                         5. Training Evaluation

                                        6. Conferring Certificate


Funding for this activity came from a variety of sources: from WSP for workshops and accommodation
for civil service personnel; from UNICEF for specialists, administration and logistics; from the STBM
Secretariat for honoraria; and from the individual partners for accommodation and the human
resources involved in this activity. The pilot was conducted and funded by the Indonesian Urban Water
Sanitation and Hygiene (IUWASH) project and Pembangunan Citra Insan Indonesia Foundation (YPCII).




                                                     13
3.2.2. Integrating STBM into Health Polytechnic Curriculae

At the launch of the TA, representatives from PPSDM and
                                                                  STBM is not an alien concept in
health polytechnic schools from 6 provinces expressed their
                                                                  environmental health education, but is a
support for integrating STBM into the environmental health        crystallization and manifestation of
curriculae to enable students to contribute to sanitation         studies in environmental health sector.
development in Indonesia in the future. Various options for
                                                                  Integrating STBM into academic
such integration were considered: (i) as part of existing core    curriculum encourages sustainable
subjects, (ii) bringing in guest lecturers, (iii) making STBM a   production of future rural sanitation
separate subject, and (iv) providing STBM competency              human resources.
training in the field.


Given that STBM is not a completely new concept for environmental health education, it was decided
that the third option would not be necessary. Option (i) of integrating STBM into the curriculums and
option (ii) arranging guest lecturers was deemed feasible after consulting with the Environmental Health
Communication Forum and PPSDM. The integration would be done in all polytechnic schools that offer
environmental health studies, beyond the three health polytechnic schools targeted by the TA. MoH has
33 polytechnic schools but only 24 offer environmental health studies. While some private schools also
offer this subject, they were not initially targeted as they fall under the authority of the Ministry of
Higher Education and Research Technology as there was concern about a potentially different
mechanism for developing curriculae and integrating new material on subjects. However, after the
Environmental Health Communication Forum disseminated the STBM integration to its members which
also cover private health institutes and environmental health academies, STBM integration was also
possible for these private schools. By November 2014, all 24 government-run health polytechnic schools
with environmental health as a teaching subject and four privately run environmental health schools
had integrated STBM into their curriculae.


Once the polytechnic schools received approval to go          Education is not the same as training.
ahead with integration, introduction and training had to
be given to environmental health lecturers. Emphasis was      Education is pre-service to generate
                                                              future human resources and training is
placed on integration and not generating new trainers,        in-service to generate “ready to use”
hence the previously envisaged training of trainers for       skilled human resources.
lecturers was not deemed necessary. The lecturers only
needed training and exposure visits to familiarize themselves with the STBM concept to enable them to
understand and put this concept into their teaching practice.

"Teaching the STBM concept" to senior lecturers, most of whom hold doctorate degrees, would not
have been an appropriate choice and very likely not been successful. Instead, WSP facilitated a
preliminary meeting in May 2013 attended by representatives/lecturers from six health polytechnic
schools and the Environmental Health Communication Forum. The lecturers were asked to observe the
implementation of STBM in communities, including the triggering process. The aim was to allow the

                                                     14
lecturers to observe and make conclusions based on their own observations of and communication with
communities, including those newly triggered and those that had started to make changes".

After three days of observations in the field, the lecturers had familiarized themselves with the STBM
and community empowerment approach used. These first-hand observations of STBM in communities
created a new mindset among the lecturers about the ways of learning and teaching STBM, away from
teaching theory and more towards hands-on practice. While some lecturers had differences of opinion
about the STBM concept itself, especially the no subsidy principle, in the end they all agreed to integrate
STBM into their community empowerment, health promotion and basic environmental health
curriculae. The fact and understanding that the health schools are under MoH which is required to
supply the health sector with adequate human resources to achieve government targets has also eased
the integration process.

Curriculum and modules for lecturer training were developed concurrently with the development of
other training curriculae and modules, but for lecturers, the development team also included
representatives from selected schools. Following its accreditation in November 2013, MoH arranged to
conduct the training with support from WSP, first involving 27 lecturers from 9 health schools
predominantly from Western Indonesia in November 2013, which started integration of the STBM
modules in January 2014. The training succeeded in raising the interests of lecturers to teach STBM at
schools as well as shaped their perception on the method of delivery, with all of them agreeing that
students’ understanding of the STBM concept had to be taught in class and practiced in community. The
training came out with agreement on the general syllabus and contents to be delivered, while details
would be developed by the individual campus upon return to their schools and submitted for approval
to the study program chairman or polytechnic director. Approval is important not only as permit to
deliver the teaching content but also to access budget needed to buy teaching materials, conduct field
work or triggering of communities. Lecturers also had to teach their colleagues who did not attend the
training to ensure full integration of the new module.

At the annual Environmental Health Schools Communication Forum in March 2014, STBM integration in
9 schools was acknowledged and endorsed for expansion into all MoH health schools and some privately
run health schools. In June 2014, 39 lecturers representing 15 MoH health polytechnic schools and 4
private health schools were trained and started integration by September 2014.

Peer learning was reinforced by circulating teaching plans for others to provide insight on the delivery in
each school facilitated by the Forkom JKL and discussion via the HAKLI email forum. MoH also linking
health schools with local STBM implementers such as local health offices and STBM related projects
through a letter requesting them to support the STBM field work to be done by the students as
mandatory requirement to graduate. Normally the field work lasts for about 4-6 weeks in the
community. The field work itself was seen as interesting yet challenging for students. Beyond requiring
them to understand the STBM concept and having triggering skills to empower communities, the field
work has opened awareness and concurrently changed the students’ mindset on the magnitude of
environmental issues they would address upon graduation and made them realized that behavior

                                                    15
change needed process and hard work. Indeed, these were memorable moments for students, while for
local health offices, engagement and support from the health schools have injected a new spirit for
them to implement STBM triggering. Simulatenously, it has also encouraged schools to conduct studies
and research on STBM, through students’ thesis or lecturers’ research.

In May 2014, a review meeting of the teaching process of the first batch of 9 schools was organized.
Minimum standards for teaching and facilitating communication of the schools were assigned to the
Forum (Forkom JKL), while the standard for evaluation would be facilitated by PPSDM after the
evaluation meeting. The evaluation meeting for all schools is expected to be held in May 2015, when
they have completed their field work/community triggering.


3.2.3. The STBM E-Learning System
 The E-learning system gives everyone     The e-learning gives anyone who is interested in STBM an
 an opportunity to learn independently    opportunity to learn about it, regardless of their location or
 about STBM via an interactive and        financial situation and is free from the constraints of waiting
 standardize method.
                                          periods or training quotas as well as erosion of contents during
 A week after the launch of the STBM      the delivery process. E-learning also facilitates the recording
 e-learning scheme in September 2014,     and mapping of the national distribution of sanitation human
 226 people from 31 provinces in
                                          resources.
 Indonesia were participating.
                                           The STBM e-learning (stage one of distance training or online
phase) curriculum and modules were developed based on the conventional STBM training curriculae
and modules, modified to suit online learning, and equipped with a number of references and
interactive tools such as video, quiz, games, and readings. It is available online in Bahasa and English at
www.stbm-indonesia.org and can be accessed through any multimedia devices such as computer and
mobile phone. STBM e-learning consists of 4 modules: (i) Basic concept of STBM, (ii) STBM facilitators,
(iii) STBM entrepreneurs, and (iv) STBM monitoring and evaluation. Module (i) is mandatory while the
others are optional upon completion of module (i). The modules can be downloaded before proceeding
to the post-test. Upon completion of the mandatory module and post-test of one optional module with
minimum 80 point participants can print a certificate of participation, which serves as an
acknowledgement of completion of the online training as well as an entry requirement to participate in
the stage 2 (face-to-face training). Those completing both stages (online and offline) are rewarded with
a certificate with credit points from the PPSDM.

The e-learning is part of the structured distance training that consists of e-learning (on-line) and
‘classical’ training (off-line). The online part focuses on the concept of STBM to ensure everyone has the
same understanding of the concept while the ‘classical’ part is important to ensure skills and
competence of human resources which cannot be measured and accomplished through the on-line
version. Besides offering up to 40% shorter classical training (3-4 days from normally 6-7 days), which
tends to fit better with the financial capability and time of the organizers, the online part is used as a



                                                    16
preliminary selection of interest and effort taken by the prospective trainees to help ensure better
outcomes of the classical training.

In the course of the development of the e-learning curriculum and modules, WSP supported the STBM
Secretariat and the Civil Servant Distance Learning Unit of PPSDM to modify existing modules to
curriculum standards and the multimedia that would be used. Although the agency has a distance
learning unit, STBM was the first tutor-less, multimedia product for the general public to be developed
by PPSDM.

Figure 7: STBM Distance Training Scheme (ONLINE and OFFLINE)




                                                  17
In the past, they had only ever developed a distance learning course on epidemiology, which was
supported by tutors and designed for specific epidemiologists groups. This has brought the attention of
PPSDM to the needs to capacitate and empower a wider set of health human resources, including
facilitators and community members, not only for those working formally under the MoH.

The e-learning has also been used to support STBM teaching at health schools. Besides lecturing
students of STBM, some lecturers such as from Health School in Palu, Kupang, Yogyakarta, and Padang
requested students to complete the e-learning before conducting the field work. This assignment
increased the completion rate compared to users with other background. Similarly, the mandatory
assignment for PAMSIMAS project staff to complete the e-learning and present their certificate before
attending a workshop in Solo early this year has also increased the completion of the learning program,
indicating that it would be useful to proceed with this for other training programs as well.

3.2.4. Incentives Mechanism

                                                            The TA institutionalization strategy had two
Accredited STBM training offers the incentive of credit
                                                            incentive-related targets for the different target
points, which functional personnel such as sanitarians
need for their career development.                          audiences       of     the    in-service    training:
                                                            (i) the inclusion of a certification requirement in
the STBM implementation technical manual for non-civil servant staff, such as STBM project staff,
sanitation             entrepreneurs,           community               facilitators,         etc.,          and
(ii) to directly link certificates of standardized training attendance with the career development credit
points system for civil servants in government institution.

The first target was not applicable because the technical implementation manual was cancelled,
however the capacity building framework had already been taken to a higher constitutional level and
was binding, under Regulation of the Minister of Health 3/2014 concerning STBM. However, the
inclusion of a certification requirement for non-civil servants in project implementation manuals was still
possible and has been promoted by MoH by encrouaging development partner projects to implement
the accredited trainings and prioritize hiring staff that have such STBM certificates.

The second target has been achieved through the implementation of accredited training, where
successful participants are awarded a certificate of competency with credit points. Credit points are
needed by the civil servants who are hired for their particular expertise – so-called ‘functional’ staff such
as sanitarian, doctors, and lecturers. To occupy a certain position, a functional staff must collect a
sufficient number of credit points within a period of time. For example, a junior sanitarian must collect
25 credit points per year to maintain his/her position. Collecting credit points is not easy: for example,
based on Minister of Civil Servant Empowernment Regulation No. 1/2008, participants who passed the
training examination and attended 95% of an accredited training program with a minimum 30 training
hours (30 x 45 minutes) are awarded 1 credit point, while the criteria to pass the training examination
such as minimum grade for post-test, participation in class, etc., are defined together between training
organizer (EH) and PPSDM.


                                                          18
Upon successful completion, PPSDM issues a certificate with a national registry number printed on a
paper with the Garuda logo (the logo of the Republic of Indonesia). That official certificate means that
that the credit award is acknowledged and accepted in the HR system of all government HR offices, not
only the PPSDM in MoH but also all local civil servants offices. The latter is important because in line
with local autonomy, most STBM implementers at local level are categorized as local civil servants who
report to the head of districts or provinces and not to MoH, thus credits much be accepted by all
government HR systems. Details of the credit point incentive system through accredited training are
summarized in ANNEX 3.



           Figure 8: Sample of Official Certificate with National Logo and National Registry Number




Even though the credit-points are not applicable to the career progression of a non-civil servant, having
a certificate from an accredited training and acknowledged credit point would help their career working
with government. It would also be an added-value should they want to work as an outsource expert of
a training funded by the government.

3.3. Implementation and Scaling Up
A summary of the curriculum and modules can be found in ANNEX 4. The five STBM training courses
have been accredited and are now being used by MoH and its partners:

       As of February 2015, more than 700 people have participated in the classical STBM training
        following the designed curriculum and modules, arranged or supported by MoH, WSP, World
        Bank PAMSIMAS Project, Plan Indonesia, SPEAK, YPCII, local government of Sukabumi, LPMAK,
        MCAI, IUWASH, and SIMAVI. However, only 40% or 269 proceeded with the certificates.
       The Ministry of Health listed a number of future training programs that will use the accredited
        version and is considering releasing a circular letter to all local health offices and STBM partners
        to scale up accredited training following the evaluation of all STBM trainings in April 2015.


                                                     19
    Circular letters can have substantial impact, such as the recently issued one requesting local
    governments to prioritize utilization of Health Operational Budget for STBM. Other options
    considered for the scale up are to link/integrate the STBM training with the accreditation system
    for the community health centre and link with BPJS (national insurance) for reaching universal
    access. These will ened to be studies further.
   As of September 2014, STBM had been integrated into the Diploma 3 and 4 environmental
    health program in 24 health polytechnic schools and 4 private health schools in Indonesia. To
    ensure that the STBM content will continue to be included in the curriculum, PPSDM has
    scheduled an evaluation of the national curriculum for 2015 (these evaluations are held every 5
    years). The new curriculum will be confirmed by a ministerial decree and the inclusion to ensure
    sustainability.
   The e-learning module has benefitted from high-level promotion by officers at various national
    events such as STBM National Coordination Meeting, City Sanitation Summit, and water and
    sanitation national meeting. Minister, Vice Minister, high level officials from PPSDM and the
    Environmental Health unit invited their subordinates and partners to visit and try out the e-
    learning. As a result, a week after its launch on 3 September 2013, the STBM e-learning module
    had attracted 226 participants from 31 provinces across Indonesia (all provinces except
    Lampung, North Central Kalimantan, and Maluku), and by February 2015, almost 500 people
    participated, as shown in the figure below:


                          Figure 9: Distribution of E-Learning Participants




   At local level, the e-learning product has been used by local health officers and some PAMSIMAS
    provincial and district coordinators to inform and explain about STBM to their partners as well
    as to confirm that STBM was a national program and not only implemented in their area.
    Practically, it has accelerated adoption of the STBM program.

                                                 20
Although the instruments and mechanisms for institutionalized capacity building are now in place, a
number of challenges still need to be addressed to ensure smooth and sustainable scale up:

a) Slow uptake of accredited training due to unfamiliarity with the modules and initial difficulties in
   setting up post-training coaching/backstopping mechanism:

   From accreditation in March 2014 until February 2015, six accredited trainings were organized for a
   total of about 269 trainees. Lack of extensive dissemination on the training benefits as well as how
   to conduct accredited training is likely behind it; MoH is now addressing this through renewed
   dissemination efforts which should result in higher uptake starting this calendar year.

   In addition, the accredited training requires adherence to a number of implementation
   arrangements and criteria. These were intentionally set to measure and ensure the quality of
   training, such as proven capacity and background of master of trainers and trainers, selection
   process for participants, measured evaluation mechanism, minimum standard of training venue, etc.
   The training provider is expected to inform PPSDM a month before the event on these criteria, so
   that PPSDM has time to do a quality check of the training. This process is often not in line with
   project time schedules, as most of the training is implemented by an ad-hoc committee established
   shortly before the event. With insufficient time for preparation, organizers decided not to proceed
   with the accredited training. With increased dissemanitation of information including the
   certification, potential trainees in particular among functional staff have started to pressure training
   organizers into better planning so that they can benefit from the credit point awards.

   A third factor influencing limited uptake is that post-training coaching and backstopping expected by
   many trainees has not yet been set up. In-service training is usually expected to provide ‘ready to
   implement’ new skills; with a new curriculum, trainees need follow up support to help them
   practicing their new skills and improving these. Accredited training with effective procedures,
   mechanisms, requirements, and supporting curriculum and modules can partly respond to this if
   executed properly but post-training coaching mechanisms will need to be set up to ensure quality
   implementation of the STBM approach by the newly trained staff.

b) Variable quality teaching by polytechnic school lecturers on both theory and field practice
   application of the new curriculum:

   While the combination of theory and practical field work in communities is enriching students’
   understanding of real world conditions, students have reportedly struggled to conduct practice work
   in villages. Many schools require their students to wear school uniforms which affect their ability to
   gain respect and trust from communities, especially for activities such as triggering. Students also
   found the field work challenging because villegers expected solutions and direct support from the
   students, while at the same time acknowledging that testing out their new skills in practice is very
   useful for their future work. Support and supervision from lecturers, local health offices, and partner
   organizations have helped make the field work more productive but have not been consistently
   mobilized. The local context, capacity of lecturers and students, availability of support from local

                                                   21
   government and local health offices, financial support, and interest of the schools and lecturers are
   all influencing factors for success.

   In addition, detailed teaching plans and syllabus are prepared individually by lecturers or teaching
   teams in each school and thus subject to variable content and delivery in terms of balancing
   demand, supply and enabling environment principles of STBM. In a few instances lecturers objected
   to the non-subsidy principle of STBM. It is essential to facilitate and inform dialogue with lecturers
   through regular updates and discussion forums to ensure that the same key messages of STBM are
   delivered to students. Such dialogues could be facilitated by the Communication Forum for
   Environmental Health Department (Forkom JKL) with support from PPSDM and the Environmental
   Health Directorate.

   To further improve teaching and practical application, MoH has issued a letter requesting local
   health offices to collaborate with health schools in implementing STBM training to support the
   teaching process and field practice. Some health offices have collaborated very well but not all. By
   December 2014, In 22 out of 28 implementing schools, students have been engaged in triggering
   activities; in Yogyakarta, Riau Islands, and West Kalimantan provinces, some students were also
   offered to work as interns at the health office to support STBM. Dissemination of best practice
   collaboration between schools and health offices could help other schools. Collaboration with the
   private sector is another potential strategy to be further explored: in West Papua and Papua
   province, the triggering in communities was conducted jointly with a mining company operating in
   their area.

   With a new government in place since October 2014, a potential change in the higher education
   structure is in the making where health polytechnic schools would be coordinated by or report to
   the new Ministry of Higher Education and Research Technology instead of MoH. While this is not
   seen as materially affecting the integration of STBM in the health schools, capturing best practice
   and evaluating the integration in 2015 will be good evidence to build upon under the new
   government organization.

c) Technical issues and non-completion of e-learning modules:

   E-learning was launched in September 2014, with almost 500 people participating. Initial technical
   problems were connection stability of e-learning pages, quality of pictures and sound, and problem
   with server capacity, with infrastructure and maintenance support needed to support the system.
   The STBM Secretariat will need to build up its capacity to manage and maintain the e-learning
   system going forward.

   The distribution of participants within the first month was all across Indonesia. However, non-
   completion of course modules is substantial and needs to be analyzed as part of the evaluation in
   2015 to find out key reasons. As of mid-December 2014, of 409 participants 45% had completed
   module 1; 47 took module 2 with a completion and certification rate of 60% (module 1 plus one of



                                                  22
   the others are required to get certified). Module 3 was taken by 25 participants with 31% of them
   completing and getting certified.


4. Achievement of Interim Outputs and Outcomes of the TA

In 18 months, the technical assistance has largely achieved and in some cases exceeded the expected
targets outlined in the project concept note. Most notably, instead of conducting pilots in 3 polytecnic
schools, these were actually launched in all 24 government schools and 4 private academies offering
environmental health courses. The TA has also influenced other actors to address the issue of
institutionalization of human resources development: for example, the Ministry of Public Works is now
developing a distance-learning program for urban sanitation. The introduction of institutionalized
incentives has generated interest from other STBM implementers, such as local governments and
partners, in organizing accredited training. Detailed achievements compared to the concept note are
presented in the table below:




                                                  23
    4.1. Intermediate Outcome 1: Rural Sanitation Capacity Building Institutionalized

                Baseline                                     Targets                                        Achievements
Human resource training and capacity       Ministry of Health develops measurable        Accreditation of conventional and online STBM
building programs are run                  quality control standards and mechanisms      training that meets training quality control
independently by local governments         for rural sanitation human resource           standards and mechanisms for STBM human
without standards or quality control for   capacity building programs - Target FY14      resource capacity building since November 2013 to
the training participants.                 (December 2013)                               September 2014

The framework for capacity building of     Framework for sanitation human resource       The framework for the capacity building of
rural sanitation human resources has       capacity building is approved and forms the   sanitation human resources is an integral part of the
not been legalized as the key reference    basis for sanitation human resource           national STBM implementation strategy that has
for rural sanitation human resource        capacity building programs, and               been adopted in the Minister of Health Regulation
capacity building programs.                differentiates the roles of institutions at   No. 3/2014 concerning STBM on 10 February 2014
                                           each level of government, and partners
                                           know about this framework and are             This regulation explains the STBM implementation
                                           expected to support it - Target FY14          steps that must be taken by each institution at each
                                           (December 2013)                               level, including national, provincial, district, and
                                                                                         subdistrict/primary health center level.

                                                                                         This achievement was not specifically supported via
                                                                                         this TA, but by TA P1322007, which is wider in scope.

No STBM curriculum existing within         Selected STBM curriculums are integrated      STBM material has been integrated into the
polytechnics                               in at least 3 health polytechnics under       environmental health curriculums of all 24 health
                                           PPSDM (and other universities) as an          polytechnics and of 4 privately run health academies
                                           introduction to students to the challenges    in three subjects (Health Promotion, Community
                                           and job opportunities in the sanitation       Empowerment, and Basic Environmental Health
                                           sector--Target FY14 (June 2014)               Problems Solving) by June 2014.



                                                                       24
   4.2. Intermediate Outcome 2: Instruments for the Standardization and Certification of Rural Sanitation Human Resource
        Capacity Building Developed

              Baseline                                 Targets                                         Achievements

No indicators or systems for          Indicators and systems for the                Curriculums, modules and incentive schemes for
standardizing capacity building       standardization of human resource capacity    training, including e-learning have been developed.
programs exist/have been developed.   building are developed and adopted,           E-learning rolled out by the Ministry of Health on 3
                                      including:                                    September 2014, and has 226 participants from 31
                                       Development of e-learning modules           provinces across Indonesia within two weeks after
                                          and a certification system that are       the launching.
                                          incorporated into the mechanisms at
                                          PPSDM/STBM Secretariat as standard --
                                          Target FY14 (March 2014)

                                         National system in place for monitoring   Monitoring systems have been incorporated into the
                                          the progress of the implementation of     training accreditation mechanism at PPSDM, which
                                          human resource capacity building          is also supported by an online system of recording
                                          programs --Target FY14 (March 2014)       and mapping. The e-learning scheme also includes a
                                                                                    questionnaire to measure the participants'
                                                                                    satisfaction with this mode of learning.




                                                                 25
     4.3. Intermediate Outcome 3: Incentive System for Rural Sanitation Human Resources Developed

                Baseline                                     Targets                                    Achievements

No system of certification or structured A well-structured incentive scheme for          Ministry of Health has agreed to include these
incentive system.                        rural sanitation human resource capacity         requirements in the criteria for project
                                         building, which includes:                        implementers. The formal process, via a circular
                                          The requirements for certification of          letter, is underway.
                                             staff are included in STBM technical
                                             manuals (for non-civil servant staff) --    The certification system has been linked to the
                                             Target FY14 (June 2014)                      credit point system for civil servants
                                          The capacity building certification
                                             system is linked to the government's
                                             credit point system and is a mandatory
                                             requirement ---Target FY15 (June
                                             2015).


Overall the TA has directly benefited the following numbers of people:

No    Instrument                          Activities                                  Number of People Reached
1.    Integration of STBM into health     Training for lecturers                      66 lecturers from 24 MoH health polytechnic schools
      schools                                                                         and 4 private schools
                                          Teaching at schools                         1,500 students from 28 schools
                                          Students field work (triggering to          By December 2014, 22 schools have done the field
                                          community)                                  work in a number of villages in 22 provinces. It is
                                                                                      estimated that by May 2015, all schools will have
                                                                                      done the field work.
2.    Accredited Training                 Utilization of the curriculum and modules   Used in a number of trainings done by the MoH and
                                                                                      partners such as WSP, World Bank PAMSIMAS
                                                                                      Project, Plan Indonesia, SPEAK, YPCII, local
                                                                                      government, LPMAK, MCAI, IUWASH, and SIMAVI.

                                                                         26
No   Instrument   Activities                                Number of People Reached
                                                            Up to February 2015, it is estimated that the
                                                            curriculum and modules have been used by more
                                                            than 700 participants. This may be understated as
                                                            the modules are available online and used by local
                                                            health offices, and monitoring usage is not yet well
                                                            developed.
                  Incentive/Certificate with Credit Point   Among those who used the curriculum and modules,
                                                            up to February 2015, 269 participants received
                                                            accredited certification.
3.   E-Learning   Participation                             As of February 2015, there were 494 participants,
                                                            with 45% having completed Module 1.

                                                            Module 2 was followed by 47 participants with 60%
                                                            completion and certification rate.

                                                            Module 3 was followed by 25 participants with 31%
                                                            completion and certification rate.




                                              27
5. Conclusions and Recommendations

The TA has institutionalized capacity building programs through i) formal pre-service education,
specifically environmental health studies at health polytechnic schools by integrating STBM into
mandatory subjects such as Health Promotion, Community Empowerment, and Basic Environmental
Health Problems Solving along with field work in community; ii) accreditation of five training modules by
PPSDM for in-service training, which are also linked to iii) a credit point system for participants taking
the accredited training; and (iv) e-learning that opens the opportunity for everyone to learn about STBM
independently

Given the enormity of the challenges of sanitation development in Indonesia and the associated human
resources needed, the institutionalization of capacity development programs is a must for reaching the
desired scale, efficiencies and quality. The challenge is not rooted in the suitability and adaptability of
the products and their embedded requirements and mechanism, but mostly is determined by mindset
and the challenges of organizational change processes. It is important that capacity building products
and mechanisms are strengthened in a structural way through institutionalization both at local and
national level led by MoH by integrating them in the institutions’ permanent targets, work plans, and
budgets.

Accredited training helps improving and maintaining quality of training; for example, the two accredited
training delivered showed an average 80% satisfaction rate for the organization of the training as well as
increasing trend in understanding the content as seen in the average result of pre-testing (53.15%) and
post-testing (80.06%). The training requires good planning and preparation. If done properly, the
accredited training will produce more competent and skillful personnel. This is critically needed for
implementation of the STBM program, and can increase the efficiency and effectiveness of training
programs. To generate more demand to use the accredited training as well as increased demand from
participants to get accredited certificates, robust endorsement, dissemination of information, and
support from the Government and STBM Secretariat is needed.

First-hand observations in the field and facilitating interaction with field practitioners helped to
influence the mindsets of lecturers on the approach and concepts of STBM. As the authority of
delivering content during the teaching process is the prerogative of lecturers, it is important to establish
regular updates, peer-to-peer dialogue and support to ensure correct understanding and delivering of
the STBM concepts to the students. This can be facilitated by the association of environmental health
schools supported by PPSDM and local health offices.

The e-learning has given everyone an opportunity to learn independently about STBM with an
interactive and standardized method. This helps increasing cognitive aspects needed to understand
STBM and – as a complementary requirement to participate in the classical part of STBM distance
training – has the potential to make conventional training more cost-effective. To ensure sustainability,
infrastructure and personnel investment for maintenance and management are critically needed.




                                                    28
The new curriculae and modules are in early stages of roll-out and implementation, with overall
encouraging signs of progress. Key recommendations to take this to greater scale at increasing quality
can be summarized as follows:

      Continued roll-out by the STBM Secretariat and PPSDM of the various types of standardized
       training is needed, including the systematic documentation of participant profiles towards
       meeting the future need for STBM personnel to achieve the target of universal sanitation by
       2019.
      The STBM Secretariat should provide human resources with competency in the management of
       STBM capacity building, especially in facilitating accredited training and managing the e-
       learning.
      Stronger collaboration between local government and health schools in implementing STBM is
       needed for better mutual outcomes for both institutions.
      Generating support to scale up the use of the STBM human resource capacity building system, in
       particular accredited training and e-learning requires structural support and regular evaluation
       done and embedded in MoH’s system. This can be done through various methods, including
       among others a ministerial circular letter to local health offices and STBM partners.
      Preparation and follow up are important aspects of capacity building programs. Continuous
       supports through the MoH system and provision of resources for such post-training follow-up
       are needed to ensure effective outcomes.
      A systematic evaluation of the capacity building program is needed to inform the review of
       curriculae at health schools in 2015 and to draw lessons on how to improve both in-service and
       pre-service training.




                                                 29
                                                                      ANNEXES

               Annex 1: Relationship of Technical Assistance Projects under Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Hygiene in Indonesia


P132007— TA for Scaling up Rural Sanitation
and Hygiene

DO: to strengthen and develop central and local
institutions’ capacity to implement STBM -
through demand creation, supply improvement
and strengthening the enabling environment
                                                                                                     Develop and institutionalize the certification
                                                                                                     system for STBM capacity building

Strengthen the STBM secretariat in guiding the     P132118— TA for Institutionalization of Rural
scaling up of STBM nationwide, using funding              Sanitation Capacity Building
                                                                                                     Establish standardized indicators and online
both from Government of Indonesia and
                                                  DO: to integrate capacity building programs for    certification system through e-learning
partners
                                                  management and implementation of STBM
                                                  programs in PPSDM, an institution that is
Support the development of a nationally                                                              Develop incentive systems for certified rural
                                                  mandated and has competencies to develop HR
applicable rural sanitation program                                                                  sanitation expertise to further professional
                                                  for health (environmental health) development
performance benchmarking and monitoring
                                                                                                     career development
system for district governments


Strengthen the provincial role in coordinating      P143167— TA for Rural Sanitation Market          Strengthen government role in implementing
districts implementing STBM through various           Expansion of Domestic Private Sector           STBM, particularly regarding the alignment of
projects in five provinces                                                                           demand and supply activities
                                                  DO: to increase rural market reach by rural
                                                  sanitation entrepreneurs by 1) increasing the     Develop enabling environment for replication of
                                                  number of sanitation entrepreneurs, and 2)        sanitation entrepreneurs by strengthening capacity of
Build local government capacity for and                                                             sanitation business association (APPSANI) to support
                                                  strengthening capacity of these entrepreneurs
ownership of sanitation and handwashing                                                             government and other institutions
                                                  to accelerate expansion
promotion using evidence-based research of
behavior change communication (BCC)                                                                 Develop local market network by facilitating
                                                                                                    relationship between sanitation entrepreneurs with
                                                                                                    other market players to improve business model to
                                                                                                    better serving the poor market segment


                                                                          30
                       Annex 2: Summary of Timeline of Technical Assistance


    Time                                                   Activity
January 2013   Kick off and launching of TA Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity Building
January 2013   Roadshow and Introduction of STBM strategy to key partner units at the MoH: Center
               for Human Resource Development (PPSDM) and Center for Health Promotion
               (Promkes).
               An ad-hoc working group was formed to assess the most appropriate and doable
               strategy to institutionalize STBM in the existing capacity building system of MoH.
May 2013       Pre-Training Meeting to integrate STBM in health schools’ curriculae.
October 2013   Establishment of indicators and systems to standardize and accredit STBM training.
               The systems are equipped with standardized curriculum modules and training
               mechanisms as well as a credit point incentive for successful participants.
November       5 curriculum modules of STBM trainings completed (training for facilitators, training
2013           of trainers for facilitators, training for sanitation entrepreneurs, training of trainers for
               sanitation entrepreneurs, and training for lecturers).
               1 curriculum module was accredited (training for lecturers).
November       STBM training for health schools’ lecturers.
2013
January 2014   9 health schools which participated in the training started inserting STBM in their
               school curriculae.
March 2014     4 STBM curriculae and modules were accredited.
May 2014       Evaluation workshop of STBM teaching in the 9 health schools
June 2014      All MoH health schools (24 schools) and selected private health schools (4 schools)
               participated in STBM training and started to insert STBM in their curriculae.
June 2014      Soft launch of the STBM e-learning by the Minister of Health.
               Two of four modules were introduced and soft-launched.
August 2014    Some projects and partners tried out the accredited STBM training mechanism.
September      Second STBM National Coordination Meeting and actual launch of the STBM e-
2014           learning.




                                                   31
                            Annex 3: Credit Point Requirement: Case of Sanitarians

Credit points are needed by civil servants, specifically functional staff such as sanitarians, doctors, and
lecturers. Pursuant to Law 16/1999 and Presidential Instruction 87/1999, functional staffs are civil
servants who are hired for their particular expertise or ability. To occupy a certain position, functional
staff must have sufficient credit points, as shown in the examples in the box below.9

Credit points are required in order to sustain a position or receive career promotion. Credit points can
be gained by participating in a training, research, technical assessment, community empowerment, or
writing an academic report/book. The accredited training such as STBM training with 30 training hours
(30 x 45 minutes) is valued at 1 credit point. Below is the illustration on how much credit points should
be collected by a sanitarian:

                                              Competent Sanitarians
         No                           Position                   Level                 Minimum Credit
                                                                                           Points
                Junior Sanitarian                                       II.A      25
         1.
                Practicing Sanitarian                                   II.B      40
         2.
                Senior Practicing Sanitarian                            III.A     100
         3.
                                                                        III.B     150
                Supervisor Sanitarian                                   III.C     200
         4.
                                                                        III.D     300


                                                  Expert Sanitarians
         No                           Position                            Level          Minimum Credit
                                                                                             Points
                Junior Assistant Senior Sanitarian                      III.A          100
         1.
                                                                        III.B          150
                Assistant Senior Sanitarian                             III.C          200
         2.
                                                                        III.D          300
                Senior Sanitarian                                       IV.A           400
         3.
                                                                        IV.B           550
                                                                        IV.C           700


Note: Since the introduction of Regulation of the Minister of Health 32/2013, the number of credit points required
is no longer valid. A new number of credit points required is still being discussed. These tables are included only for
the purpose of illustrating that sanitarians need to have credit points.




9
Civil Service Education and Training Centre, Agency for Development and Empowerment of Health Professionals, "Training
Modules for Sanitarians", 2011

                                                           32
Pursuant to the Decree of the Minister of State Administration Reform 19/KEP/M/PAN/2011 concerning
sanitarians and the credit point system, a sanitarian will no longer be eligible to hold a functional
position if:
    a) Within five years, the sanitarian is unable to accumulate the minimum credit points for the level
         above him/her;
    b) The sanitarian is unable to accumulate 10 credit points as a junior sanitarian or practicing
         sanitarian, and 20 credit points as a supervising sanitarian from the time he or she takes up that
         position; or
    c) The sanitarian takes leave of absence of more than six months for learning purposes, is
         suspended or takes unauthorized leave; he or she will be placed in a non-functional sanitarian
         position.

Pursuant to Regulation of the Minister of Health 32/2013 concerning Employment of Sanitarians, there
are currently five levels of sanitarians:

1) Sanitarian,
2) Junior sanitarian technician,
3) Assistant sanitarian technician,
4) Senior assistant sanitarian technician, and
5) Assistant sanitarian technician.

All sanitarians are required to hold a professional qualification in environmental health, and to practice
his or her profession, a sanitarian must have a certificate of competency and certificate of registration as
a sanitarian.




                                                    33
                 Annex 4: Summary of the Accredited STBM Curriculum and Modules



1. Curriculum and Module of STBM Facilitator Training

Expected Role : The successors of this training shall work as STBM
              facilitators in their working area and able to integrate
              STBM approach into their daily roles and works.

Participants    : Those who are willing to be a facilitator in sanitation
                and environmental health programs using STBM
                approach.

Competences :

1. To explain direction and national strategy on STBM
2. To explain basic concept of STBM
3. To explain community empowerment in STBM
4. To practice communication, advocation, and facilitation
5. To practice triggering in community

Number of participants in one class: not more than 30 persons.

Program structure:

No                Content                                       Time                         Total Hours
                                             Theory        Assignment       Field Practice
A.    Basic Content
1.    National Policy and Strategy of           2              0                  0              2
      STBM
                          Subtotal “A”          2              0                  0              2
B.    Main Content
1.    Basic Concept of STBM                     2              2                  0              4
2.    Community Empowerment in                  1              2                  0              3
      STBM
3.    Communication, Advocation,                2              6                  0              8
      and Facilitation
4.    STBM Triggering in community             6                8                10              24
                           Subtotal “B”        11              18                10              39
C.    Supporting Content
1.    Building Learning Communities            1                2                0                3
2.    Follow Up Action and Evaluation          1                2                0                3
                           Subtotal “C”        2                4                0                6
      TOTAL                                    16              22                10              47
Note: 1 training hour= 45 minutes
Credit Point: 1 credit

                                                      34
Training Process:




                                            OPENING SESSION


                                                PRE-TEST


                                  BUILDING LEARNING COMMUNITIES


                    Knowledge (Cognitive)               Knowledge and Skill (Competence)
                    Basic Content:                      Main Content:
 E
 V                  National Policy and                 1. Basic concept of STBM,
                                                        2. Community empowerment in STBM
 A                  Strategy of                         3. Communication, Advocation, and
                    STBMMETHOD: Lecture-                   Facilitation
 L                                                      4. Communication, Advocacy and Facilitation,
                    Question&Answer (CTJ),
 U                                                      5. STBM Implementation in community,
                    Discussion                          6. Fieldwork practice: Triggering STBM in
 A                                                         community.
                    National Policy and
 T
                    Strategy of STBM                    METHOD: Lecture-Questions&Answer,
 I                                                      Discussion, case study, role play, simulation,
 O                                                      film discussion, and field work practice.
                    METHOD: Lecture-
 N

                                            FIELD WORK PRACTICE



                                             FOLLOW UP ACTIONS


                                                  POST-TEST


                                            CLOSING SESSION




                                                   35
2. Curriculum and Module for Training of Trainer (ToT) STBM Facilitator

Expected Role : The successors of this training shall work as
              trainers of STBM facilitator training in their
              working area.

Participants    : Those with background as follows:

a. Civil servants from local health offices working related to
     STBM programs,
b.   Government trainers, prioritizing those who are interest in
     STBM,
c.   Master Trainer (MT)/ STBM national trainers that already
     participated in leadership training and similar training,
d.   Willing to complete all training series,
e.   Commit to be STBM trainers at the minimum for the next 3 years.

Competences:

1.   To explain basic concept of STBM
2.   To explain community empowerment in STBM
3.   To practice communication, advocation, and facilitation
4.   To practice triggering in community
5.   To train in the future STBM Facilitator training

Number of participants in one class: not more than 30 persons.

Program structure:

No                     Content                                         Time                    Total
                                                  Theory         Assignment   Field Practice   Hours
A.    Basic Content
1.    National Policy and Strategy of STBM            2              0              0           2
                                   Subtotal “A”       2              0              0           2
B.    Main Content
1.    Basic Concept of STBM                           2              2              0           4
2.    Community Empowerment in STBM                   1              2              0           3
3.    Communication, Advocation, and                  2              2              0           4
      Facilitation
4.    STBM Triggering in community                     4            2              10           16
5.    Micro teaching for training                      6            9              0            15
                                   Subtotal “B”       15            17             10           42
C.    Supporting Content
1.    Building Learning Communities                   0              3              0           3
2.    Follow Up Action and Evaluation                 1              2              0           3
                                   Subtotal “C”       1              5              0           6

                                                    36
      TOTAL                                         18             22               10             50
Note: 1 training hour= 45 minutes
Credit Point: 1 credit


Training Process:

                                            OPENING SESSION


                                                PRE-TEST


                                  BUILDING LEARNING COMMUNITIES


                    Knowledge (Cognitive)                Knowledge and Skill (Competence)
                    Basic Content:                       Main Content:
 E
 V                  National Policy and                  1. Basic concept of STBM,
                                                         2. Community empowerment in STBM
 A                  Strategy of STBM                     3. Communication, Advocation, and
                                                            Facilitation
 L                                                       4. Communication, Advocacy and Facilitation,
 U                                                       5. STBM Implementation in community,
                    METHOD: Lecture-                     6. Micro teaching
 A                  Question&Answer (CTJ),
                    Discussion                           METHOD: Lecture-Questions&Answer,
 T
                                                         Discussion, case study, role play, simulation,
 I
                                                         film discussion, and micro teaching practice.
 O
                    National Policy and
 N

                                            FIELD WORK PRACTICE


                                               MICRO TEACHING


                                             FOLLOW UP ACTIONS


                                                  POST-TEST


                                            CLOSING SESSION




                                                   37
3. Curriculum and Module for Training of STBM Entrepreneur

Expected Role : The successors of this training shall work as an
              entrepreneur that able to conduct STBM approach

Participants     : Those with background as follows:

a. Future Entrepreneur who is willing to be an STBM entrepreneur,
   individual or group,
b. Have minumum of 9 years basic education and have experience in
   business
c. Age between 17 to 60 years old
d. Pass the selection process using application to participate in
   STBM entrepreneur training form.

Competences :

1.    To explain national policy and strategy of STBM
2.    To explain basic concept of STBM
3.    To explain motivation of STBM entrepreneur
4.    To explain basic concept of STBM products and services marketing
5.    To explain marketing network for STBM products and services
6.    To explain STBM products and services
7.    To explain STBM products and services’ production process (case: improved latrine)
8.    To explain technics of communication and presentation of STBM products and services
9.    To practice selling and production
10.   To implement book keeping administration and simple financial management
11.   To develop business plan
12.   To conduct monitoring and evaluation of STBM marketing

Number of participants in one class: not more than 30 persons.

Program structure:

No                     Content                                    Time                      Total
                                                   Theory   Assignment     Field Practice   Hours
A.     Basic Content
1.     National Policy and Strategy of STBM            2         0               0           2
                                    Subtotal “A”       2         0               0           2
B.     Main Content
1.     Basic Concept of STBM                           2         0               0           2
2.     Motivation of STBM entrepreneur                 2         3               0           5
3.     Basic concept of STBM products and              1         1               0           2
       services marketing
4.     Marketing network of STBM products              1         1               0           2


                                                    38
      and services
5.    STBM products and services                   3   0    0   3
6.    STBM products and services’ production       1   2    0   3
      process (case: improved latrine)
7.    Technics of communication and                1   3    0   4
      presentation of STBM products and
      services
8.    practice selling and production              1   0    9   10
9.    book keeping administration and simple       1   2    0    3
      financial management
10. business plan                                  1   2    0   3
11. monitoring and evaluation of STBM              1   2    0   3
      marketing
                                   Subtotal “B”   15   16   9   40
C.    Supporting Content
1.    Building Learning Communities                0   2    0    2
2.    Follow Up Action and Evaluation              1   1    0    2
                                   Subtotal “C”    1   3    0    4
      TOTAL                                       18   19   9   46
Note: 1 training hour= 45 minutes
Credit Point: 1 credit




                                                  39
Training Process:




                                               OPENING


                                               PRE-TEST


                             BUILDING LEARNING COMMUNITIES
                                          (BLC)
 E
                    Knowledge (Cognitive)               Knowledge and Skill (Competence)
 V                                                      Main Content:
                    Basic Content:
 A                                                      1. Basic concept of STBM.
                    National Policy and                 2. motivation of STBM entrepreneur
 L                  Strategy of STBM                    3. basic concept of STBM products and services
                                                            marketing
 U                                                      4. marketing network for STBM products and services
 A                                                      5. STBM products and services
                    METHOD: Lecture-                    6. STBM products and services’ production process
 T                  Question&Answer (CTJ),                  (case: improved latrine)
                    Discussion                          7. technics of communication and presentation of
 I
                                                            STBM products and services
 O                                                      8. practice selling and production
                                                        9. book keeping administration and simple financial
 N                                                          management
                                                        10. business plan
                                                        11. monitoring and evaluation of STBM marketing

                                                        METHOD: Lecture-Questions&Answer, Group
                                                        Discussion, film, assignment, simulation, roleplay



                                          FIELD WORK PRACTICE
                                            Selling and Producing


                                          FOLLOW UP ACTIONS

                                                POST-TEST

                                            CLOSING SESSION



                                                   40
4. Curriculum and Module for Training of STBM Entrepreneur



Expected Role : The successors of this training shall work as a
              trainer of STBM entrepreneur training

Participants     : Those with background as follows:

a. Civil servants from local health offices working related to
   STBM programs,
b. Government trainers, prioritizing those who are interest in
   STBM,
c. Master Trainer (MT)/ STBM national trainers that already
   participated in leadership training and similar training,
d. Willing to complete all training series,
e. Commit to be STBM trainers at the minimum for the next 3 years.

Competences :

1.    To explain national policy and strategy of STBM
2.    To explain basic concept of STBM
3.    To explain motivation of STBM entrepreneur
4.    To explain basic concept of STBM products and services marketing
5.    To explain marketing network for STBM products and services
6.    To explain STBM products and services
7.    To explain STBM products and services’ production process (case: improved latrine)
8.    To explain technics of communication and presentation of STBM products and services
9.    To practice selling and production
10.   To implement book keeping administration and simple financial management
11.   To develop business plan
12.   To conduct monitoring and evaluation of STBM marketing
13.   To train in the STBM entrepreneur training

Number of participants in one class: not more than 30 persons.

Program structure:

No                     Content                                     Time                     Total
                                                   Theory    Assignment    Field Practice   Hours
A.     Basic Content
1.     National Policy and Strategy of STBM            2          0              0           2
                                    Subtotal “A”       2          0              0           2
B.     Main Content
1.     Basic Concept of STBM                           2          0              0           2


                                                    41
2.    Motivation of STBM entrepreneur              1   1    0    2
3.    Basic concept of STBM products and           1   1    0    2
      services marketing
4.    Marketing network of STBM products           1   1    0    2
      and services
5.    STBM products and services                   2   0    0    2
6.    STBM products and services’ production       1   2    0    3
      process (case: improved latrine)
7.    Technics of communication and                1   2    0    3
      presentation of STBM products and
      services
8.    practice selling and production              1   0    7    8
9.    book keeping administration and simple       1   1    0    2
      financial management
10. business plan                                  1   2    0    3
11. monitoring and evaluation of STBM              1   1    0    2
      marketing
12. Micro teaching                                 6   1    8    15
                                   Subtotal “B”   19   12   15   46
C.    Supporting Content
1.    Building Learning Communities                0   2    0     2
2.    Follow Up Action and Evaluation              1   1    0     2
                                   Subtotal “C”    1   3    0     4
      TOTAL                                       22   15   15   52
Note: 1 training hour= 45 minutes
Credit Point: 1 credit




Training process:




                                                  42
                              OPENING


                              PRE-TEST


             BUILDING LEARNING COMMUNITIES
                          (BLC)
E
    Knowledge (Cognitive)             Knowledge and Skill (Competence)
V                                     Main Content:
    Basic Content:
A                                     1. Basic concept of STBM.
    National Policy and               2. motivation of STBM entrepreneur
L   Strategy of STBM                  3. basic concept of STBM products and services
                                          marketing
U                                     4. marketing network for STBM products and services
A                                     5. STBM products and services
    METHOD: Lecture-                  6. STBM products and services’ production process
T   Question&Answer (CTJ),                (case: improved latrine)
    Discussion                        7. technics of communication and presentation of
I
                                          STBM products and services
O                                     8. practice selling and production
                                      9. book keeping administration and simple financial
N                                         management
                                      10. business plan
                                      11. monitoring and evaluation of STBM marketing
                                      12. Micro teaching

                                      METHOD: Lecture-Questions&Answer, Group
                                      Discussion, film, assignment, simulation, roleplay

                          FIELD WORK PRACTICE


                          MICRO FACILITATING


                          FOLLOW UP ACTIONS


                               POST-TEST

                           CLOSING SESSION




                                 43
5. Curriculum and Module of STBM Facilitator Training for Lecturer

Expected Role : The successors of this training shall work as lecturers teaching
              STBM in their school

Participants    : Lecture in health promotion, community empowerment and basic
                problem solving of environmental health issues with minimum
                academic diploma in health environment.

Competences :

1.   To explain direction and national strategy on STBM
2.   To explain basic concept of STBM
3.   To practice STBM implementation
4.   To practice triggering in community

Number of participants in one class: not more than 30 persons.

Program structure:

No                Content                                      Time                     Total Hours
                                           Theory         Assignment   Field Practice
A.    Basic Content
1.    National Policy and Strategy of         2               0              0              2
      STBM
                          Subtotal “A”        2               0              0              2
B.    Main Content
1.    Basic Concept of STBM                   2               4              0               6
2.    STBM Implementation                     4               6              0              10
3.    STBM Triggering in community            1               3              6              10
                           Subtotal “B”       7              13              6              26
C.    Supporting Content
1.    Building Learning Communities           1               2              0               3
2.    Follow Up Action and Evaluation         1               2              0               3
                           Subtotal “C”       2               4              0               6
      TOTAL                                   11             17              6              34
Note: 1 training hour= 45 minutes
Credit Point: 1 credit




                                                    44
Training Process:




                                            OPENING SESSION


                                                PRE-TEST


                                  BUILDING LEARNING COMMUNITIES


                    Knowledge (Cognitive)               Knowledge and Skill (Competence)
                    Basic Content:                      Main Content:
 E
 V                  National Policy and                 1. Basic concept of STBM,
                                                        2. STBM Implementation
 A                  Strategy of STBM
                                                        3. Triggering in community
 L
                                                        METHOD: Lecture-Questions&Answer,
 U                  METHOD: Lecture-                    Discussion, case study, role play, simulation,
 A                  Question&Answer (CTJ),              film discussion, and field work practice.
                    Discussion
 T
 I
 O
 N

                                            FIELD WORK PRACTICE



                                             FOLLOW UP ACTIONS


                                                  POST-TEST


                                            CLOSING SESSION




                                                   45
