Report No: ACS18642




Republic of Indonesia
Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Hygiene in
Indonesia
{enter report sub-title here}
{June 6, 2016 }




GWASE

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC




                                i
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Abbreviations


AKKOPSI         : Alliance of Districts and Cities Concern on Sanitation
BAPPENAS        : Badan Perencanaan Pembangunan Nasional - State Ministry of National
                  Development Planning
BOK             : Bantuan Operasional Kesehatan (Health Operational Assistance)
CLTS            : Community-Led Total Sanitation
GDP             : Gross Domestic Product
JMP             : Joint Monitoring Programme
MCAI            : Millennium Challenge Account-Indonesia
MDG             : Millennium Development Goal
MFIs            : Micro Finance Institutions
MoH             : Ministry of Health
PAMSIMAS        : Third Water and Sanitation for Low-Income Communities Project
PPSDM           : Pusat Pengembangan Sumber Daya Manusia Kementerian Kesehatan - Agency
                  for Development of Human Resources, MoH
PPSP            : Program Percepatan Pembangunan Sanitasi Permukiman - National Sanitation
                  Acceleration Development Program
Poltekes        : Health Polytechnic Schools
Promkes         : Health Promotion Board
Puskesmas       : Community Health Center
RPJMN           : Medium-Term Development Plan
RPJPN           : Long-Term Development Plan
STBM            : National Strategy for Community-Based Total Sanitation
TA              : Technical Assistance
ToT             : Training of Trainers
TSSM            : Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing
WSP             : Water and Sanitation Program, the World Bank
WSLIC-2         : Second Water and Sanitation for Low-Income Communities Project
Acknowledgements
This report is a synthesis of the technical assistance (TA) Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Hygiene in
Indonesia (P132007), carried out by the World Bank - Water and Sanitation Program (WSP). It was
developed in consultation with the Directorate of Environmental Health, Directorate General of Public
Health and Centre for Health Promotion of the Ministry of Health (MoH) and with key institutions in the
focus provinces in West Java, Central Java, East Java, Bali, and West Nusa Tenggara.

The Task Team Leader for this TA was Deviariandy Setiawan. Valuable contributions to the report were
made by Dr. Imran Agus Nurali, Sp.KO, Director of Environmental Health and the following World Bank
staff and consultants: Almud Weitz, Susanna Smets, Emily Rand, Ari Kamasan, Wano Irwantoro, Amin
Robiarto, Effentrif, Dwi Kuswarno, Wendy Sarasdyani, Nyoman Oka and Rahmi Kasri. The peer reviewers
were Steffen Soulejman Janus, Pratibha Mistry, Puti Marzoeki, and Joep Verhagen.




                                                  5
Contents


Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................................... iv
Acknowledgements....................................................................................................................................... 5

Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 9

1.     Introduction ................................................................................................................. 15
1.1.     Country Context ............................................................................................................................... 15
1.2.     Rural Sanitation Status and Sector Changes .................................................................................... 15
1.3.     Rationale for the TA: Building on Past Engagement......................................................................... 16

2.     Objectives of the Technical Assistance .......................................................................... 17

3.     Key Results and Achievements ...................................................................................... 19
3.1. Intermediate Outcome 1: Well-functioning STBM Secretariat set up to co-ordinate STBM
implementation nationwide ....................................................................................................................... 19
3.2. Intermediate Outcome 2: Local government capacity in implementing STBM through demand
creation, supply improvement and enabling environment increased ....................................................... 24
3.3. Intermediate Outcome 3: More effective STBM implementation at provincial and district Level .. 31

4.     Lessons Learned and Recommendations ....................................................................... 35
4.1.     Lessons learned ................................................................................................................................ 35
4.2.     Recommendations............................................................................................................................ 37



List of Tables

Table 1: Key Intermediate Outcomes and Indicators ................................................................................. 18
Table 2: Achievements against Intermediate Outcome 1 .......................................................................... 20
Table 3: Achievements against Intermediate Outcome 2 .......................................................................... 24
Table 4: The STBM District-Wide Approach as adopted by PAMSIMAS3 ................................................... 27
Table 5: Number of people reached through training ................................................................................ 29
Table 6: Achievements against Intermediate Outcome 3 .......................................................................... 31
Table 7: Increased access to improved sanitation by province .................................................................. 33
Table 8: Comparison of STBM progress implementation in the five focus provinces and nationally ........ 34




                                                                               6
List of Figures

Figure 1: STBM Capacity Building Framework ............................................................................................ 26
Figure 2: Provincial budget for STBM over four years in five focus provinces ........................................... 28
Figure 3: Overview of STBM intervention achievement in 5 focus provinces ............................................ 34
Figure 4: Overview of STBM intervention achievement nationwide .......................................................... 35




                                                                    7
List of Annexes

Annex 1: Relationship between TAs under Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Hygiene in Indonesia ... - 40 -
Annex 2: Summary of Timeline of Technical Assistance ....................................................................... - 41 -
Annex 3 Structure of the Directorate General of Public Health of the Ministry of Health ................. - 42 -
Annex 4: Behavior Change Communication Strategy ........................................................................... - 43 -
Annex 5: STBM Monitoring Framework ................................................................................................ - 44 -
Annex 6: Monitoring Feedback Mechanism under STBM .................................................................... - 47 -
Annex 7: Link between TA P132007 and P158934 ............................................................................... - 48 -
Annex 8: Financial Report P132007 ...................................................................................................... - 49 -




                                                                      8
Executive Summary
This report sets out the results and lessons learned from TA P132007: Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and
Hygiene in Indonesia, which ran from 2013 to March 2016. This was an umbrella TA with a broad remit,
and under it were two other TAs with a narrower focus: Rural Sanitation Market Creation (P143165) and
Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity Building (P132118), both of which closed in 2015.

Reform in the rural sanitation sub-sector began in 2005 following the successful introduction of
Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) in 6 districts. In 2007, the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP)
supported the Ministry of Health (MoH) to complement the use of CLTS with behavior change
communication (BCC) and development of the sanitation market. This new approach was piloted at
scale in 28 out of 29 districts in East Java Province in 2007-2011 under the Total Sanitation and
Sanitation Marketing (TSSM) TA. Impressive results were achieved in just ten months, with 262 villages
becoming Open Defecation Free (ODF). In response, MoH adopted the district-wide approach in 2008
and launched a new rural sanitation development strategy called Community-Based Total Sanitation
(Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat) or STBM. The STBM strategy has three elements: demand creation
through CLTS and BCC; supply chain improvement through developing the local sanitation market; and
creation of and enabling environment through advocacy for local formal and informal regulations and
resource mobilization.

Objectives of the Technical Assistance
In 2012 MoH requested TA from WSP to strengthen the capacity of national and local institutions to
implement STBM in up to five provinces. The agreed TA covered four areas:

a. Strengthen the Secretariat to guide the scaling up of STBM nationwide, using funding from the
   Government of Indonesia and development partners.

b. Support the development of a nationwide rural sanitation performance benchmarking and
   monitoring system for district governments, using Joint Monitoring Program (JMP)-aligned
   definitions.

c. Strengthen the role of provincial government in coordinating district-level implementation of STBM
   through various projects including PAMSIMAS and PNPM Generasi Plus; and develop provincial and
   district resources for scaling-up CLTS, sanitation marketing and strengthening the enabling
   environment in up to five provinces.

d. Develop a new campaign and tools and build local government capacity in, and ownership of,
   sanitation and handwashing promotion using evidence-based research on behavior change
   communication (BCC).

Complementing this TA were two smaller TAs, each with a specific, narrower focus: Rural Sanitation
Market Creation (P143165) and Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity Building (P132118), both
of which closed in 2015.



                                                   9
P132007 was also complementary to a large-scale World Bank-funded program called PAMSIMAS, which
has evolved from a project to a national platform through which the government intends to reach its
newly adopted target of universal access to water supply and sanitation by 2019.

Key results and achievements
Intermediate Outcome 1: Well-functioning STBM Secretariat set up to co-ordinate STBM
implementation nationwide
When the TA started, the Secretariat was outside the MoH structure, 100% donor-funded and managed
informally. Early in the TA, in 2012, consensus was reached that the STBM Secretariat should be hosted
and managed by MoH. With substantial support from donor partners, the Ministry accordingly allocated
resources for operations, assigning one officer as Co-ordinator, recruiting administrative staff and
providing the necessary office space and facilities. The TA then provided a pool of experts to support the
Secretariat in carrying out its role in spearheading, guiding and monitoring STBM implementation. The
Secretariat is now staffed by seven consultants and co-ordinated by a government official, and is
functioning well. Among other things, the Secretariat has organized national STBM reviews and co-
ordination meetings; developed guidelines and supported training for stakeholders at all levels;
supported knowledge management and advocacy; and collaborated with other relevant platforms and
institutions.

As of 2016 onwards, most funding comes from the Ministry’s regular budget. The Ministry decided to
selectively accept support from donors for non-budgeted activities, innovative ideas and a small
selection of experts on a time-bound basis, and has elevated to Secretariat’s position from under the
Basic Water and Sanitation Unit to be directly under the Director of Environmental Health Department.
A Director General of Public Health’s decree has been drafted and circulated for this promotion in May
2016. However, the Secretariat is bound by the government’s general financing standards resulting in
unattractive remuneration rates for experienced and specialized consultants and restricted support for
certain activities. Hence, some (low) level of external support is still required. WSP will continue to
support the Secretariat through the new TA (P-158934), in particular to support them in addressing the
bottom 40%, cross sectoral collaboration such as combating malnutrition and stunting, and leveraging
and expanding strategic advocacy to the local governments.

Intermediate Outcome 2: Local government capacity in implementing STBM through demand
creation, supply improvement and enabling environment increased
When STBM was adopted as a national strategy in 2008, there were initially some challenges to
implementation at scale, including inconsistent and poor quality implementation of program
methodology as well as limited support from local government. For example, the triggering
fundamental to the CLTS process was often neglected or done badly and there was inconsistent
sequencing of activies. In response, the TA assisted MoH in developing a capacity building framework
and developed a comprehensive STBM guideline for implementation at all government levels, from
national down to village level, by tapping into government’s existing mechanisms and resources.



                                                   10
The TA strengthened capacities of the STBM Secretariat and local governments in the three components
of STBM: demand creation, supply development and enabling environment. One to two consultants
were deployed to work closely with provincial health offices to ensure their commitment and strengthen
their capacity to implement the STBM following national framework in a way that it matched with local
policy and financing. Their work was substantially strengthened by a pool of TA consultants in Jakarta
who iteratively designed methods, strategies, as well as supporting tools, guidances and mechanisms
such as SMS and web-based monitoring and evaluation, class-based and online training, and BCC
materials. This support was scaled-up nationally through the STBM Secretariat.

The benefits of the TA extended far beyond the five focal provinces and resulted in the enactment of
STBM as a national program for rural sanitation, through Minister of Health Regulation No. 3/2014 and
corresponding policies at national and local level. In turn, this helped to increase financing for the
sanitation program at both national and local level by 270% to 350% each year from 2012 to 2015.

STBM-derived training modules have been formally accredited by MoH and 28 health schools now teach
the STBM curriculum, with 1,500 students completing it by December 2015. In addition, over 500 people
completed the STBM e-learning course. The accredited modules are also used by PAMSIMAS.

Technical assistance directed at the development of the local sanitation market delivered a standardized
training curriculum and standard operating procedures for sanitation entrepreneurs. By 2015, 270 active
sanitation entrepreneurs were working in 65 districts and had built more than 60,000 latrines.

A further step forward came when the TA helped to establish a ‘district-wide approach’ which was
subsequently adopted by government and mainstreamed in other large-scale national programs such as
PAMSIMAS and the Community-Based Health and Nutrition to Reduce Stunting Project of the
Millennium Challenge Account-Indonesia (MCA-I). This marked a strategic shift from project-specific
interventions towards a programmatic approach that embedded implementation within government
structures, thereby utilizing government resources. The district-wide approach has also been adopted by
other international development agencies including UNICEF, SIMAVI and Plan International.

STBM implementation is now a priority for local governments. As evidence of this, by 2015, 85 out of
514 districts, and 19 out of 34 provinces, had issued local regulations to support STBM. Strong support
from MOH and persistent advocacy and day-to-day support by STBM consultants under PAMSIMAS both
at provincial and district level have encouraged local governments to mainstream STBM in their local
policy. Moreover, by 2014 three districts (Pacitan, Magetan and Ngawi) and one city (Madiun), all in East
Java, had achieved open defecation-free (ODF) status. Intensive support by WSP in East Java has
significantly contributed to the achievement, building upon the two phases of engagement in the
province (i.e., 2005-2007 piloting of the CLTS approach, resulting in numerous community champions for
the cause and government buy-in for this new approach in generating demand; and 2007-2011 scale up
across the whole province, broader and more intensive support covering demand (via CLTS), supply
(working with entrepreneurs to ensure supply of sanitation products matches rising demand), and the
enabling environment in the province under the Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing TA funded by
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation).


                                                   11
Intermediate Outcome 3: More effective STBM implementation at provincial and district Level
Following a period of piloting in East Java in 2009, the TA helped MoH establish a nationwide SMS-based
monitoring system covering 34 provinces. The system was first rolled out to the five provinces
supported by this TA1, where the TA supported the training and coaching of sanitarians and district
health officers both in using the system and analyzing the data, developed user guidelines, and
advocated use of the findings by local governments to improve STBM implementation.

Institutional roles and responsibilities for monitoring are now clearly assigned at each level of
government, and the system has both SMS- and web-based components. It provides information not
only on sanitation access, but also on STBM budgets at local level, training activities and sales by
sanitation entrepreneurs. STBM data is widely disseminated and used by various stakeholders as an
advocacy tool to address policy makers.

Access to improved sanitation in the five provinces increased by 2.57% per year over the period 2012-
2015, more than the national average increase of 1.61%, while access to permanent improved sanitation
(meaning pour-flush toilets) increased by 1.68% per year, compared to a national average of 1.12%.
Prior to the TA implementation, the ODF ‘success’ rate in intervention villages was below 20% (i.e., 20%
of communities ‘triggered’ via CLTS became verified as ODF). Acknowledging the challenges to achieve
full ODF status, the TA targeted increasing the success rate 20%. By the end of the TA, the ODF
conversion rate was higher in the five focal provinces (29%) compared to the country as a whole (23%).
In total an additional 8 million people gained access to improved sanitation in the five supported
provinces between July 2012 and December 2015. The achievement is consistent with the TA’s
expectation and in-line with global achievement rates in countries with comparable (and well-working)
verification processes.

Lessons Learned
1. A capacity building framework to strengthen institutions at all levels is key for scaling up in a
decentralized environment. The framework was developed following transformational changes in rural
sanitation strengthened with Minister of Health Regulation No.3/2014. The regulation provides clear
direction for actors, phases of STBM implementation, and their expected responsibilities. Capacity
building was delivered through various channels, including through integration into the existing
government education system, conventional class-based and online training, developing systematic
tools such as for monitoring and evaluation, and coaching for STBM provincial coordinators. The
accreditation of training courses was particularly useful, as it helped to ensured that an acceptable
quality of training was achieved and maintained.

2. Well-crafted advocacy and communications are valuable for disseminating tested approaches and
facilitating their adoption at scale. Evidence and data-backed up advocacy materials and carefully

1
    West Java, Central Java, East Java, Bali and West Nusa Tenggara.


                                                          12
designed communication channels and events which demonstrated the government’s lead in the sector
were keys to smooth adoption of the approach by local government. Local government commitment to
STBM was boosted via national knowledge sharing and advocacy events plus international learning visits
which provided vision and inspiration to policy makers.

3. Engagement of a range of institutions also strengthens campaign outreach. Beyond the
environmental health unit in charge of sanitation, collaboration with the Center for Health Promotion
and the Center for Public Communication leveraged their resources and expertise.

4. An effective monitoring system is invaluable and it use should be formally integrated into the
routine operations of government agencies. The STBM Secretariat played a key role in ensuring the
regular collection and submission of data to the MIS and – importantly – use of the data to inform
planning, decision making and advocacy.

5. Local government can help to develop the rural sanitation market. In the WSP-supported provinces,
the supply side of STBM implementation benefitted from partnerships established between local
government and local micro-finance institutions. This encouraged and enabled local sanitation
entrepreneurs to start working directly with rural communities. Ongoing support from the Sanitation
Entrepreneurs Association APPSANI helped these actors to improve their operations and stay engaged.

6. The scaling up tested approaches can be enhanced greatly through their incorporation into
established programmes. Adoption of the district-wide approach by PAMSIMAS boosted progress in
rural sanitation enormously.

Recommendations
For the Government:

   Following institutional changes within the Ministry, MoH should accelerate relocation of the STBM
    Secretariat directly under the Director of Environmental Health and enhance coordination and
    collaboration with other parts of the Directorate General of Public Health, including the Health
    Promotion Unit, Public Communications, and the Agency for Development and Empowerment
    Human Resources of Health (PPSDM). Collaboration on nutrition interventions should also be
    pursued given the close association between poor sanitation and early childhood stunting.

   While the current STBM MIS does not specifically monitor access among poorer households, the
    affordability of improved sanitation facilities is known to be a constraint. Beyond MoH, therefore,
    the STBM Secretariat should also collaborate with social sector programs to ensure better inclusion
    of the poor and develop knowledge for effective pro-poor support mechanisms. A key national
    program platform to work with is the National Program on Community Empowerment (PNPM).

   In collaboration with the Alliance of Districts and Cities Concern on Sanitation (AKKOPSI), MoH
    should continue strengthening advocacy to district and cities leaders to consolidate their
    commitment to STBM as a key intervention to achieving the target of universal access to sanitation.


                                                  13
   MOH should strengthen the supply side of STBM, for example by ensuring that support structures
    such as APPSANI (or alternatives) are available at scale. This may entail some or all of the following:
            o Expanding capacity building support for entrepreneurs and their marketing agents and
               masons.
            o Further development of affordable technology options for sanitation in challenging
               environments such as rocky or sandy soil.
            o Facilitating loans for entrepreneurs and households, through support from local
               governments and APPSANI, as well as collaboration with other partners

   In collaboration with other related ministries, MoH could explore opportunities for rural sanitation
    development under the recently-enacted Village Law whereby village government is provided with
    significant resources for development; this could be done by making ODF status one of the village’s
    key performance indicators.

For the Bank as part of ongoing operation (PAMSIMAS) and TA:

       In collaboration with the STBM Secretariat and PAMSIMAS team, and based on the experience
        gained with the SMS-based system and the PAMSIMAS MIS, the Bank is expected to explore the
        scope for introducing an interactive, smartphone-based reporting system. This could potentially
        improve the ease and efficiency of monitoring.

       In collaboration with STBM Secretariat and PAMSIMAS team, the Bank is expected to develop
        performance-based incentive schemes for STBM implementers at all levels: province, district
        and sub-district/Puskesmas, to encourage competition and improve the quality and scale of
        STBM implementation. This needs to be done in parallel with expanding the independent
        verification of reported results to avoid over-reporting by individuals.

       Building on the momentum achieved through PAMSIMAS and the sequence of TAs, the
        sustainability of the STBM Secretariat and continued program’s scale-up is required if the
        Government is to reach its ambitious goal of universal access to sanitation by end of 2019. The
        Bank is expected to continue supporting innovative ideas through a small selection of experts on
        a time-bound basis and support for non-budgeted, nation-wide impact activities, including to
        reach the bottom 40%, cross-sectoral collaboration (for example to combat malnutrition and
        stunting), and strengthen local support for universal access of sanitation.




                                                    14
1. Introduction
1.       This report summarizes the results and lessons learned from TA P132007, entitled Scaling Up
Rural Sanitation and Hygiene in Indonesia. This was a multi-year TA program implemented from January
2013 to March 2016 with a budget of USD 3 million including fixed staff costs. It was linked to two
complementary TAs: TA P143167 on sanitation marketing (from 2012 to 2015) and P32118 on
institutionalizing capacity building (from 2012 to 2015). Both have contributed to the achievements
discussed in the report.

1.1. Country Context
2.      Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world, with 256 million people spread over
a vast equatorial archipelago of 17,000 islands extending 5,150 kilometers from east to west. About 118
million people (46% of the country’s population) live in rural areas.2 In recent years, the country’s
economic growth has slowed, from 6.2% in 2011 to around 4. 7% in the second quarter of 2015, for
several reasons including a slump in the mining sector. Nevertheless, the poverty rate declined from
12.5% in 2011 to 11.3% in 20153, and the Human Development Index (HDI) rose from 0.670 in 2010 to
0.684 in 2014, with Indonesia ranking 110 out of 188 countries and territories in 2015.4 This
achievement maintained Indonesia’s status as a lower-middle income and medium human development
country.

3.       Politically, Indonesia’s transition to democracy in 1998 was followed in 2001 by a policy of
decentralization whereby significant responsibilities were devolved to districts and municipalities. Its
administration has evolved accordingly from 27 provinces, 234 districts, and 64 cities in 1999, to 34
provinces, 416 districts and 98 cities in 2014.5 Local governments have significant autonomy in
administration and setting local policy. Under Law No. 23/2014, they are obliged to deliver basic
services, such as education and health (including water and sanitation); and non-basic services, such as
village and community empowerment and environmental services, and they are encouraged to deliver
optional services relevant to local natural resources and industry.6

1.2. Rural Sanitation Status and Sector Changes
4.      Despite economic growth and decentralization, basic service provision, particularly for rural
communities, has lagged behind for much of the past decade and access to improved sanitation
increased by only 23% from 1990 to 2015. Among its peers in the region, Indonesia and Cambodia did
not meet their sanitation MDG targets, while Lao PDR, the Philippines and Vietnam did. At the same
time, Indonesia came close as the last UNCEF/WHO Joint Monitoring Program update shows, and made
the biggest gains in absolute numbers, reaching 50 million over the MDG period. Growth in access has


2
   UNICEF & WHO (2015). 25 Years Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water, 2015 Update and MDG Assessment.
3
 Statistics Indonesia (2015). Percentage of poor population in September 2015 was 11.13%.
4
  UNDP (2015). Human Development Report 2015, Sustaining Human Progress.
5
  Ministry of Home Affairs (2014). Jumlah Provinsi, Kabupaten dan Kota. http://otda.kemendagri.go.id/index.php/2014-10-27-
09-15-39
6
  Law No. 23/2014 on Local Government.


                                                            15
accelerated in particular in recent years following a shift from supply- to demand-led infrastructure
development through community empowerment and behavior change, the creation of a sanitation
market and an enabling policy environment.7 As a result, access to improved sanitation in rural areas
grew by around 2.6% per annum from 2008 onwards. However, this still left an estimated 63 million
people without access by 2015, out of which 39 million practiced open defecation.8

5.      Reform in the rural sanitation sub-sector began in 2005 following the successful introduction of
Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) in 12 districts. In 2007, the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP)
supported the Ministry of Health (MoH) to complement the use of CLTS with behavior change
communication and development of the sanitation market. This new approach was piloted at scale in 28
out of 29 districts in East Java Province in 2007-2011 under the Total Sanitation and Sanitation
Marketing (TSSM) TA. Impressive results were achieved in just ten months, with 262 villages becoming
Open Defecation Free (ODF).9 In response, MoH adopted the district-wide approach in 2008 and
launched a new rural sanitation development strategy called Community-Based Total Sanitation
(Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat) or STBM. The STBM strategy is built around three elements: i)
demand creation through CLTS and BCC, ii) supply chain improvement through developing the local
sanitation market, and iii) creation of an enabling environment through advocacy for local formal and
informal regulations and resource mobilization. STBM defines ‘total sanitation’ based on five pillars that
communities need to achieve: 1) open defecation free, 2) hand washing with soap, 3) household water
supply and food management, 4) household waste management, and 5) household wastewater
management. The TA support was focused on pillars 1 and 2.

1.3. Rationale for the TA: Building on Past Engagement
6.        MoH acknowledged that scaling-up the STBM approach would require qualified government
staff to facilitate consumer choice and community action, and to achieve multi-stakeholder cooperation
at all levels of government. Comprehensive capacity building was therefore needed on a national scale.
To this end, in 2009 the national STBM Secretariat was founded and has been nurtured by MoH since
2012. Following the results achieved in East Java under TSSM (see Box 1), MoH requested TA from WSP
to strengthen the STBM Secretariat and develop a nationwide monitoring and evaluation system for
sanitation.




7
  Shifting from from supply to CDD was introduced since 1993 through WSSLIC program. However, linking the demand to
sanitation market and government institution was done by TSSM approach and formally adopted by the Government in 2008
through STBM.
8
 Statistics Indonesia in STBM Indonesia. Trend Rumah Tangga dengan Akses Sanitasi Layak 1993-2011 Relatif Terhadap
Pencapaian MDGs. http://stbm-indonesia.org/?page=tentang-stbm&command=stbm&id1=116
9
  A community is considered ODF when: 1. All community households defecate and dispose of infant feces only into improved
latrines (including at schools). 2. No human feces are visible in the environment. 3. The community uses sanctions, rules, or
other means to check and prevent OD by anyone. 4. The community is using a monitoring mechanism to measure gains in
household access to improved sanitation. ODF Verification refers to a system of physical inspection of a community by
outsiders to assess whether the community is ODF in accordance with the criteria above. A community that fulfills the criteria is
said to be ODF certified.


                                                              16
Box 1: TSSM Results

The TSSM project, implemented from 2008 to 2011, encouraged and invited district governments in East Java to
scale up the STBM approach. 28 of 29 heads of districts submitted their written request for the TA and pledged
their commitment to increase ODF hamlets from 870 to 6,266. As a result, an additional 1.4 million people gained
access to improved sanitation, with 2,199 communities becoming ODF. Community investment was five times that
of local government and the local sanitation market was expanded, with local entrepreneurs selling more than
15,000 toilets in 2009-2011, generating revenue of USD 1.3 million. The commitment and capacity of local
governments were key factors in this success.

7.      The TA scale-up strategy was to apply the capacity developed and lessons learned in East Java to
Indonesia’s five most populous provinces: West Java, Central Java, East Java, Bali, and West Nusa
Tenggara This would be achieved via the STBM Secretariat and government programs such as the World
Bank-financed PAMSIMAS.

2. Objectives of the Technical Assistance
8.       The development objective of the TA was to strengthen the capacity of national and local
institutions in up to five provinces to implement STBM through demand creation, supply improvement
and strengthening the enabling environment.

9.      The TA covered four areas:
a. Capacity building of the STBM Secretariat: Strengthen the Secretariat to guide the scaling up of
   STBM nationwide, using funding from the Government of Indonesia and development partners.
b. Monitoring system for rural sanitation: Support the development of a nationwide rural sanitation
   performance benchmarking and monitoring system for district governments, using Joint Monitoring
   Program (JMP)-aligned definitions.
c. Capacity building at provincial and district level: Strengthen the role of provincial government in
   coordinating district-level implementation of STBM through various projects including PAMSIMAS
   and PNPM Generasi Plus; and develop provincial and district resources for scaling-up CLTS,
   sanitation marketing and strengthening the enabling environment in up to five provinces.
d. Evidence-based BCC development and implementation: Develop a new campaign and tools and
   build local government capacity in, and ownership of, sanitation and handwashing promotion using
   evidence-based research on behavior change communication (BCC).

10.     Complementing this TA were two smaller TAs, each with a specific, narrower focus: Rural
Sanitation Market Creation (P143165) and Institutionalization of Rural Sanitation Capacity Building
(P132118), both of which closed in 2015. Details of the linkage between the three TAs are provided in
Annex 1, while a summary of the timeline of the TA is in Annex 2.

11.     Table 1 summarises achievements against the intermediate outcomes of the TA, and associated
indicators, as stated in the project concept note (PCN). Chapter 3 provides further details of the results
achieved.



                                                      17
Table 1: Key Intermediate Outcomes and Indicators
   Intermediate Outcome                     Indicators                         Achievements

Client capacity increased
Well-functioning STBM            Baseline                           Achieved
Secretariat in coordinating       Secretariat just founded         Secretariat hosted under the Basic
STBM implementation              Target                             Sanitation and Water Health
nationwide.                       Secretariat's organizational     Division (PASD), with one staff and
                                     structure formalized           administrative support assigned and
                                  Work plan developed and          functioning well.
                                     implemented
                                  Effective coordination role in
                                     developing capacity building
                                     modules and
                                     implementation guidelines.
                                     Best practices regularly
                                     disseminated
Local government capacity in     Baseline                           Achieved
implementing STBM through         Local governments only           Within the five provinces targeted
demand creation, supply              focus on implementing one      for TA support, sanitation
improvement and enabling             component of STBM              entrepreneurs work in partnership
environment increased.               (demand creation/CLTS)         with district governments.
                                 Target
                                  Local governments                Enabling environment improved in
                                     implement three                all provinces. Includes improved
                                     components (demand,            monitoring, enhanced capacity and
                                     supply, enabling               comprehensive planning and
                                     environment)                   budgeting for all three STBM
                                     comprehensively as             components.
                                     reflected in the ministerial
                                     decree
More effective STBM              Baseline                           Achieved
implementation at both            Appropriate monitoring           CLTS triggering scaled up from 5,335
district and provincial level.       system is not in place         villages to 7,433 villages in five
                                  Low ODF achievement rate         provinces; ODF achievement rate
                                     in villages where CLTS         increased from 20% in 2012 to 30%
                                     triggering takes place (<      in 2015 and 1,945 sanitation
                                     20%)                           entrepreneur candidates trained.
                                  No trained sanitation
                                     entrepreneurs in all five
                                     provinces, except East Java


                                                   18
   Intermediate Outcome                   Indicators                        Achievements

                               Target
                                Utilization of monitoring
                                   system;
                                increase in number of
                                   villages triggered and in ODF
                                   achievement rate;
                                   sanitation entrepreneurs
                                   trained; active and
                                   mechanism for replication
                                   developed


12. The TA was carried out through a variety of methodological approaches, including:
     Consultative and participatory meetings with central and provincial stakeholders to develop the
        work plan of the STBM Secretariat and an intervention plan for the five provinces;
     Provision of 1-2 consultants in each province as provincial coordinators to work hand- in-hand
        with provincial governments in developing a work plan and intervention strategy;
     Setting up a pool of consultants with specialist expertise in monitoring and evaluation, BCC and
        sanitation marketing, and institutional capacity building to work closely with the STBM
        Secretariat and to back-stop provincial coordinators;
     Periodic ‘horizontal’, peer-to-peer learning opportunities between the district implementers
        within provinces and among provinces to enable best practice to be shared and replicated in
        real time (rather than at the end of an intervention);
     Close coordination with investment projects, particularly PAMSIMAS (the health component),
        but also PNPM Generasi, and other interventions funded by donor agencies such as UNICEF,
        PLAN Indonesia, Simavi and IUWASH, both at central and provincial levels to ensure well-
        coordinated implementation.



3. Key Results and Achievements
13.    This section provides further details of the achievements of the TA in delivering the
Intermediate Outcomes summarised in Table 1.

3.1.   Intermediate Outcome 1: Well-functioning STBM Secretariat set up to co-ordinate
       STBM implementation nationwide
14.      The TA strengthened the Secretariat’s technical and operational capacity and it successfully
facilitated STBM implementation nationwide. Table 2 outlines what the TA has achieved against this
intermediate outcome while Box 2 summarises the various regulations, guidelines and knowledge
products resulting from the TA overall.




                                                 19
Table 2: Achievements against Intermediate Outcome 1

  Baseline          Targets                                  Achievements
Secretariat  Secretariat’s          Achieved.
just founded organizational         Secretariat hosted under the Basic Sanitation and Water Health
             structure formalized   Division (PASD) and one staff and administrative support
                                    assigned.

                                    Proposed relocation of STBM Secretariat under General
                                    Directorate of Public Health (following MoH restructuring) is
                                    expected to strengthen and leverage its position to mainstream
                                    and facilitate STBM implementation nationwide.

              Work plan developed   Achieved.
              and implemented       A work plan and budget for the STBM Secretariat has been
                                    developed. Not all activities in the work plan have been included
                                    in the MoH annual budget, but most can be implemented using
                                    the Secretariat’s own resources and with support from other
                                    partners, including WSP for capacity building and M&E, and
                                    UNICEF for basic operating costs.

             Effective co-          Achieved.
             ordination of the      The Secretariat has effectively co-ordinated the development of
             development of         modules and guidelines with support from the MoH, local health
             modules and            offices and STBM partners.
             guidelines
                                    The Secretariat published a roadmap for program acceleration
                                    from 2013-2015; a technical implementation manual; six
                                    modules (5 accredited training modules and 1 M&E module and
                                    guideline); a STBM district-wide implementation guideline for
                                    the PAMSIMAS project; and e-learning instruments for capacity
                                    building.

             Best practices well    Achieved.
             disseminated           Dissemination has been achieved both face-to-face and via
                                    media, both online and offline. Ouputs included:
                                    - National Co-ordination Meetings in 2011 and 2014


                                                20
     Baseline              Targets                                             Achievements
                                                -    Learning events
                                                -    Policy briefs and other guidance material
                                                -    Dissemination of BCC campaign materials (Plung jadi Plong,
                                                     STBM kaleidoscope, testimonial video, sanitation marketing
                                                     standard operation procedures) plus advocacy books,
                                                     posters, and booklets. The Secretariat encouraged local
                                                     government replication and local specific adaptation of BCC
                                                     and advocacy material. A list of publications appears in Box 2
                                                     and is also available online at www.stbm-indonesia.org


15.     When the TA started, the Secretariat was outside the MoH structure, 100% donor-funded and
managed informally. This contributed to slow progress and limited adoption of the newly promoted
STBM approach by local government as well as weak ownership of the MoH to carry out the approach.
During a series of consultative meetings to initiate the TA in 2012, consensus was reached that the
STBM Secretariat would be best hosted and directly managed by MoH. MoH accordingly allocated
limited resources from its regular budget, assigning one officer as Coordinator, recruiting administrative
staff and providing the necessary office space and facilities. The TA then provided a pool of experts10 to
support the Secretariat in carrying out its key functions, which were to:

     Provide clear, strategic and structured conceptual direction.
     Develop a strategy for scaling up and sustaining monitoring systems
     Review and enhance technical and operational guidelance as necessary
     Co-ordinate the actors implementing STBM
     Monitor progress and disseminate achievements and findings
     Collaborate with other strategic departments in MoH to strengthen and scale up STBM, including
      Human Resources Development Center to strengthen training and education11 and Health
      Promotion Centre to strengthen and scale-up BCC and communication strategy12
     Collaborate with stakeholders to facilitate supply chain strengthening13

16.     The Secretariat is now staffed by seven consultants and coordinated by a government official,
and has regular operational budget, allocated through the Ministry’s budget and also from the MoH
funding of the PAMSIMAS project. One caveat is that allocations from regular budget are bound by the
10
   These include a monitoring and database management specialist, communication and advocacy specialist, a sanitation
marketing specialist, and master trainers/facilitators.
11
   Activities for this function were carried out through P132118.
12
   Earlier, STBM was only implemented by the Environmental Health Department and its vertical units, i.e., provincial/district
environmental health unit and sanitarians at Community Health Centers. By collaboration with the Human Resource unit and
Health Promotion, STBM implementation was also supported by provincial/district health promotion unit, health information
unit, and training centre and health schools.
13
   This activity was supported through P143167.


                                                              21
government general expenditure standard, which often results in below market price remuneration
rates, in particular for very experienced and specialized consultants. Support from development
agencies is thus still expected for non-budgeted activities, innovative ideas, and a small selection of
experts on a time-bound basis.

17.     With restructurization of MoH’s organization, where Environmental Health Department moved
from under Directorate General of Disease Prevention and Environmental Health to Directorate General
of Public Health, the Secretariat’s position will be leveraged and moved from under the Basic Water and
Sanitation Unit to be under the Director of Environmental Health. A Director General’s decree is being
drafted and circulated in May 2016. The new position is expected to strengthen its influence to engage
other public health units such as family health, public nutrition and health promotion and community
empowernment implement STBM program. The organization structure under D.G of Public Health
appears as Annex 3. Some of the most significant activities carried out by the Secretariat include the
following:

   Organizing national STBM co-ordination meetings (biannual events) in 2011 and 2014.
   Developing publications (see Box 2) and supporting the implementation of the nationally accredited
    STBM training curriculum (including e-learning). This included organizing national and provincial
    training and mobilizing MoH funding to expand the pool of master trainers.
   Organizing the national annual review (since 2014) of the integration of STBM into health school
    curricula.
   Supporting the expanded functionality of the national MIS (SMS and web-based) for STBM, including
    the generation of sector reports for use in advocacy.
   Supporting knowledge management and advocacy via a website, social media and face-to-face
    events and fora; includes the dissemination of BCC tools and materials.
   Facilitating collaboration with other platforms such as the PAMSIMAS Secretariat and WASH
    working group.
   Facilitating collaboration between APPSANI (an association of sanitation entrepreneurs), local
    governments and partners on sanitation enterprise training, resulting in 100 entrepreneurs trained
    beyond the five focal provinces.
   Supporting collaboration between APPSANI and the MoH Water and Sanitation Technology Institute
    (BBTKL) for research and development and promotion of sanitation options for swampy/coastal
    areas
   Facilitating collaboration between micro finance institutions, NGOs/partners, and sanitation.
    entrepreneurs to secure household loans for sanitation hardware, resulting in a range of loan
    schemes, including some offered by local government-owned banks in many districts of East Java,
    Central Java and West Java by Water.org through their partnership with Bina Artha Ventura in East
    Java; and by national bank BRI in East Java.

18.     Behavior Change Communication (BCC) has been fundamental to advocate the program and
trigger behavior change. The TA developed BCC products based on an evidence-based and measured
strategy following WSP’s theory of change. Based on formative research, messages and the campaign

                                                  22
design were developed, pre-tested, revised, disseminated and monitored for effectiveness. Local
government then develop their own campaign materials based on this but adjusted to local culture and
using local languages. The utilization of the BCC materials, including budget disbursed, number of
people exposed were captured in the web-based monitoring system. Data is inputted by local
government with support from WSP’s provincial coordinators. This was a fundamental shift from any
previous sanitation campaigns which were centrally designed and procured without pretesting,
feedback mechanisms or adjustments to local culture or languages. Details on the BCC strategy are in
Annex 4.

19.      Another important step forward for STBM implementation was government adoption of the
district-wide approach, and the mainstreaming of this approach in other large-scale national programs.
This is discussed further in section 3.2.


Box 2. Regulations, Guidelines and Other Knowledge Products from the TA14

Government documents

a.   Circular Letter of the Minister of Health No. 132/2013 to all governors on the direction of STBM
     implementation. This letter instructs all districts and cities to monitor sanitation behavior and access;
     stimulate demand through CLTS and sanitation marketing; achieve at least one ODF village annually per sub-
                                                   15
     district primary health center (Puskesmas) ; and build on the ODF status of villages to promote the other
     STBM pillars.
b.   Second revision of the 2013 Health Operation Support Fund guideline, which requests that sub-district primary
     health centers prioritize STBM for sanitation (including leading the CLTS implementation) to support
     achievement of Goal 7 of the MDGs.
c.   Minister of Health Regulation No.3/2014 on STBM, which reaffirms and supersedes Minister of Health Decree
     No. 852/2008 on the National Strategy of STBM. This regulation includes an operational guideline for STBM
     implementation which was developed based on the lessons of the TA. As of December 2015, 19 provinces and
     85 districts had issued local regulations on STBM.
d.   Roadmap to accelerate STBM 2013-2015, MoH, 2013.

Other products
e.   Training modules: Sanitation Entrepreneurship Training, WSP, 2014; 5 accredited classical training modules; 4
     e-learning modules on STBM, MoH, 2013
f.   Manuals: STBM Technical Implementation Manual, MoH, 2013; STBM verification book, MoH, 2013; M&E
     Guideline and starter kits, WSP, 2013; Sanitation Entrepreneurship Training, WSP, 2014
g.   Printed advocacy materials: STBM Advocacy pocket book, WSP, 2012; 34 province sanitation profiles, WSP,
     2015; Coffee table book on STBM, WSP, 2015
h.   Advocacy videos: Plung jadi Plong, WSP, 2013; STBM Kaleidoscope, MoH, 2014; SURS program in Pacitan,
     KSAN, and STBM Coordination Meeting, WSP, 2013-2014.


14
   Document (a) to (h) are available at www.stbm-indonesia.org, document (i) is available at www.wsp.org, while documents (j)
and (k) are available offline.
15
   There are around 9,000 sub-district health centers in Indonesia.


                                                             23
i.   Learning Note: Scaling up Indonesia’s Rural Sanitation Mobile Monitoring System Nationally, WSP, 2014.
j.   Research: Hygiene and Sanitation Behavior, WSP, 2013; Managing the flow of monitoring information to
     improve rural sanitation in East Java, WSP, 2013; Rapid Nee d Assessment of PAMSIMAS’ Capacity Building,
     2015;
k.   Advocacy and BCC tools developed by local government, including: STBM kaleidoscope in West Java; Kang
     Hebring in West Java.




3.2.      Intermediate Outcome 2: Local government capacity in implementing STBM through
          demand creation, supply improvement and enabling environment increased


Table 3: Achievements against Intermediate Outcome 2

       Baseline            Targets                                 Achievements
Local government      Local government     Achieved
focuses on            implement all        Enactment of Minister of Health Regulation No.3/2014 on
implementing a        three                STBM and adoption of the district-wide approach provided
single component      components           clear guidance on the STBM demand-supply-enabling
of STBM (demand       (demand, supply,     environment strategy and demarcation of roles, functions
creation / CLTS       enabling             and expected outcomes for stakeholders at all levels.
implementation)       environment) as
                      reflected in the     By December 2015:
                      ministerial decree   -   85 districts and 19 provinces had issued local regulations
                                               to support STBM
                                           -   3 districts and 1 city in East Java were verified as ODF
                                           -   Efforts to mainstream local government support and
                                               scale up STBM implementation had been promoted via
                                               MoH and a range of other associations and networks
                                               including AKKOPSI (a national association of mayors), an
                                               association of sanitation entrepreneurs, health schools,
                                               mass media, local NGOs and the private sector.


20.   When STBM was adopted as a national strategy in 2008, there were initially some challenges to
implementation at scale, including:

     -    Inconsistent and poor quality implementation of program methodology. Triggering, for example,
          which is fundamental to the CLTS process, was often not understood, neglected or done badly.




                                                      24
     -   Misunderstanding of STBM principles and definitions. An example here was ODF verification, at
         a term which was widely misinterpreted, with local players regarding it as simply confirmation
         that triggering had taken place.
     -   Inconsistent sequencing of activities. Product promotion by sanitation entrepreneurs was
         sometimes carried out before CLTS triggering, when it should be done afterwards to capitalize
         on the demand created.

These issues affected the results of promotional interventions and gave rise to doubts about the
effectiveness of the STBM approach.

21.     In response, the TA assisted MoH in developing a capacity building framework (see Figure 1) for
the various actors involved in STBM implementation. The first steps were to define the roles and
responsibilities of key institutions at each stage of the STBM process which was done through series of
consultative meetings with MoH and selected local governments, as well as through field visit and
document review. It was then followed by identifying guidance, existing training modules developed by
various organizations and experience from earlier interventions. The draft framework was reviewed by
the Legal Unit of MoH and finally issued as MoH Regulation No. 3/2014.16

22.      Following the transformational changes in rural sanitation service delivery, the methods for
capacity building were designed not only to cover required training but also to anchor the training
within the existing government education system and MoH human resources development, coupled
with additional outreach channels to match the needs of various actors. Providing a pool of experts to
support national government to design and develop its program strategy, M&E system, advocacy and
communication tools; implanting 1-2 provincial coordinators within provincial health offices to
mainstreaming STBM at local level; developing an accredited curriculum and modules for STBM
implementers, both in-service and pre-service; expanding networks for sanitation entrepreneurs; and
providing expertise to master the training were among the areas of support provided by the TA. The TA
provided substantive material and helped the Secretariat engage with other agencies such as donor
agencies, NGOs, Health Promotion Units and Human Resources Unit of MoH to collaboratively develop
tools for capacity building. This collaboration was very fruitful, not only to strengthen methods, contents
and budget efficiency, but also to ensure widespread reception and adoption of the framework.




16
  The regulation has higher legal status than the decree that had guided implementation of STBM since 2008 (MoH Decree No.
852/2008).


                                                           25
                                         Figure 1: STBM Capacity Building Framework



23.     The enactment of Minister of Health Regulation No. 3/2014 created a formal obligation for
related institutions to apply the STBM approach, and in some cases this regulation was complemented
by the adoption of local instruments achieved through persistent strategic advocacy done by
provincial/district health offices supported by STBM Secretariat and STBM-supporting agencies and
consultants.17

24.      A further important milestone of the TA was the establishing of a ‘district-wide approach’ which
was subsequently adopted by government and mainstreamed in other large-scale national programs
such as PAMSIMAS (II and III) from 2013 onwards and the Community-Based Health and Nutrition to
Reduce Stunting Project of the Millennium Challenge Account-Indonesia (MCA-I), implemented under
the national PNPM Generasi Program 18 (PNPM Generasi) from 2014. This marked a strategic shift from
project-specific interventions towards a programmatic approach that embedded implementation within
government structures, thereby utilizing government resources. The successful implementation of this
approach through STBM in five focus provinces has provided strong evidence on how to implement and
deliver, and hence convinced MoH to adopt this approach to be implemented across its rural sanitation
programs nationally. Table 4 highlights the key differences between project and district-wide approach.
The district-wide approach is expected to expedite the achievement of universal access to sanitation by

17
   Including provincial/district regulations, regulations, instructions, decrees and circular letters of governors, district heads and
mayors, and village regulations.
18
   PNPM (Community Empowerment National Program) Generasi is a national program that aims to address certain lagging
human development outcomes and accelerate attainment of the MDGs on maternal and infant mortality, universal primary
education and poverty reduction.




                                                                 26
2019 and has also been adopted by other development agencies including UNICEF, SIMAVI and Plan
International.

Table 4: The STBM District-Wide Approach as adopted by PAMSIMAS 3
                                                                                Programmatic/District Wide
               Aspect                         Project Approach
                                                                                Approach under PAMSIMAS3
                                                                            All villages within a district in
Intervention site                    Selected villages only                 planned stages
                                                                            Village volunteers/cadre led by
Front liners                         Project hired-facilitators             Sanitarian
                                                                            Demand, Supply, Enabling
Intervention focus                   CLTS                                   Environment

                                     Community facilitators /               Sanitarians, district officers, online
Data collection for M&E                                                     through STBM website
                                     consultants (project hired)
Consultant/project role              Project implementer                    Partner and enabler
                                                                            Various sources, with project budget
Funding                              Project budget                         as supplement only
                                                                            Coordinated by health office
Institutions involved                Local health offices only              involving others, including
                                                                            entrepreneurs and MFIs




25.     STBM implementation is now a priority for local governments. As evidence of this, progress by
2015 included the following:

a. 85 out of 514 districts, and 19 out of 34 provinces, had issued local regulations to support STBM.
b. Three districts (Pacitan, Magetan and Ngawi) and one city (Madiun), all in East Java, achieved
   district-wide ODF status in 2014. To accelerate ODF, the STBM Secretariat initiated a national
   network meeting in 2014 attended by local governments. With support from the TA, a collaboration
   of about 20 districts and the Alliance of District and Cities Concerned on Sanitation (AKKOPSI) were
   initiated to accelerate the achievement of ODF districts and cities.
c. 119 districts and cities in the five focus provinces allocated IDR 73 billion (USD 5.6 million) from local
   budget to mainstream STBM using a comprehensive approach involving CLTS, sanitation marketing,
   training in monitoring, production of BCC tools, implementation of BCC events and establishment of
   a reward mechanism for extension workers (sanitarians).19 However, changing of government
   officers and policy might affect the amount contributed for STBM annually. For example, in NTB the
   allocation in 2015 decreased following rotation of the head of District Planning office, the champion
   of STBM, to another post. In Central Java, following national advice for “tight budget policy?, local
   government responsed by decreasing budget for sectors that might have other potential source of
   funding, such as STBM (see Figure 2).
19
     Local budget is derived from various sources, including local revenue, balance revenue, and fiscal transfer.


                                                              27
d. More than 500 people from all provinces completed STBM e-learning and received certificates, with
   a 92% completion rate for mandatory modules and 55% for optional modules. Frequent promotion
   and advice by MoH to encourage local health offices, sanitarians and consultants to complete the
   learning accelerated these achievement rates. Placing the e-learning icon in the STBM website has
   also encouraged public stakeholders to take the course. However, expansion to non-STBM partners
   was still limited.
e. All MoH health schools in 24 provinces were teaching the STBM curriculum (including mandatory
   student field work for two months) in collaboration with local governments. In total more than
   1,500 students had been enrolled since 2014.
f. Local public-private partnerships on STBM had expanded, engaging inter-governmental agencies,
   private companies through their CSR initiatives, and local and international NGOs.
g. APPSANI and its provincial branches were partnering with the STBM Secretariat and local
   governments in the five focus provinces to support supply chain strengthening activities. APPSANI
   provided services to members and local governments, including training, updating the accredited
   training program, providing information on sanitation technologies for specific contexts, and
   facilitating access to finance. This facilitated the active engagement 270 active entrepreneurs who
   built more than 60,000 toilets across 65 districts.


                                     Provincial Level Budget for STBM in Five Provinces Over Past Four Years

                                   1,600                                                                                      1,486

                                   1,400
     Budget Allocation each year




                                   1,200
           (x 1,000 USD)




                                   1,000

                                    800                                                                      758
                                                                                                                            631
                                                                                            535                 565
                                    600
                                                                                                                        477
                                                                                       359
                                    400              293                         265271                  249
                                    200                128                                             129            108
                                             43 52
                                                                3 14 17 27
                                      -
                                                 NTB                Bali            East Java          Central Java    West Java
                                                                                  Province

                                                             2012      2013       2014          2015



                                     Figure 2: Provincial budget for STBM over four years in five focus provinces



                                                                           28
26.       Table 5 summarises the numbers and categories of people trained under the TA.

Table 5: Number of people reached through training

No         Instrument     Activities                         Number of People Reached

1.         BCC            Workshop at national level         4 provinces; 100 people
                          Workshop in province level         4 districts; 250 people

2.         Demand         STBM ToT (triggering) for          248 people: 219 district consultants and
           Creation       district facilitators and          29 provincial coordinators in the
                          provincial coordinators in the     PAMSIMAS project.
                          PAMSIMAS project.
                          STBM training (Triggering) for     In 2010 - 2015, 3,693 people in the five
                          environment and health             provinces were trained (East Java: 1,326,
                          officers, sanitarians, midwifes,   Bali: 277, NTB: 575, West Java: 623,
                          nurses, and natural leaders /      Central Java: 892).
                          village cadres.                    Funded by: National and local
                                                             governments, WSP WB and other NGOs.

3.         M&E            Coaching to maintain the STBM      25 participants
                          M&E system for STBM
                          Secretariat staff (MoH)
                          STBM M&E training in the 5         Participants involved:
                          provinces                            - 19 people at province level
                                                               - 236 people at district/city level
                          ToT at national level              Participants involved:
                                                               - 7 people at national level
                                                               - 65 people at province level
                          Post national training: coaching - 55 training events, involving 1,560 people
                          and additional support             in 34 provinces.
                                                             433 events, involving 9,750 sanitarians in
                                                             433 districts/cities.
                          Updating data                      6,221 sanitarians in 433 districts/cities
                                                             updated data via the SMS/Smart
                                                             monitoring system.
     4.    Sanitation     Sanitation entrepreneurship        Number of training events: 52
           Marketing      training events                    Participants: 1,945 people

                          Post training support: coaching    Number of active entrepreneurs: 273
                          and additional support             people working in 65 districts
                                                             Number of masons involved in the
                                                             business process: 764 people


                                                     29
30
3.3.     Intermediate Outcome 3: More effective STBM implementation at provincial and
         district Level
Table 6: Achievements against Intermediate Outcome 3

       Baseline                  Targets                                       Achievements
Appropriate                Use of monitoring Achieved
monitoring system          system, increase    According to STBM M&E data (www.stbm-
is not in place, less      in number           indonesia.org/monev), the five provinces achieved the
effective triggering       villages triggered, following results:
process (ODF rate          increase in ODF
                                                Before 2012, there were 5,335 triggered villages; from
below 20%), no             achievement
                                                    2012 to 2015, 7,443 villages were triggered, an
sanitation                 rate, sanitations
                                                    increase of 140%.
entrepreneurs in           entrepreneur
                                                In 2012, there were 720 verified ODF villages. By
the provinces,             emerged and
                                                    December 2015, there were an additional 2,370, an
except in East Java        replicated
                                                    increase of 370%.
                                                The average ODF achievement rate in the triggered
                                                    villages was 29%.
                                                Eight million people in the five WSP-supported
                                                    provinces gained access to improved latrines from
                                                    2012 to 2015, of which 2.7 million were in 7,433
                                                    newly-triggered villages, 2.49 million were in 12,085
                                                    non-triggered villages,20 and 2.84 million were in 5,335
                                                    villages that had been triggered before 2012.
                                                52 sanitation entrepreneur training courses in five
                                                    provinces attended by 1,945 candidates, of whom 273
                                                    became active entrepreneurs selling 63,760 improved
                                                    latrines worth IDR 90 billion (USD 7 million) since 2010.



Improved monitoring
27.      The Government of Indonesia realized that the lack of reliable data on sanitation access and
behavior was an obstacle to developing, implementing and mobilizing funding for a rural sanitation
program. In 2009, under the previous TA, an SMS-based monitoring system was piloted in two districts
in East Java. The pilot found that the progress towards ODF status and data on household access could
be collected via SMS and stored in a database at district level.
20
  These villages may have seen a natural increase in sanitation access, even without CLTS triggering. This can be the result of
extended promotion of sanitation marketing, exchange of information between villagers or between village government and
neighboring villages, general awareness of sanitation due to mass media coverage, gradually changing social norms, and higher
incomes.


                                                              31
28.    Encouraged by the pilot, the MoH decided to scale up, with support from the TA, to a
nationwide monitoring system covering 34 provinces, for which robust server and hosting arrangements
were provided in MoH. The new system was first introduced in the five supported provinces, where the
TA supported the training and coaching of sanitarians and district health officers both in using the
system and analyzing the data, developed user guidelines and advocated use of the findings by local
governments to improve STBM implementation.

29.      Sanitation access rates and ODF status can be followed in real time through through www.stbm-
indonesia.org/monev. The data is presented as tables, graphics, and maps. All website visitors can
access sanitation data down to the village level. The utilization of regular updated and accurate
information has advanced collaboration. For example, district health officers in Brebes used this data for
district planning with the district Planning Agency and district Public Works office. This best practice had
been adopted by Central Java’s health office to harmonize its sanitation data through “one sanitation
data policy? and had been successfully accepted by provincial planning and public works offices.

30.     Consistent capacity building at all levels has increased the effectiveness of the system, utilization
of recorded data, and local government’s capacity plan and improve implementation. Regular
supervision was found to be essential to ensure routine data updates and feedback mechanism were
conducted dilligently and in a constructive manner. The capacity building model for STBM SMS and
Web-based system is illustrated in figure 3.


                                  Dissemina
 Process




             Strengthening                              Proposed           M&E             OJT of SMS
                                    tion of                                                                 Data
            STBM secretariat                                for         training to         system for     updated
                 team
                                     M&E                                                   field officer
                                                         training           LGs
                                   system
 Required
 Capacity




               Manage                                                   Web & SMS           SMS based
                server,                                                 based M&E             M&E
               Advocacy                                                   system             system
                 skill
 Outcomes




            • System well         Awareness & commitment               Readiness to
              managed             developed, indicated by:             coach field         Update data
            • LG well             • baseline data prepared             officer, analysis   through SMS
              assisted            • Data of assigned staffs for        & utilize data
                                    monitoring available.



            Figure 3: Capacity Building Model for nationwide Monitoring System




                                                                  32
31.      Institutional roles and responsibilities for monitoring are now clearly assigned at each level of
government, from sanitarians at community level to health office staff at district level to Secretariat
staff at national level. The monitoring framework is strengthened with input, output and outcome
indicators collected through SMS and web-based components for systematic analysis. These enable real-
time updates, enhanced data analysis, mapping options21 and automation of sector performance
reports. The system provides information not only on sanitation access, but also on STBM budgets at
local level, training activities and sales by sanitation entrepreneurs. STBM data is widely disseminated
and used by various stakeholders as an advocacy tool to address policy makers. One very useful
innovation has been for the Secretariat and local government to incentivize data collection and
reporting through a ‘Top 20 sanitarians’ system (see Annex 5).

32.     Monitoring has helped to improve the quality of STBM implementation through mechanisms for
direct feedback between program managers and implementers, not only to increase quantity and
quality of data but also to increase data usage. Brief information on STBM feedback mechanism appears
as Annex 5. To support a district-wide approach towards universal access to water and sanitation, the
system was adapted to encompass data entry on rural water supply, for which access is being scaled up
through the PAMSIMAS project.

Acclerated growth in access to sanitation
33.      Table 7 shows that access to improved sanitation in the five provinces increased by 2.57% per
year over the period 2012-2015, more than the national average increase of 1.61%, while access to
permanent improved sanitation (meaning pour-flush toilets) increased by 1.68% per year, compared to
a national average of 1.12%.22 Similarly Table 8 shows that the ODF conversion rate was higher in the
five focal provinces (29%) than in the country as a whole (23%).

Table 7: Increased access to improved sanitation by province

                                   Baseline (%)                    End line (%)               Increase per year (%)
        Province
                           Permanent       Total Access     Permanent      Total Access     Permanent       Total Access
West Java                        45.42            64.45           48.27            69.91           0.95               1.82
Central Java                     45.97            69.55           53.55            78.42           2.53               2.96
East Java                        47.67            72.46           53.87            80.49           2.07               2.68
W. Nusa Tenggara                 41.62             59.4           50.34            74.84           2.91               5.15
Bali                             74.31            88.11            75.9            89.19           0.53               0.36
Five Provinces                   47.02             69.4           52.09            77.11           1.69               2.57
National                         33.72            53.48           37.09            58.32           1.12               1.61




21
     Including an overlay map and data of the PAMSIMAS project.
22
     The distribution curve is an average based on population average at the baseline in 2012 and end line in 2015.


                                                                 33
Table 8: Comparison of STBM progress implementation in the five focus provinces and nationally

              Total        Triggered          ODF Villages        ODF Verified         Verified +
             Villages       villages                                                   document
                          No.        %        No.        %        No.        %        No.       %
  Five
              24,863     12,778      51      3,988       29      3,376      67       517         15
provinces
 National     80,275     26,383      33      6,771       23      5,052      49       1,036       20



34.      Figures 4 and 5 below show that the WSP-supported intervention triggered 51% of the 24,863
villages targeted, equivalent to 31% of the the national total of 80,275 villages, while nationwide just
33% villages were triggered overall. By the end of 2015, 5,052 villages were verified as ODF of which
3,400 (67%) were in the five focus provinces; and 11 million people gained access to improved latrines,
of which 8 million (73%) were in WSP-supported provinces. WSP support to the Government of
Indonesia therefore made a substantial contribution to Indonesia’s efforts to accelerate sanitation
access. At the same time it should be noted that the TA was unable to monitor access for the bottom
40% of households because there is no specific policy addressing quintile monitoring in Indonesia. This
remains a knowledge gap.




               Figure 4: Overview of STBM intervention achievement in 5 focus provinces




                                                    34
                   Figure 5: Overview of STBM intervention achievement nationwide


4. Lessons Learned and Recommendations
35.     The TA was successful in mainstreaming STBM in development programs at local level, not only
in the five focus provinces but nationwide, through a strengthened STBM Secretariat and national
projects such as PAMSIMAS. The mainstreaming was not limited to the demand creation component
(CLTS), but included sanitation market strengthening and creation of an enabling environment.
Instruments developed by the STBM Secretariat under this TA have been adopted by a range of
government agencies and development partners. Lessons learned from the experience are outlined
below.

4.1.    Lessons learned

1. A capacity building framework to strengthen institutions at all levels is key for scaling up in a
decentralized environment. The framework was developed following transformational changes in rural
sanitation service delivey, through: 1) anchoring capacity building in the existing health schools system,
2) developing a new guideline to implement the capacity building strategy through accredited training,
distance training, and credit point rewards linking to MoH’s human resources system, and 3) shifting the
approach from project-based to district-wide approach. The framework adopted in Indonesia clearly
defined roles and skill requirements then developed capacity through a mix of conventional training and
e-learning, backed by a solid monitoring and evaluation system which revealed trends in operational
performance, enabling government and TA providers to revise operational approaches and capacity
building interventions where necessary. The accreditation of training courses was particularly useful, as
it helped to ensured that an acceptable quality of training was achieved and maintained.

2. Well-crafted advocacy and communications are valuable for disseminating tested approaches and
facilitating their adoption at scale. Evidence-based and data-backed up advocacy materials and

                                                   35
carefully designed communication channels and events through formative study and collaboration with
local and national government were keys to smooth adoption of the approach by local government.
Local government commitment to the district-wide approach was boosted via national fora including
national coordination meetings, and occasional international learning visits which provided vision and
inspiration to policy makers. Periodic national and regional meetings also helped to motivate local
actors, facilitate the sharing of lessons and ensure a consistent operational approach.

3. Engagement of a range of institutions also strengthens campaign outreach. Beyond the usual
Environmental Health Unit in charge of sanitation, collaboration with the Center for Health Promotion
and the Center for Public Communication at national level leveraged their technical expertise and mass
media resources access for promoting the STBM approach. Furthermore, it increased funding and
human resource deployment for rural sanitation at national and local levels.

4. An effective monitoring system is invaluable and it use should be formally integrated into the
routine operations of government agencies. The STBM Secretariat played a key role in ensuring the
regular collection and submission of data to the MIS and – importantly – use of the data to inform
planning, decision making and advocacy. The effective operation of the MIS was underpinned by a two
key features:
   formal appointment of district M&E account holders by the head of the health office; and
   user-friendly processes and outputs which were set out in standard operating procedures - including
    explicit feedback loops between operational tiers to ensure that the information generated was
    communicated and acted upon, and data validation processes which were partly
    built into the MIS itself but supplemented by spot checks in the field.

5. Local government can help to develop the rural sanitation market. In the WSP-supported provinces,
the supply side of STBM implementation benefitted from partnerships established between local
government and local micro-finance institutions. This encouraged and enabled local sanitation
entrepreneurs to start working directly with rural communities, following up swiftly after CLTS triggering
events to capitalize on the demand generated for sanitation products and services. Ongoing support
from the Sanitation Entrepreneurs Association helped these actors to improve their operations and stay
engaged.

6. The scaling up tested approaches can be enhanced greatly through their incorporation into
established programmes. While the TA focused primarily on five provinces, the framework and capacity
building provided by the TA covered all provinces through the STBM Secretariat. With adoption of the
district-wide approach by PAMSIMAS, which has been accepted as national platform for rural water and
sanitation, the path to nation-wide implementation is now well established. The PAMSIMAS Interim
Implementation Completion Report found that by mid-June 2015, an additional 7.6 million people had
gained access to improved sanitation facilities, exceeding the programme target by 0.2 million (2.7%).
This target had earlier been revised downward to 3.4 million, which was thought to be a more realistic




                                                   36
level of ambition, but was increased to 7.4 million following the introduction of the district-wide
approach.23

4.2.      Recommendations

36.     Lessons from the TA program are already mainstreamed in the next phase of TA24, which will
support PAMSIMAS 3 and other platforms to implement the government’s rural water and sanitation
strategy, which is aligned with the Law No. 23/2014 on Local Government, Law No. 6/2014 on Villages,
and Government Regulation No. 122/2015 on Water Service Delivery. The World Bank team will
continue to support the Government of Indonesia to achieve universal access of sanitation in 2019
through strengthening the STBM Secretariat, collaboration with AKKOPSI, supporting supply side
through APPSANI, and more intensive strengthening of local governments to implement district-wide
STBM through PAMSIMAS. Integration of lesson learned has already been initiated in close collaboration
with the PAMSIMAS task team, including in improving training curriculum and methods of delivery for
PAMSIMAS facilitators, integrating web and smart-phone data base, and developing strategic advocacy
and dissemination materials for PAMSIMAS. Some initiatives to collaboratively support the World Bank’s
engagement in the rural sanitation sector have also been (and will continue to be) conducted. The TA
engaged PNPM colleagues to introduce stunting issues in a number of workshops. A number of
discussions and data sharing with the PSF team have also been conducted to elaborate on a more
effective strategy supporting the Government in achieving universal access to sanitation.

37.      Scaling up will, in addition, benefit from clear demarcation of the roles and responsibilities of
STBM stakeholders at national and local level and strong local government ownership, which has led to
the institutionalization of STBM within local government processes.

38.   The following recommendations are offered to further enhance STBM implementation from the
Government’s side:

         Following institutional changes within the Ministry, MoH should accelerate relocation the STBM
          Secretariat directly under the Director of Environmental Health and enhance coordination and
          collaboration with other parts of the Directorate General of Public Health including the Health
          Promotion Unit, Public Communications, and the Agency for Development and Empowerment
          Human Resources of Health (PPSDM). Collaboration on nutritional interventions should also be
          pursued given the close association between poor sanitation and nutritional stunting.

         While the current STBM MIS does not specifically monitor access among poorer households, the
          affordability of improved sanitation facilities is known to be a constraint. Beyond MoH,
          therefore, the STBM Secretariat should also collaborate with social sector programs to ensure

23
   Interim Implementation Completion and Results Report, The Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low-Income Communities
(PAMSIMAS) Project, The World Bank, 30 June 2015.
24
   See Project concept Note P158934, which consists of three components: (i) Strengthening Policy and Institutional Capacity of
Government; (ii) Support to Public Sector for Last-Mile Service Delivery; and (iii) Innovations in Private Sector Service Delivery
and Finance


                                                               37
          better inclusion of the poor and develop knowledge for effective pro-poor support mechanisms.
          A key national program platform to work with is the National Program on Community
          Empowerment (PNPM).

         In collaboration with the Alliance of Districts and Cities Concern on Sanitation (AKKOPSI), MoH
          should continue strengthening advocacy to district and cities leaders to consolidate their
          commitment to STBM as a key intervention to achieving the target of universal access to
          sanitation.

         MOH should strengthen the supply side of STBM, for example by ensuring that support
          structures such as APPSANI (or alternatives) are available at scale. This may entail some or all of
          the following:
          - Expanding capacity building support for entrepreneurs and their marketing agents and
              masons.
          - Further development of affordable technology options for sanitation in challenging
              environments such as rocky or sandy soil.
          - Facilitating loans for entrepreneurs and households, through support from local
              governments and APPSANI, as well as collaboration with other partners

         In collaboration with other related ministries, MoH could explore opportunities for rural
          sanitation development under recently-enacted Village Law whereby village government is
          provided with significant resources for development; this could be done by making ODF status
          one of the village’s key performance indicators.

         Sustainability of STBM Secretariat and continued program’s scaled-up to reach universal access
          of sanitation in 2019 should be strengthened. The Bank is expected to continue support
          innovative ideas through a small selected of experts on a time-bound basis and support for non-
          budgeted nation-wide impact activities, including to reach the bottom 40%, cross sectoral
          collaboration (for example to combat malnutrition and stunting) and strengthen local politics
          support for universal access of sanitation. The link to Bank New TA P-158934 appears as Annex
          7.

39.       For the Bank as part of ongoing operation (PAMSIMAS) and TA:

         In collaboration with the STBM Secretariat and PAMSIMAS team, and based on the experience
          gained with the SMS-based system and the PAMSIMAS MIS, the Bank is expected to explore the
          scope for introducing an interactive, smartphone-based reporting system. This could potentially
          improve the ease and efficiency of monitoring.

         In collaboration with STBM Secretariat and PAMSIMAS team, the Bank is expected to develop
          performance-based incentive schemes for STBM implementers at all levels: province, district
          and sub-district/Puskesmas, to encourage competition and improve the quality and scale of

                                                      38
    STBM implementation. This needs to be done in parallel with expanding the independent
    verification of reported results to avoid over-reporting by individuals.

   Building on the momentum achieved through PAMSIMAS and the sequence of TAs, the
    sustainability of the STBM Secretariat and continued program’s scale-up is required if the
    Government is to reach its ambitious goal of universal access to sanitation by end of 2019. The
    Bank is expected to continue supporting innovative ideas through a small selection of experts on
    a time-bound basis and support for non-budgeted, nation-wide impact activities, including to
    reach the bottom 40%, cross-sectoral collaboration (for example to combat malnutrition and
    stunting), and strengthen local support for universal access of sanitation.




                                              39
                                                                        ANNEXES


                           Annex 1: Relationship between TAs under Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Hygiene in Indonesia


P132007— TA for Scaling up Rural Sanitation
and Hygiene

DO: to strengthen and develop national and local
institutions’ capacity to implement STBM,
through demand creation, supply improvement
and strengthening the enabling environment
                                                                                                      Develop and institutionalize the certification
                                                                                                      system for STBM capacity building

Strengthen the STBM Secretariat in guiding the      P132118— TA for Institutionalization of Rural
scaling up of STBM nationwide, using funding               Sanitation Capacity Building
                                                                                                      Establish standardized indicators and online
from national government and partners
                                                   DO: to integrate capacity building programs for    certification system through e-learning
                                                   management and implementation of STBM
                                                   programs in PPSDM, an institution that is
Support the development of a nationally            mandated and has competencies in HR for            Develop incentive systems for certified rural
applicable rural sanitation program,                                                                  sanitation expertise to further professional
                                                   health (environmental health) development
performance benchmarks, and monitoring
                                                                                                      development
systems for district governments


Strengthen the role of provincial governments         P143167— TA for Rural Sanitation Market         Strengthen the government’s role in implementing
in coordinating districts implementing STBM             Expansion of Domestic Private Sector          STBM, particularly regarding the alignment of
through various projects in five provinces                                                            demand and supply activities
                                                   DO: to expand the rural market reach of rural
                                                   sanitation entrepreneurs by 1) increasing the     Develop an enabling environment for replication of
                                                   number of sanitation entrepreneurs, and 2)        sanitation entrepreneurs by strengthening the
Build local government capacity in and                                                               capacity of the sanitation business association
                                                   strengthening the capacity of these               (APPSANI) to support government and other
ownership of sanitation and handwashing
                                                   entrepreneurs to accelerate expansion             institutions
promotion using evidence-based research of
behavior change communication (BCC)                                                                  Develop local market networks by facilitating linkages
                                                                                                     between sanitation entrepreneurs and other market
                                                                                                     players to improve the business model to better
                                                                                                     serve the poor market segment

                                                                          - 40 -
                       Annex 2: Summary of Timeline of Technical Assistance



      Time                                                 Activity

May 2011             Kick off and launch of TA Scaling Up Rural Sanitation in Indonesia and introduction
                     of Rural Sanitation Capacity Building Framework

June -October 2011   Development of SMS and Web based monitoring system and STBM Operational
                     Guideline

October 2011         STBM National Coordination Meeting and launch of the SMS monitoring system
                     and Operational Guideline by the Minister of Health.

October 2012         Dissemination of the operational guideline to national stakeholders, including
                     donor partners, and agreement to select five provinces for provincial level pilot

December 2011-       Rapid assessment in five provinces
January 2012

February 2012        Workshop to develop the work plan for STBM intervention in five provinces

February 2012-       STBM Implementation in five provinces, which included:
September 2015
                            Strengthening institutions at the provincial level
                            SMS and web based outcome monitoring
                            Sanitation marketing initiative
                            Behavior change communication

January 2013         Scaling up to 32 provinces/219 districts through the PAMSIMAS 2 Project

February 2014        Formalization of the operational guideline as a Minister of Health Regulation

September 2014       Second STBM National Coordination Meeting; national learning event; launch of
                     STBM e-learning, and study visits by three countries.

December 2015        Learning consolidation and roadmap to 80,000 STBM villages

2016-2020            Scaling up to 33 provinces/400 districts through the PAMSIMAS 3 Project




                                                 - 41 -
      Annex 3 Structure of the Directorate General of Public Health of the Ministry of Health




                                                            Directorate
                                                          General of Public
                                                              Health




                                         Secretariat of
                                          Directorate
                                           General




                                                                                                   Directorate of
                        Directorate of                     Directorate of
     Directorate of                                                            Directorate of    Health Promotion
                        Environmental                     Sport and Work
     Family Health                                                            Public Nutrition    and Community
                            Health                             Health
                                                                                                  Empowernment




Main role: to define and implement policy on public health in compliance with prevailing
statutory provisions in Indonesia




                                                              - 42 -
                       Annex 4: Behavior Change Communication Strategy


              Behavior Change Communication Strategy for Scaling Up Rural Sanitation




                                      FEEDBACK
Assess Target’s Behavior             ASSESSMENT                          EFFECTIVE BEHAVIOR
 SURVEY and ANALYSIS                                                          CHANGE
                                                                          COMMUNICATION
                                                                               TOOLS

       MEDIA                                      PILOTING
    DEVELOPMENT




CONSISTENT - SIMPLE LANGUAGE - LOGO - MESSAGE - TARGET - FOCUS - MOTTO




                                              - 43 -
                                      Annex 5: STBM Monitoring Framework

                                   STBM PILLAR-1 MONITORING FRAMEWORK

                                                                                                        REPORTING
                                     DATA                    REPORT                  FORMS/
No.        INDICATOR                                                                                   SYSTEM AND
                                  SOURCE/Who               FREQUENCY              INSTRUMENTS
                                                                                                        DATABASE
      Outcome indicator
1     Number and               Primary health           Monthly                Social mapping;       CBTS web- and
      percentage of            centre staff (based                             latrine observation   SMS-based
      households using         on compilation of                               checklist, LB-1       monitoring
      improved latrines        participatory                                   recapitulation form
                               community
                               monitoring)
2     Number of villages       ODF verification         Quarterly              Linked to LB-1; ODF   CBTS web- and
      in the district that     team                                            verification form;    SMS-based
      are ODF, rechecked                                                       ODF recapitulation    monitoring
      annually after ODF                                                       form
      declaration
      Input and output indicators
1     Number and            Primary health              Monthly                CBTS village          CBTS web- and
      percentage of         centre staff (based                                intervention          SMS-based
      villages that have    on compilation of                                  recapitulation form   monitoring
      received CBTS         participatory
      intervention (either community
      triggering or other   monitoring)
      demand
                   25
      promotion)
2     Time taken to         Primary health              Quarterly              CBTS village          CBTS web- and
      achieve ODF status centre staff (based                                   intervention          SMS-based
      after triggering.     on compilation of                                  recapitulation form   monitoring
                            participatory
                            community
                            monitoring)
4     Number of CBTS        Environmental               Biannual               Capacity building     Web-based
      facilitators who      Health Section,                                    record                monitoring
      have been trained     District Health                                                          system
      to do triggering or   Service
      other demand
      promotion
5     Number of trained     Environmental               Biannual               Capacity building     Web-based
      CBTS facilitators     Health Section,                                    record                monitoring
      who are actively      District Health                                                          system
      engaged in            Service
      triggering or other
      demand promotion
9     District sanitation   Environmental               Annual                 Sanitation program    Web-based
      budget allocation     Health Section,                                    performance           monitoring

25
  Locations that have not received intervention but have been introduced to CBTS can be counted
The operational definition of triggering needs to be given in this manual


                                                           - 44 -
                                                                                                    REPORTING
                                       DATA                  REPORT            FORMS/
No.          INDICATOR                                                                             SYSTEM AND
                                    SOURCE/Who             FREQUENCY        INSTRUMENTS
                                                                                                    DATABASE
         per unserved            District Health                         evaluation             system
         household               Service                                 recapitulation form
10       Proportion of total     Environmental           Annual          Sanitation program     Web-based
         local sanitation        Health Section,                         performance            monitoring
         budget allocated to     District Health                         evaluation             system
         non-construction        Service                                 recapitulation form
         sanitation activities
11       Proportion of           Environmental           Annual          Sanitation program     Web-based
         sanitation budget       Health Section,                         performance            monitoring
         for non-                District Health                         evaluation             system
         construction            Service                                 recapitulation form
         activities used for
         media promotion
         of sanitation


At community, STBM monitoring should be done by and with the participation of the local community,
and with the active participation of natural leaders and community organisations such as the Family
Welfare Movement, dasawisma groups, etc. Sanitarians play an active role as facilitator and catalyst at
the subdistrict/district level in terms of managing the data and information resulting from this
monitoring of environmental health activities. At district level, this monitoring function will be
reinforced by the use of district consultants/facilitators to transfer knowledge and expertise with the
primary health centre personnel/sanitarians and directly with the community (natural
leaders/participating community organisations.

A simple illustration of the implementation of STBM monitoring is show in figure-10. Sanitation access
and ODF status can be followed in real time through through www.stbm-indonesia.org/monev. The data
is presented as tables, graphics, and maps, such as seen in figure A and B below.




                                                                    Figure B: Mapping of ODF Village (www.stbm-
           Figure A: National Map of Sanitation Access
                                                                                   indonesia.org)
     (source: www.stbm-indonesia.org



                                                           - 45 -
                                                  Natural leader/
                                                    Sanitation
                                                   Committee




                                       •   Access                                 3. Budget
                                                                                                Web based
                                       •   ODF status                             4. Training


                                                                               Web based

Figure C: Flow of monitoring and reporting, from community to national level




                                                                               - 46 -
                        Annex 6: Monitoring Feedback Mechanism under STBM

Feedback mechanisms are essential for a well functioning M&E system, as an enabler of flow and use
of data and information. Feedback is both created automatically by the system and through standard
operating procedures by system users. Benefits of feedback and incentive mechanism have been the
following:

   Increased quantity and quality of data

Feedback mechanism through an “autoresponse system? helped to ensure data accuracy and
consistency. Sanitarians receive a realtime status of their inputted data, make any clarification if
needed, and update their data in just a click. As an incentive mechanism, the Top 20 most active
sanitarians in updating data appear on the website as an acknowledgement of their excellence. This has
also triggered competition among puskesmas, distrist, and provinces to update their data.

 An example, is that in West Nusa Tenggara, local government has allocated budget to provide rewards
to districts/cities based on accuracy and consistency of data in STBM website. Data from all levels in 5
provices could be completed only in 11 months using the principle to focus on the flow of data first and
data validation at the later stage.




         Figure D: inconsistent data in website STBM

 Increase Data Usage
On the use and publication of data and simple analytics through various media and events has proved
effective in advocating STBM. Districts have used data and information to gain stronger support for
STBM from other programs/sectors and to get support from the municipal leaders, mayors, or
governors. In districts/cities with comprehensive and high quality data on sanitation access this
information is used for planning and budgeting. Automatic reports, advanced analysis and visualization
feautures of the system were introduced by the TA to increase data-utilization across all districts and
provinces.



                                                       - 47 -
                                                      Annex 7: Link between TA P132007 and P158934


                                                                                                        P1358934— TA Supporting Indonesia in
P132007— TA for Scaling up Rural Sanitation                                                           Achieveing Rura Water Supply and Sanitation
and Hygiene                                                                                                         Services for all

DO: to strengthen and develop national and local                                                     DO: to strengthen the capacity of Government
institutions’ capacity to implement STBM,                                                            of Indonesia’s platform to support national,
through demand creation, supply improvement                                                          district and village-level institutions in providing
and strengthening the enabling environment                                                           sustainable rural water supply and sanitation
                                                                                                     services for all.


Strengthen the STBM Secretariat in guiding the
scaling up of STBM nationwide, using funding
from national government and partners                                                                 Strengthened Institutional capacity of the
P132007— TA for Scaling up Rural Sanitation
                                                                                                      Government
and Hygiene                                                                                           P132118— TA for Institutionalization of Rural
                                                                                                              Sanitation Capacity Building
DO:  to strengthen
Support              and develop
          the development         central and local
                             of a nationally
institutions’ capacity
applicable rural        to implement
                  sanitation  program, STBM -                                                        DO: to integrate capacity building programs for
performance    benchmarks,    and monitoring                                                          Develop and institutionalize the certification
through   demand    creation, supply improvement                                                     management and implementation of STBM
systems                governments
          for districtthe
                                                                  Through PAMSIMAS                    system for STBM capacity building
and  strengthening        enabling environment                                                       programs in PPSDM, an institution that is
                                                                                                      Support to
                                                                                                     mandated     Public
                                                                                                                 and has Sector for Last-Mile
                                                                                                                         competencies         Service
                                                                                                                                        to develop  HR
                                                                                                      Delivery
                                                                                                     for health (environmental health) development
Strengthen the role of provincial governments
in coordinating districts implementing STBM                        Through STBM                       Develop and institutionalize the certification
through various projects in five provinces                                                            system for STBM capacity building
                                                                   Secretariat and
P132007— TA for Scaling up Rural Sanitation                                                           Develop and institutionalize the certification
                                                                   previous engaged
and Hygiene                                                                                           system for STBM capacity building
Build local government capacity in and
                                                                   agencies i.e AKKOSI,               P132118— TA
                                                                                                      Innovations       for Institutionalization
                                                                                                                     in Private                    of Rural
                                                                                                                                Sector Service Delivery
DO:  to strengthen  and develop  central and local                 APPSANI, MFI, etc.                 Develop and     institutionalize
                                                                                                                Sanitation    Capacity the certification
                                                                                                                                        Building
ownership   of sanitation  and handwashing                                                            and Finance
institutions’ capacity to implement  STBM - of                                                        system for STBM capacity building
promotion using evidence-based research
through   demand  creation,  supply improvement                                                      DO:  to integrate
                                                                                                      Develop            capacity building
                                                                                                                and institutionalize         programs for
                                                                                                                                       the certification
behavior change communication (BCC)
and strengthening the enabling environment                                                           management
                                                                                                      system for STBM      capacity buildingof STBM
                                                                                                                      and implementation
                                                                                                     programs
                                                                                                      Develop andin PPSDM,   Outputs
                                                                                                                              an institution
                                                                                                                      institutionalize        that is
                                                                                                                                       the certification
                                                                                                      Develop and
                                                                                                     mandated         institutionalize the certification
                                                                                                                  and  has  competencies    to
                                                                                                      system for STBM capacity building develop HR
                 Inputs                                                                               system   for                   building
                                                                                                                   STBM capacityhealth)
                                                                                                     for health  (environmental              development
                                                                                                      Develop and institutionalize the certification
                                                                         - 48 -                       system for STBM capacity building
P132007— TA for Scaling up Rural Sanitation                                                           Develop and institutionalize the certification
and Hygiene                                                                                           Develop and institutionalize the certification
                                                                                                      system for STBM capacity building
                                                                                                      system for STBM capacity building
DO: to strengthen and develop central and local                                                               — TA
                                                                                                      P132118and
                                                                                                      Develop        for Institutionalization
                                                                                                                   institutionalize            of Rural
                                                                                                                                    the certification
                                    Annex 8: Financial Report P132007



                  Labor                   Travel                       Other                Total Actuals
 FY
            PCN           Actual    PCN            Actual        PCN           Actual      PCN        Actual
2013      297,545         156,408   204,000        163,941      580,435        603,704   1,081,980    924,053
2014       214,500        134,188   150,000        170,519      350,500        612,091    715,000     916,798
2015       158,785        191,323   100,000        173,078      270,500        365,781    529,285     730,182
2016                      205,997                   62,424                     199,619                468,040
Total      670,830        687,916   454,000        569,962     1,201,435   1,781,195     2,326,265   3,039,073


         The approved PCN budget in 28 January 2013 was $2.326 million.
         The actual expenses is $3,039,072, which is 30% over the original, largely because of extension
          of its scope to support PAMSIMAS provinces.




                                                      - 49 -
