ACS16280
Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry
in the Eastern Caribbean
October 2015
$Jo¢
- *2
vil
Hans Jansen  Adam Stern  Eli Weiss
THE WORLD BANK
4   1BRD ?  IDA | WORLD BANK GROUP


﻿
﻿Linking Farmers
and Agro-processors
to the Tourism      Industry
in the Eastern Caribbean
October 2015
THE WORLD BANK
IBRD* -IDA I WORLDBANKGROUP
Hans Jansen * Adam Stern * Eli Weiss


﻿Standard Disclaimer
This volume is a product of staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors
of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Copyright Statement
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable
law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to
reproduce portions of the work promptly.
For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a
request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should
be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW,
Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org
Photo credit: Eli Weiss, World Bank, 2015
Report No: ACS16280


﻿ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This study was produced by a team from the World Bank, led by Eli Weiss (Senior
Rural Development Specialist), with Hans G.P. Jansen (Senior Agriculture
Economist) and Adam A. Stern (Trade and Value Chain Consultant).
The authors would like to thank Piet Werbrouck (Rural Development Consultant),
John G. Perrottet (Global Tourism Lead, GTCDR), Loraine Ronchi (Global
Agribusiness Lead, GTCDR), Nabil M. Chaherli (Program Leader, AFCF2), Ivan
Rossignol (Chief Technical Specialist, GTCDR), Holger A. Kray (Lead Agricultural
Economist, GFADR), and Raha Shahidsaless (Senior Private Sector Development
Specialist, GTCDR) for their guidance and advice during the elaboration of this
paper, as well as Kelly Cassaday (Consultant) for the editing and Kilka Diseflo
GrAfico for the formatting. Laurent Msellati (Practice Manager, GFADR), Sophie
Sirtaine (Country Director, LCC3C), Cecile Thioro Niang (Program Leader,
LCC3C), and Alessandro Legrottaglie (Senior Country Officer, LCC3C) provided
oversight for the work.
Moreover, the authors would like to thank the government representatives and
technical staff of the six visited countries and the staff of the OECS Commission, for
the inputs, advice, and comments provided, and for facilitating the meetings during
the mission, as well as all the people interviewed from the private sector for their
time and valuable contributions.


﻿.                                           ..........
..                                                                       . .  .
jim
aHHH
....s...s
............s
.M  ..........   .......                              s


﻿CONTENTS
Acronyms and Abbreviations            ........................................vi
Executive Summary...........................................vii
I. Introduction            ...................................        .......... 1
II. Findings            ...................................................... 9
1. Competitiveness of OECS agriculture                        ............9........9
2. Marketing of fresh agricultural produce           .........       ...............24
3. Youth involvement in agriculture      .............................27
4. Agro-processing                                    ........................................30
III. Recommendations.           ........................................35
1. Private sector-led aggregation of smallholder produce .......     .........36
2. Advancing farming through the promotion
of young entrepreneurial farmers.........................39
3. Promoting agro-processing          ........................       .........42
IV Laying the ground for concrete interventions   ............        ......... 45
References                                         ....................... ................ 47
V


﻿ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
BAM         Banana Accompanying Measures
CARDI       Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Institute
CET         Common External Tariff
CHTA        Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Association
ESW         Economic and Sector Work
EU          European Union
FAO         Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP         Gross domestic product
HACCP       Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
ICT         Information and communication technology
NGO         Non-governmental organization
OECS        Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
PROPEL      Promotion of Regional Opportunities for Produce through
Enterprises and Linkages
SME         Small and medium enterprise
UWI         University of the West Indies
VAT         Value added tax
WTO         World Trade Organization
Vi


﻿A I
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
States (OECS), a more dynamic, diversified, and entrepreneurial
F or the small island nations of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
agriculture sector, in which farmers and agro-processors benefit
from stronger ties to the tourism industry and wider markets for
their products, could be a strong driver of sustainable development. This
study identifies opportunities to reinforce linkages between domestic agricultural
supply chains and the tourism sector and describes interventions with the greatest                vii
potential to strengthen those linkages. Based on detailed field interviews with a
selected sample of "game changers" in the private sector and building on previous
research, the study focuses on three essential areas for building stronger linkages,
including marketing arrangements, the role of young farmer-entrepreneurs, and the
agro-processing industry. While the OECS is composed of nine member countries,
this study focuses on the following six: Antigua & Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St.
Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines.


﻿Findings
Across OECS countries, demand for food is expanding in volume and variety,
and tourism is an important driver of this growth. Fresh products, which have
the greatest potential to be supplied locally, account for about 60 percent of food
purchased by hotels, and are mostly imported. Locally produced fruits and vegetables
have the greatest potential to substitute for some of the imported produce because of
high local demand, competitive cost of production in some cases, high perishability
of these products, their ability to grow in most OECS countries, and their suitability
for production even on small farms. Some types of fish and seafood also have
potential, while local meat, poultry, and dairy products have limited potential in
the short run. Apart from hotels, the yachting sector has been expanding in recent
years and thus has had an increasing impact on local economies including local
food provisioning. Beyond the tourism sector, linkages between local farmers and
supermarkets are of high importance given the latter's demand for fresh food and
thus the potential to substitute some of its imported food requirement with locally
sourced food
For hotels, especially the large ones, the main barrier to purchasing greater
quantities of local produce and other fresh food is the limited ability of local
farmers to deliver hotels' required quantities and quality of produce in a
timely, consistent, and competitive manner. Most farms are small and lack
the inputs, equipment, infrastructure, and farm management skills (including
production planning, crop management knowledge, and post-harvest handling
capacity) needed to become reliable suppliers. Few producers regard farming as a
business, and most young people do not regard agriculture as a successful career.
Yet the agricultural sector has room for growth and can absorb young farmers-
an important consideration since youth unemployment in OECS countries is on
average almost double the national unemployment rate.
Poor market information and a rudimentary market structure for fresh
produce result in suboptimal market performance. The limited aggregation' in
marketing (such as contract farming and outgrower schemes2) reduces farmers'
access to assured and remunerative markets (and a more stable income), complicates
buyers' purchasing operations, and creates a disincentive to buy locally. Moreover,
Ministries of Agriculture throughout the OECS are actively involved in purchasing
and marketing agricultural produce through marketing board arrangements,
Viii                          1    Aggregators can include traders, wholesalers, agro-processors, larger lead farmers
who buy from small-scale farmers, and producer organizations strong enough
to take on the role of aggregation. Aggregators would enter into commercial
relationships with buyers such as supermarkets, hotels, restaurants, exporters, and
agro-processors.
2   Outgrower schemes or contract farming can be defined as agricultural production
carried out according to a pre-planting agreement in which the farmer commits to
producing a given product in a given manner and the buyer commits to purchasing
it - usually at a guaranteed minimum price.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
typically running at consistent losses, failing to provide remunerative prices to
farmers and crowding out private sector-led marketing activities.
Food losses are high, mainly because most farmers often produce the same
products at the same time, and lack adequate storage facilities. The resulting
surpluses lead to low prices and revenues for farmers, as well as losses. On islands
where marketing boards are mandated to buy all products meeting a minimum
quality standard, large amounts of produce, such as mangoes, tomatoes, and citrus
are ultimately dumped each year.
While several agro-processing initiatives exist, the industry is underdeveloped.
Entrepreneurs need stronger skills and knowledge to develop viable business plans;
establish plants; link with farmers; penetrate new markets; and comply with quality,
food safety standards, and certifications requirements. Difficulties in obtaining
financing on affordable terms limit investments in infrastructure, equipment, and
inputs required in order to achieve a transformational impact.
Recommendations
1. Private sector-led aggregation of smallholder produce
a. Promoting private sector-led aggregation
To address the limited aggregation of smallholder produce-a fundamental
issue in marketing fresh produce-a promising model is a combined production-
marketing system led by the private sector. Under this model, off-takers' purchase
from small-scale producers, providing a market for their produce as well as
additional services such as input supply, financing and technical advice. The off-
taker is compensated (usually in kind) for the support (plus an implicit interest rate)
at harvest when taking possession of the produce. These arrangements-also known
as "contract farming"-help to overcome key constraints faced by smallholders.
Contract farming may be particularly suited for strengthening agriculture-
tourism linkages and meeting demand from the tourism industry for fresh
produce with specific attributes. Small farm sizes should not be an issue, given
that horticulture is largely scale-neutral and is in strong demand from the tourism
industry. Smallholder farmers would produce according to a plan agreed upon with
the aggregator and detailed in a written contract. Besides marketing (purchasing
commodities and providing market information), contracts may cover input supply,
financing, and other services such as technical assistance.
Some producer organizations have the potential to act as aggregators.                                 ix
Although most farmer groups throughout the OECS region are relatively weak, the
best performing ones should be supported in order to achieve this role. Nevertheless,
3   An off-taker is a buyer that agrees through an offtake agreement entered with a
producer to purchase a certain amount of the future production. It is generally
negotiated before investments are made, in order to guarantee a market for
future production and improve chances of obtaining financing for the concerned
investments.


﻿additional private sector actors should be encouraged to step in and assume the
required organizational and aggregation roles. These could be traders, wholesalers,
agro-processors, or larger (lead) farmers who buy from multiple small farmers.
Aggregation schemes and contract farming arrangements should be
facilitated. Such arrangements may contain a matching grant mechanism to
finance competitively selected and financially viable business plans needed in
order to develop adequate aggregation schemes. Business plans could finance: (i)
investments for aggregators (such as transport, storage, post-harvest, or cold chain
facilities) and producers (such as equipment for land preparation and harvesting,
irrigation infrastructure including rain water harvesting, or protected agriculture
structures), and (ii) technical assistance for aggregators on logistics, storage, food
safety, marketing, agronomy, accounting (and so on), and to producers on good
agricultural practices and technologies, climate smart agriculture, innovation, or
post-harvest handling. Rigorous financial analysis of these schemes is crucial for
designing a matching grant structure, as is careful analysis of business plans to
determine eligibility for a grant. Business plans should include a technical description
of the scheme and beneficiaries and analyses of financial viability, market feasibility
and environmental considerations, and ideally, have secured up-front resources
from the financial sector to support the business plan. A matching grant contract
is signed between the project and grant recipient (aggregator). In order to mitigate
the risk of conflict between sellers and buyers, third-party verification or arbitration
can play a constructive role.
b. ICT platform to match supply and demand
Aggregation schemes would also benefit from the use of information and
communication technology (ICT) by collecting data on hotels' demand for fresh
food and matching it with agricultural supply data.
2. Advancing farming through the promotion of young
entrepreneurial farmers
Enabling young entrepreneurial farmers to establish their own innovative
farming enterprises would revitalize the OECS agriculture sector, promoting a
shift from subsistence farming and a focus on traditional exports towards an
increasingly diversified, dynamic, and commercial agriculture with improved
linkages to the tourism sector and the local economy. To realize this shift, there
is a need to (a) identify and sensitize/educate these young farmers and provide
X                             them with the skills and training required for starting and successfully operating
a farming enterprise based on modern technology and climate smart agriculture;
and (b) assist trained young farmers in establishing agricultural enterprises and
marketing their products.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
a. Capacity building and vocational training program
The selection process for the vocational training program would be competitive,
based on previously identified, transparent criteria following the launch
of a local awareness campaign to attract a pool as large as possible. The ideal
candidates would be young individuals aged 16-35, an age group that faces similar
challenges (such as difficulty in obtaining financing), finds it easy to adopt new
technology, and can be motivated to embark on innovative ventures.
The training program would combine technical training in the classroom with
internships or on-the-job training to increase trainees' command of the subject
matter and gain valuable experience. The training program would finance study-
abroad scholarships of practical technical training in agricultural entrepreneurship,
horticulture, plant biology, plant protection and production, climate smart
agriculture, agriculture logistics, value chains, business, marketing, and ICT,
followed by internships on farms that employ modern agricultural techniques.
Program participants would be mentored throughout the training program, and
a network of program participants would be established to develop contacts and
promote information sharing.
b. Program for enterprise start-up
The enterprise startup program would provide financing, technical advice, and
guidance for young farmers to establish their own agricultural enterprises. It
would also combine financing (matching grants) with coaching and technical advice
to selected agro-processors with plans to scale up their enterprises. A business plan
competition would identify plans with the best prospects of success. Preference
would be given to enterprises that use modern and environmentally friendly
agriculture techniques, focus on producing higher value or highly perishable
products, and ideally also have secured up-front resources from the private financial
sector to support the business plan. The program would also assist participants in
marketing their products locally and regionally.
3. Promoting agro-processing
In the agro-processing industry, support start-ups, established small and
medium enterprises (SMEs) and producer groups, and improve their forward
and backward linkages. The two priority areas for agro-processing interventions
include: (i) improving skills for the agro-processing industry; and (ii) promoting
investments and alliances that put those skills to work.                                             .
X1
a. Improve skills for the agro-processing industry
Skills training would focus on financial literacy, marketing, food processing and
machinery, packaging, quality control, and food safety and hygiene. Training
(short or longer term, conducted in-country or abroad) would be practical and


﻿directly calibrated to strengthen the industry. It could include study tours, trade
fairs, and business roundtables to promote access to new skills and markets. Specific
technical assistance would enable agro-processing enterprises to meet quality, food
safety, and labeling standards and improve traceability.
b. Promote investments and alliances for agro-processors
Create alliances for agro-processors with farmers or farmer groups, commercial
partners, technical service providers, or financial intermediaries. Following a
similar model for marketing of fresh agricultural products, alliances with farmers
or farmer groups based on formal contracts would improve the quality, quantity,
consistency, and timing of the supply of raw materials to processing plants. Agro-
processors would provide improved services to farmers and would purchase
products directly from them. A formal agreement with at least one buyer would be
a prerequisite to participate. Alliances would be encouraged with technical partners
as well as with financial intermediaries, which could provide loans to complement
the matching grants.
4. Laying the ground for concrete interventions
In order to develop some of these recommended interventions, specific additional
analysis on agriculture-tourism linkages would be helpful. These include: the
identification of key products that governments and aggregators would target; a
market-scoping study focused on potential aggregators; a study of the potential for
intra-regional and extra-regional markets; an analysis of logistics constraints; and a
study of the yachting industry food supply chain.
Xi


﻿I. INTRODUCTION
identify opportunities for stronger linkages between domestic
agricultural supply chains and the tourism sector in the OECS, and
to outline priority interventions with potential to strengthen these
linkages. Since this topic has been analyzed in a number of studies, the approach
for this ESW is not to conduct yet another comprehensive study. Instead, the goal
is to validate and build on previous work through detailed field interviews with a
selected sample of "game changers" in the private and public sectors, and to come
up with priority areas of focus and investments.
The member countries of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS)4 continue to face serious development challenges. The region's poor
4   Established in 1981, the OECS has 9 member countries. In this study, however,
"OECS" refers to the following six countries: Antigua & Barbuda, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines.


﻿economic performance of the 1990s has persisted into the 2000s; during the four
consecutive years following the 2008 global financial crisis, OECS economies
contracted on average by 1.5 percent per year. The crisis reduced demand for OECS
exports and services and exacerbated unemployment. Poverty rates range from 18
percent in Antigua and Barbuda to around 38 percent in Grenada, with the majority
of the poor across OECS countries living in rural areas.5 Youth unemployment-
which is double the average regional unemployment rate-is a particular concern.
While the island nations of the OECS depend on tourism for much of their economic
activity, the sector's linkage with the local agriculture sector remains limited.
The continued focus on strengthening the agriculture-tourism linkages is
appropriate given the unexploited possibilities for increasing the share of locally
sourced food purchased by the tourism sector and reducing the growing food
import bill (Figure 1). Recent studies, most notably from the OECS Commission
(2014) and from the World Bank and Food and Agriculture Organization (2008)
argue that there is room to increase local food sales to tourism operators, mainly
to hotels. The studies also identified specific types of food with potential to satisfy
demand from the tourism sector. Both studies caution, however, that the potential
for local production to replace imports is limited, given the region's agro-climatic
conditions and price competitiveness. The World Bank-FAO study estimated that
the scope to substitute tourism import demand by local produce is limited to around
11 percent of hotel food imports, equivalent to approximately 2 percent of the total
food import bill. The study estimated that the annual "leakage" of the tourism sector
in fresh products could be reduced by about US$10 million, arguing that local and
regional markets have greater potential to lower the food import bill. According to
the recent agro-tourism demand study (OECS Commission, 2014), hotel tourist
demand as a percentage of total food demand is 6.4 percent in Antigua & Barbuda,
6 percent in St. Kitts & Nevis, 4.4 percent in St. Lucia, 3.3 percent in Dominica, 2.6
percent in Grenada, and 2.1 percent in St. Vincent & the Grenadines.
OECS countries share similar features and challenges. All are island nations
with small territories, populations, and economies. In addition, they are vulnerable
to exogenous shocks due to their high dependence on imports and their exposure
to natural disasters, especially hurricanes. With a historical dependence on a few
export crops, OECS countries continue to have an undiversified economy and
limited skilled labor. While gross domestic product (GDP) per capita ranges from
about US$6,500 (St. Vincent & the Grenadines) to US$13,500 (St. Kitts & Nevis),
their economies depend increasingly on tourism, which ranges from around 25
percent of GDP in Grenada to 75 percent in Antigua & Barbuda. Following the
end of preferential trade arrangements with the European Union-mainly duty-
free imports, quotas, and compensatory finance for key agricultural commodities
produced in the OECS such as bananas and sugar- the share of agriculture in
5   Specific figures on rural poverty are not readily available, but conversations with
governments and agricultural sector reviews reveal that most poor people in the
OECS reside in rural areas.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
OECS economies has greatly diminished, including agricultural exports (Figure 2).6
OECS Members have a common monetary policy and central bank in addition to
a common currency, the East Caribbean (EC) dollar, which is pegged to the United
States dollar.
Figure 1: Food import bill (US$ millions)
110
90
70
50
30
10
Dominica     Saint Kitts  Grenada    Saint Vincent  Saint Lucia  Antigua
and Nevis              &the Grenadines             & Barbuda
E 1995    U 2000   U 2011
Source: OECS commission, based on FAOSTAT.
Figure 2: Agricultural exports (US$ millions)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Saint Vincent  Saint Lucia  Saint Kitts  Grenada     Dominica     Antigua
& the Grenadines             and Nevis                             & Barbuda
0 1995    E 2000   N 2011
Source: OECS Commission, based on FAOSTAT.
The agricultural sector is still a major contributor to employment. While
OECS agriculture is not a significant contributor to GDP (except for Dominica),
it is an important source of employment (Table 1). This gap in labor productivity
reflects some of the challenges facing the sector. The contribution of agriculture to
6    Agriculture remains a key economic sector only in Dominica, where it represents
around 15 percent of GDP.


﻿employment is especially high in rural areas, where the majority of farms and poor
families are located. Thus, farming represents an important source of income for
the poor.
Table 1: Importance of the agriculturaL sector in OECS countries
Area                GDP per     Agriculture  Agriculture  Poverty Rate
(SiK)Population  cpt($S)Sector          Sector (% of  %
(Sq m)      apit ($SD)(% of GDP)     Labor Force)
Antigua &  440     89,985      12,910      2.1          7            18.4
Barbuda
Dominica   750     72,003     6,760        14.9         40          29
Grenada    340      105,897   7,460        5.4          11          38
St. Kitts &
Nvs   260     54,191     13,460      1.5          NA           21.8
Nevis
St. Lucia  610     182,273    7,090        3.6          21.7        28.8
St. Vincent
& the      390     109,373    6,580        7.5          26          30.2
Grenadines
OECS       2,790   613,722    9,043        5.83         NA          28.5
Source: Authors, based on data from OECS Commission, World Bank, FAO, and CIA World Factbook.
Note: Figures for area, population, and GDP per capita are from 2014; data in the other columns are from
earlier years.
OECS Members are signatories to four main trade-related treaties. These
treaties led to the (i) OECS Economic Union, (ii) CARICOM Single Market and
Economy (CSME); (iii) CARIFORUM-EU Economic Partnership (EPA); and (iv)
Multilateral Trading System (WTO 2014). While the OECS Economic Union calls
for the free movement of people, goods, capital, and services, it has not been fully
implemented; more progress is needed in harmonizing legislation, institutions, and
tariff schedules. The OECS Members' main trading partners are the United States,
EU, Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, and Canada.
The agricultural sector in OECS countries faces serious challenges. OECS
agriculture could potentially be a driver for sustainable development by reducing
dependence on food imports while addressing food security and undernourishment
concerns.' But despite efforts by OECS governments to diversify their agricultural
production base over the past two decades, a non-traditional, diversified agriculture
has yet to take off, and most OECS countries continue to depend on single crop
exports.' Following trade liberalization and the lapse of the preferential trade
7   The prevalence of undernourishment ranges from around 5 percent in Dominica
to 19 percent in Grenada.
8   OECS agriculture historically has depended on a small number of traditional
export crops, including bananas in St. Lucia, St. Vincent, and Dominica; sugar in
St. Kitts & Nevis and Antigua; and nutmeg in Grenada.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
agreements with the EU for traditional agricultural exports in the late 1990s, OECS
governments and farmers were slow to adapt to the newly competitive environment.9
Challenges facing the sector include small farm sizes and complex land tenure
systems, natural disasters and climate change, limited use of improved production
technologies, low investment, limited financial capacity, limited water supply and
irrigation development, production of low and inconsistent volumes for processing
and shipping, and limited and expensive inter-island transportation. Additional
challenges include a domestic private sector where skilled human resources are in
short supply; an aging farming population; weak farmer organizations and marketing
boards; phytosanitary issues; larceny (theft); and a range of other institutional
and policy issues, including limited support from agricultural extension and a
challenging investment climate.
Due to limited, inconsistent and often costly domestic agricultural production,
most food is imported. OECS countries are net food importers, with meat, cereals,
and dairy products featuring among the main imports. Trade balances have grown
increasingly negative since the 1990s, and OECS agricultural imports are now about
four times as high as agricultural exports. Food imports have increased in volume,
variety, and value, fueled by increased tourism, higher incomes, and the rise of
supermarkets. Demand for imported food from the hotel tourism sector amounted
to US$93 million in 2008, representing about 25 percent of OECS agricultural
imports. Only 32 percent of the food demand arising from the tourism industry is
met locally (World Bank and FAO, 2008).
The seasonality of the tourism industry in the Caribbean impacts demand for
food. Winter is considered the high season for tourism throughout the Caribbean,
largely since tourists like to escape the cold winter weather of the north. During
the high season (around mid-December to mid-April), hotels, cruises and flights
are fullest; there is little rainfall and comfortable temperatures prevail. Tourism
demand drastically decreases during the summer months, largely because the
weather in tourists' home countries is more comfortable while in the Caribbean it is
less favorable than in the winter. The low season is generally described as mid-April
to mid-December, with the slowest months being June through August. During the
low season, which partially overlaps with hurricane season in the Caribbean (June 1
to November 30), many resorts reduce their off-season rates by up to 50 percent in
order to attract visitors and fill empty rooms. In addition, there are often promotions
and discounts on cruises, airfare, and attractions at destinations. Consequently,
hotels and cruise lines make most of their profits in the winter, and that is when
their food demand is highest.
5
9   Agriculture was the dominant economic sector in OECS countries until the 1990s,
when preferential trade agreements with the EU were ruled incompatible with
World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements and were not renewed. As a result,
the importance of traditional export crops diminished greatly throughout the
OECS. During the 25 years that the series of Lom6 agreements were in effect,
OECS governments had few incentives to diversify or strengthen linkages between
agriculture and the tourism sector.


﻿Agriculture production in the OECS is affected by the dry and wet seasons.
During the dry season, which runs from around December to May (i.e. also the
tourist season), agriculture production significantly drops due to the lack of
intensive irrigation needed to sustain horticultural production.10 Annual rainfall is
lower at the Leeward Islands of Antigua and St. Kitts & Nevis than in the Windward
Islands of Grenada, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, and Dominica, thus causing more severe
water-related challenges in these countries (FAO, 2000).n Hoteliers interviewed in
Antigua, for instance, mentioned that while availability and consistency of supply
of local produce is problematic throughout the year, it is especially problematic
during the dry season.12 The remainder months (June to November) are considered
to be the wet season, although in recent years precipitation has been reduced and
is less predictable due to climate change. Interviewed farmers have experienced
more periods of droughts and high temperature in recent years, making their farms
even more vulnerable. The wet season also coincides with the hurricane season,
thus agricultural production can also be challenging during the wet season due to
growingly unpredictable weather."
Seasonal production impacts the availability and prices of food. During the
wet season, there is often an oversupply of certain agriculture crops, which leads
to a drop in food prices and food losses. As food stocks decline during the dry,
lean season, there are shortages of locally grown agricultural products, leading to
a rise in food price. According to hotels' executive chefs and purchasing managers
interviewed by the Bank team, consistency of supply of locally grown produce is
especially challenging during the dry season, which happens to coincide with the
high tourist season. The main strategy used by hotels to mitigate locally grown food
supply shortages is through importing food (by the larger hotels), or purchasing
from importers such as traders, wholesalers, supermarkets and marketing boards
(by smaller hotels). Some smaller hotels also employ a strategy of adjusting their
menus to food that is available.14
Despite their agriculture-related challenges, OECS countries have room for
increasing food production and food sales to tourism actors. Given the growing
domestic and tourism demand for fresh food, as well as concerns over food security
and the import bill, OECS countries have the potential to increase production of
10  Many small OECS farmers are located on the steeper, more remotely located
lands, with limited access to water. Larger farmers are typically located at the more
fertile, flatter lands, either in the river valleys or by water sources.
11  This is mainly due to orographic influences of the Windward Islands being steeper.
6                                Even within the Windward Islands, the steeper mountainous parts often receive
up to 60 percent more rainfall than the flatter, coastal regions.
12  Hotels are also impacted by water scarcity; Antigua hoteliers mentioned that
hotels located by the beach employ their own desalination systems, which is very
energy guzzling and thus costly. Other hotels truck in water.
13  Hurricanes and storms in the region have caused extensive damage to crops.
14  Large international hotel chains such as Sandals, Four Seasons, and Marriott
cannot adjust their menus in such a way since they are required to follow their
chain's international standards.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
some items such as fresh produce and fish. Many hotels have expressed a high level
of willingness to increase the share of products purchased locally, as fresh foods
and juices are highly attractive to tourists. At the same time, surveys have found
strong interest among local farmers for devoting a larger share of their production
to meeting the needs of the tourism industry. "
The methodology employed in this study relied on both primary and
secondary data. Secondary data was obtained from relevant studies, as well as from
OECS governments' publications, articles, World Bank reports, and international
trade databases. Primary data was collected through meetings with key stakeholder
groups and individuals during a two-week mission to the six countries of focus
and to Miami and Barbados in May 2015, as well as through phone interviews.
The authors visited six large hotels (or 30 percent of hotels with over 100 rooms
in the six OECS countries of focus) and nine small- to medium-sized hotels. The
team typically met with hotel executive chefs, purchasing managers and/or cost
controllers, and sometimes with hotel owners as well. The authors also met with
most of the national Hotel and Tourism Association managers, as well as with the
heads of the Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Association (CHTA) in Miami. They
also met with supply chain and procurement executives from two of the largest
cruise lines operating in the Caribbean, as well as with the heads of the Florida-
Caribbean Cruise Association (FCCA). Finally, the team also met with a range of
other individuals and groups from the public and private sector, listed in Annex 1.
7
15  Inconsistency of supply and lack of competitiveness currently prevent more fresh
products from being sourced locally and offsetting imports. In some cases, a cost
disadvantage is responsible for the low levels (or absence) of local production
(meat and dairy products are two examples), while in other cases, agro-climatic
conditions prevent certain commodities in high demand by the tourist sector
from being produced (apples and cold-water fish, for example).


﻿8


﻿II. FINDINGS
1. Competitiveness of OECS agriculture
Can OECS farmers compete with imports? The quick answer appears to be "Yes,
sometimes," but in actuality this is an intricate question, as tourism actors carefully
examine multiple factors during their decision-making process concerning
where food sourcing. These factors include availability and consistency of supply,
cost, quality, quantity, variety, freshness, logistics, and standards. Recent surveys
conducted in OECS member countries have found that while the percentage of                             9
food sourced locally by hotels and other tourism actors varies greatly among them,
typically all source at least some share of their food requirements locally. Thus
it appears that OECS products are attractive in some cases. While it is currently
impossible to precisely quantify the potential demand and supply given the lack
of data on food sales to the tourism industry actors and the paucity of agricultural
production data, previous studies that employed comprehensive surveys have
concluded that local supply in all OECS countries for the tourism sector could


﻿increase. Some of the main factors contributing to the competitiveness of OECS
agriculture and influencing tourism actors' decision making process for food
purchases are discussed below.
Hotels
Hotels import much of their food requirements, including fresh products.
Statistics on food purchases by hotels are not regularly collected, but a World
Bank-FAO study (2008) found that OECS hotels imported around US$94 million
of food items in 2008, which amounted to around 20 to 25 percent of OECS food
imports.16 Local food purchased by hotels amounted to around US$44.5 million
that year. Fresh products, which have the greatest potential to be substituted by
local production, account for about 60 percent of total hotel food purchases (Table
2). While approximately 64 percent of fresh products consumed by hotels were
imported, the types of fresh products that they imported varied notably. For example,
they imported more than 80 percent of their meat and dairy needs compared to 40
percent or less of their fruit and vegetable needs. Overall, the survey found that
food products with little processing (fresh products) tended to be sourced locally,
whereas highly processed foods (non-fresh products) and semi-processed foods
(meat and fish) tended to be imported. This study reached the same conclusion.
Table 2: Fresh food consumption by the hotel sector in the OECS, 2008
Fresh Purcased% of TotalI                              % of TotalI
Produts  Loally Imported   Imports %  Total (U$)  Fresh Products  Hotel Food
Consumed      Consumption
Meat       3,938,444  31,346,796  89%       35,285,240  42.4%       25.5%
Dairy      2,491,668  10,931,190  81%       13,422,859  16.1%        9.7%
Fruit      6,349,736  3,616,938  36%        9,966,674  12.0%        7.2%
Vegetables  5,465,595  3,697,314  40%       9,162,910  11.0%         6.6%
Fish       8,359,146  3,697,314  31%        12,056,460  14.5%       8.7%
Eggs       3,375,809  0          0%         3,375,809  4.1%         2.4%
Subtotal   29,980,397  53,289,553  64%      83,269,950  100%         60.20%
Source: World Bank-and FAO (2008)
10                                The increase in the number of hotel rooms in recent years holds potential
to boost local food sourcing. In recent decades, the number of hotel rooms has
steadily increased, growing by approximately 51 percent from 1990 to 2000 and
by another 15 percent or so from 2000 to 2015 (Figure 3)." Many hotels have at
16 These figures are based on a comprehensive survey conducted by the Mind
Company in January/February 2008.
17 "Hotel rooms" refers to villas, apartments, and guest-houses catering to tourists,


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
least one restaurant on their property and thus purchase food to feed their guests
and their employees; even where properties do not have restaurants, tourists still
purchase food locally. The hotel survey conducted by the Mind Company estimated
that hotel food purchases amounted to US$171 per room per week or US$8,892
per year. Thus for 2008, when the OECS had an estimated 15,457 hotel rooms, total
hotel food consumption was estimated at US$138.5 million. Based on the current
estimate of 16,000 hotel rooms in the OECS," hotel food consumption in 2014 is
estimated to be worth around US$143 million (this estimate accounts also for the
slight rise in the Food Price Index since 2008). Given that imports of fresh food
represent about 38.5 percent of hotel food consumption, they are estimated at about
US$55 million for 2014. Within fresh produce imports by hotels in 2014, fruit and
vegetable imports are estimated at US$7.5 million, while fish imports are estimated
at US$3.8 million. While the entire fresh produce imports cannot be substituted
through local farming given countries' agro-climatic conditions, production costs,
availability of fish stocks, as well as other constraints, some substitution is possible.
Figure 3: Number of hotel rooms in OECS countries, 1990-2015
17.000
15.000
13.000
11.000
9.000
7.000
5.000
1990        1995       2000        2005        2010       2015
Source: Authors, based on data gathered from the OECS Commission and national Ministries of Tourism.
Note: Authors' estimation for total rooms for 2005, 2010, and 2015, given missing data for some countries
Apart from food purchases, hotels have a significant impact on local
economies through the employment absorbed by the hotel sector and the daily
expenditures of guests. While almost twice the number of cruise passengers visited
St. Lucia in 2014 than hotel guests (641,452 versus 338,158), the impact of cruise
passengers is much lower than that of hotel guests. The average daily expenditure
per cruise passenger is estimated at only US$35.22, compared to US$256.20 for
hotel guests, and the average length of stay for hotel guests exceeded one week,
compared to one day for cruise passengers.19 The recent establishment of new hotels
as these are included in the same category when counted by OECS government
authorities all lumped together in counting rooms used by tourists. While full data
on hotel rooms were not available, in St. Lucia hotels represented about 90 percent
of total rooms and in Dominica the figure was around 45 percent.
18  This is an estimate by the authors; data on hotel rooms were not available for all
OECS countries.
19  Interviews with hotel managers and tourism associations revealed that American
hotel guests typically stay for around 5 to 7 days, while European travelers typically
stay for around two weeks.


﻿throughout the OECS includes large enterprises such as Sandals in Grenada, which
opened in 2013 and has 12 restaurants feeding over 900 people per day (450 guests
and 500 staff).20 Hotels typically have a relationship with a number of local farmers
who deliver to the hotels' storage rooms (typically the same day that the produce is
harvested, to maintain freshness). However, the rising number of total hotel rooms
does not automatically translate into a rise in local food sourcing, which depends on
availability of fresh food demanded by the hotels and hotels' purchasing strategies,
among other factors.
Small and medium-sized hotels are more strongly linked to local farmers than
large hotels. Close to 40 percent of OECS hotels are members of the Caribbean
Hotel and Tourism Association (CHTA); these typically include the larger hotels.
Of the 303 hotels in the six OECS countries in focus, 20 are large hotels (defined
here as those having at least 100 rooms). As seen in Table 3, 85 percent of large
hotels are located in just two countries: St. Lucia and Antigua. In general, small-
and medium-sized hotels typically purchase a higher percentage of their food
requirements locally than large hotels. The actual percentage of fresh food sourced
locally (typically including produce, fish, whole chickens, eggs, and pork) varies
greatly even between small- and medium-sized hotels. Interviews with hoteliers
found that small- and medium-size hotels purchase around 60 to 98 percent of their
produce from local farmers, compared to around 10 to 60 percent for the large
hotels. Some hotels place a strong emphasis on purchasing locally.2' All hotels in
this size range indicated that their purchases of fresh produce are constrained by the
limited availability and variety of products, among other factors.
20  In St. Lucia Sandals Resorts has three hotels, one with 169 rooms and two with
over 300 rooms each. Sandals also has one resort in Antigua (373 rooms) and
another in Grenada (225 rooms).
21  The Spice Island Beach Resort in Grenada is a case in point. Established in 1975,
this upscale resort currently has 64 rooms and employs 185 full-time employees.
12                                During peak season, rooms are priced at over $1,000 per night. Luxury hotels such
as this one place a strong emphasis on freshness, which is one of the main reasons
that the Spice Island Beach Resort purchases around 98 percent of its fruits and
vegetables locally. The hotel purchases directly from dozens of small farmers, who
deliver their produce to the hotel on a weekly basis. The hotel typically tries to plan
production schedules with the farmers, advising them about the expected demand
for produce about three months in advance of purchase. The hotel purchases about
40 percent of its produce from the marketing board, although its first choice is to
buy directly from farmers, since their product are fresher.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
Table 3: Number of hotels in the OECS, 2015
CHTAsmatl CHTA large  Non -CHTA    Total Hotels
hotels     hotels     hotels
Antigua & Barbuda             13         6          36           55
Dominica                      4          0          25           29
Grenada                       9          1          34           44
St. Kitts & Nevis             12         2          23           37
St. Lucia                     21         11         61           93
St. Vincent & the Grenadines  5          0          40           45
Total                         64         20         219          303
Source: Authors based on information obtained from the Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Association and
national governments.
Hotels typically source locally grown foods from a variety of sources. These
sources include local supermarkets, warehouse stores (such as Mega J in St. Lucia),
national Marketing Boards, producer organizations, local suppliers, and directly
from farmers. Medium- and large-size hotels also either import food themselves or
order from a trader who imports. Interviews with hoteliers revealed that the main
advantage of buying directly from farmers is that they get the freshest products
(typically picked earlier that morning by farmers, who transport the produce to the
hotels on set days). In addition, the cost of purchasing directly from farmers is often
cheaper than buying from the Marketing Board or supermarkets. The difficulties,
though, include lack of consistency with the quantity and quality of products
delivered by farmers, and the limited availability of quantity and variety of products.
Consequently, hotel purchasing managers have to purchase from multiple farmers
and other sources to fill their demand, which can be very time consuming. Local
farmers like to sell their produce to hotels since they often attain higher selling prices
than from selling to the Marketing Boards, producer organizations or supermarkets.
However, farmers interviewed by the World Bank team and by previous researchers
claimed that selling to hotels is a challenge mainly because quantities ordered are
typically small and vary greatly between orders, with no prior knowledge of what
the orders will be, as well as unfavorable payment terms in some cases.
Coordination and communication between hotels and farmers is very
limited. Most hotels do not provide farmers with a demand forecast, thus farmers                               13
cannot plan their production based on demand, contributing to periods of glut and
shortages. Typically, communication between local farmers and hotels only takes
place at the time the hotel places an order, which usually happens less than a week
in advance. Only a few hotels, agro-processors, and supermarkets have stronger
engagement with farmers, including sharing their expected demands and assisting
with loans, inputs into production, and technical advice. However, even in these few


﻿cases of close coordination, there are typically gentlemen agreements between the
local buyer and lead farmers, rather than formal contracts.
Overall, the strategy adopted by small to medium-sized hotels is to maximize
the food they can source locally; to import or purchase from suppliers who
import only whatever is not available locally or does not meet quality or cost
requirements. The reasons for this strategy are both economic and emotional-
these hotels typically lack the economies of scale to import cost-effectively, and as
residents of the island, they feel that they are part of the local economy and thus
gain from contributing to it by purchasing locally. Smaller establishments also
prefer buying relatively small quantities per order and to do so when they know
that they will use the purchased food items, in order to reduce losses, maintain
freshness, and avoid having to invest in large storage facilities. Local prices for the
kinds of items purchased by hotels in country-mainly fresh produce, fresh fish,
eggs, whole chickens, and some pork, as mentioned-are typically similar to that
of landed prices of imported goods, given high transportation costs and taxation,
except during times of shortages, when local prices can significantly increase. In
addition, smaller hotels are typically more flexible with their food budgets and their
menus, since they are typically not all-inclusive resorts and do not have to meet
international standards, thus they can more easily adjust their menus to include
dishes of food items that are available locally. Still, executive chefs of all hotel sizes
are cautious about their food budgets, since they are required to achieve a certain
profit margin on food sales.
Local food purchases of large hotels in the OECS typically represent a small
percentage of their food demand. For hotels that belong to large international
chains such as Sandals, Marriott, and the Four Seasons, it is financially attractive
to purchase in bulk from Miami in order to get guaranteed quantities and volume
discounts, rather than to attempt to source locally from smallholder farmers, given
the considerable difficulty and uncertainty involved in sourcing large quantities
from many small farmers. In addition, recently established large hotels have
received concessions from OECS governments allowing them to import duty free,
thus making it considerably cheaper for them to import items than for smaller
traditional hotels. Moreover, in the case of Sandals Resorts, the purchasing orders
are submitted by the chain's purchasing department at its headquarters in Jamaica
rather than in the OECS, thus apart from the requirement of placing purchase
orders from pre-approved hotel vendors, the purchasing associate at headquarters
has less awareness of local supply chains and no emotional ties to the island. Apart
from the cost savings and consistency of supply and quality involved in purchasing
14                           in bulk from Miami, this strategy also reduces the risk of shortages, which occur
very commonly in the OECS due to lack of production planning, limited water
supply, limited protected agriculture, plant diseases, and the vagaries of weather
(especially storms). Buying in bulk in Miami also makes it very difficult for local
agro-processors such as Baron Foods (which operates out of St. Lucia and produces
sauces, condiments, spices, and other products) and Summer (operating out of
Grenada and producing fruit juice drinks) to sell significant quantities to large
hotels. In comparison with small hotels, large hotels thus have a lower tendency to


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
purchase locally. In cases where large hotels purchase from the few local farmers
who can deliver the required quantities and quality within the demanded price
range, these farmers are typically large, and sometimes purchase from other farmers
to fill the orders with produce that they do not grow or do not have handy. Box 1
is an example of the pricing structure for locally-grown versus imported produce.
Box 1: Pricing structure for imported versus locally grown produce:
The case of a large hotel in St. Kitts & Nevis
This large hotel imports over 90 percent of its fresh produce, most of which
arrives from Miami aboard reefer (refrigerated) containers. The hotel also
imports almost all of its seafood requirements, also from Miami but via air
freight. While it does purchase some fresh produce locally, it typically does
so when it runs short of a particular item. The main reasons for sourcing in
Miami are lower costs and consistency of supply. For instance, it imports
Irish (white) potatoes from Miami at a landed cost of around US$0.50/lb,
compared to a cost of around US$1.20/lb for local potatoes, when available,a
thus has little incentive to purchase locally given the much higher pricing.
The hotel indicated that it would prefer to buy local in order to support the
local economy and for freshness, but it would not be willing to pay more
than around 5 to 10 percent above the landed cost for local potatoes.
While for some locally grown products the cost of production is
simply too high to compete with imported products, there are examples
where local fresh produce has the potential to be competitive. A case in
point is tomatoes. Until May 2015, before it negotiated a reduced price
with the Marketing Department, this large hotel had imported tomatoes
from Miami. Before the new price was negotiated, the wholesale price (the
Marketing Department in this case) was US$1.25/lb compared to a landed
price of US$1.06/lb for imported tomatoes from Miami. The fact that local
tomatoes cost US$0.19/lb or 18 percent more than imported tomatoes (see
below figure) made them unattractive for the hotel. The newly negotiated
price of US$1.11/lb became only US$0.05/lb (or 4.6 percent) over the landed
cost, which was good enough for the hotel given the premium it places on
freshness. Thus the hotel began purchasing tomatoes locally, and will likely
continue doing so as long as consistency of supply and quality are met.
15


﻿Cost of tomatoes imported by a large hotel in the OECS versus locally grown
tomatoes (US$/[b)
1.61 1.66
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.2     ~1.02 1.05 1.06                   .9.1
1                                  .
0.8
0.6
00.6
0.4
0                   0   Y   0
E   U E ~                           0       0.  ,
t,O               0                            00
0  UU
(U         0
U Imported   0 Local
This example illustrates that it is possible to increase sales of locally
grown produce to large hotels, even when the local price is slightly higher
than the landed cost of imports. In this case, direct communication with the
hotel was key in order to negotiate a price that is workable for both buyer
and seller.
Source: Authors estimation based on interviews with hotel Purchasing Manager and local farmers in St. Kitts
& Nevis in May 2015.
o The landed price is only 25 percent above the Miami wholesale price since the hotel gets a good shipping
rate because it is an important customer for the shipping lines, and because it does not pay import duties.
Linkages between large resorts and local farmers have been strengthened in
some cases. Sandals Resorts (which is the largest operator of all-inclusive resorts
in the Caribbean), for instance, initiated a farmers program in Jamaica in 1996,
intended to develop local agriculture supply linkages by improving a number of key
areas including the quality of produce and its working relationships with farmers.
Some of the program's activities included providing agricultural production
support through various regional organizations and through funding a farmer
extension officer to work with farmers, better coordination on pricing and volumes,
16                            and arranging meetings between farmers and hotels such as through workshops,
visits of hotel management teams to farms and of farmers to hotels to discuss
and coordinate related aspects. According to DFID (2004), the program was able
to overcome problems and grow the number of participating farmers, sales, and
farmers' incomes, while improving quality and variety of local produce at a cost
savings for the participating hotels. Since Sandals owns multiple hotels in Jamaica,
investing in improving its local food sourcing is critical given the chain's large food
requirements for its guests and staff. In recent years, Sandals has been successful in


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
purchasing close to 100 percent of their fresh food requirements for its ten resorts
in Jamaica locally, procuring from one lead farmer who fills Sandals orders from
its own farm as well as through purchasing from other Jamaican farmers. Sandals
provides the lead farmer with a forecasting of occupancy three months in advance
in order to help the farmer with planning, while actual orders are done a week in
advance. Prices are determined on a quarterly basis.22
International experience suggests that it is possible for large hotels to purchase
a significant portion of their fresh food requirements locally when conditions
permit. Team interviews with purchasing managers of large hotels located at
several countries in the Latin America and Caribbean region revealed that these
hotels purchased a high percentage of their food requirements locally. For instance,
a 300-room hotel in Peru belonging to the same hotel chain mentioned in Box 1,
purchases close to 100 percent of its produce requirements locally, as well as all of
its poultry and eggs and much of its seafood. The main reasons that enable this hotel
to locally purchase the majority of its fresh food requirement for its two restaurants
is availability, good quality, and variety at competitive prices. In addition, while the
hotel purchases directly from a small number of farmers, over 80 percent of its fresh
food is sourced from a small number of suppliers who consolidate produce from
multiple producers. While the hotel can get slightly lower prices when purchasing
directly from farmers, local producers do not have the capacity to supply the
quantities that the hotel requires.23 While no official contract exists between the
hotel and farmers, the hotel provides farmers with a demand estimate, which aids
them in planning their production and transportation. Similarly, an interview with
a 184-room hotel in Costa Rica that is part of the same management company as
one of the large hotels interviewed by the team in the OECS found that about 90
percent of the food purchased by the hotel in Costa Rica for its four restaurants
is produced locally. The vast majority of the fresh food is purchased from a small
number of Costa Rican suppliers, who locally source the majority of the food except
for certain products, such as beef, which the hotel requires to be imported from the
U.S. for quality and food safety demanded by its guests, while the hotel purchases
directly from farmers only in the case of eggs and cheese.
22  For all Sandals resorts located outside of Jamaica except for those in St. Lucia, the
majority of fresh produce is sourced by Sandals Headquarters in Jamaica from a                          17
small number of vendors in Miami. For the three Sandals resorts located in St.
Lucia, Sandals purchases from a small number of vendors in Jamaica that import
the majority of Sandals food requirements from Miami, and purchases some of
the food locally as well.
23  In addition, since the hotel only purchases from formal establishments, the
majority of farmers are excluded from selling to it since they do not have all the
required licenses and permits that would enable it to be an approved vendor for
the hotel.


﻿Cruise ships
The cruise line industry is a less likely potential market for local farmers in
the short run. Close to half of all cruise ships worldwide navigate the Caribbean
Basin, bringing with them around 10 million passengers annually to the region
(Sdnchez and Wilmsmeier 2009). In OECS countries, cruise passengers represent
on average over half of all annual visitors (Figure 4), with varying impact on the
local economies.24 However, cruise lines typically purchase very large volumes of
food in a consolidated manner in Miami and have fewer incentives to purchase
from OECS suppliers. Because cruise lines have stringent requirements concerning
food quality, quantities, safety, packaging, and delivery, as well as relatively smaller
food budgets per person, significant progress in all of these areas would need to
be made before cruise lines would be able to source locally on a significant level.
Finally, unlike OECS-based hotels, cruise lines do not have to pay maritime
freight, insurance, import duties and customs fees (since they load the majority
of their food in Miami). They usually purchase from OECS suppliers or farmers
only when they are short on a product, which is an irregular and rare occurrence.
However, cruise lines do strategically purchase a very small percentage of their food
and beverages in a few non-OECS Caribbean countries.25 In addition, cruise line
executives indicated that they would seriously consider sourcing more food locally
once local suppliers develop the capacity to deliver the required quantities on a
consistent basis and at competitive prices, in compliance with all of their product
and logistics requirements.26
24  Within the OECS, St. Kitts and Nevis received the highest amount of cruise ship
spending at US$65.7 million (11.4 percent of GDP, 2012 figures). In contrast,
cruise line spending contributed only 0.3 percent to GDP in St. Vincent & the
Grenadines (World Bank, 2015).
25  For instance, two leading cruise lines each spend around US$10 million annually
18                                on local purchases in the Caribbean, such as soft drinks in Puerto Rico and
seafood in Barbados. It makes sense for them to purchase some food in these
locations because they already stop there to load some supplies, and there are
some financial incentives. For instance, the government of Puerto Rico provides
cruise lines a rebate of 15 percent of the value of their local purchases in an attempt
to incentivize cruise ships to visit and buy locally.
26  The authors met with supply chain and procurement executives of the two largest
cruise lines operating in the Caribbean, as well as with the President and Sr. Vice
President of the Florida-Caribbean Cruise Association.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
Figure 4: Tourist arrivals to OECS countries, 2000-14
4.000.000
3.000.000
2.000.000
1.000.000
0
2000  2000   2000  2000  2000   2000  2000  2000   2000  2010  2011   2012  2013  2014
0 Stay-Over Visitors  a Cruise Passengers  N Yacht Visitors  a Total Visitors
Source: Authors, based on data from the Caribbean Tourism Organization (CTO), 2015.
Quantity and consistency of supply are major issues for tourism operators.
Both the OECS Comission (2014) and the World Bank and FAO (2008) studies,
as well as field interviews with tourism actors, both quantity and consistency of
supplies were stressed as the major challenges to overcome once price is deemed
competitive. These supply challenges are especially acute for large hotels and cruise
lines, yet they are also an issue for small- and medium-sized hotels, because they
have to deal with relatively large numbers of farmers to ensure supply. The majority
of OECS farmers are smallholders who typically do not have the capacity to
consistently deliver required quantities. Apart from farm size, consistency of supply
can depend on factors such as the availability of inputs (water/irrigation, seed,
fertilizer, harvesting equipment, and infrastructure for protected farming) and the
level of farm management skills (including production planning, crop management
knowledge, and post-harvest handling capacity).
Yachts
The yachting sector in the OECS has potential to increase its sourcing of locally
grown food. In recent years, full-service, modern marinas have been built in OECS
countries, including the 170-berth Port Louis Marina (Grenada) which opened
in 2010, and the 60-berth Marina at Christophe Harbor (St. Kitts) which partially
opened in February 2015. Both of these marinas can accommodate super-yachts
of up to 300 feet. Official statistics on yacht passenger arrivals show an overall
decreasing trend (Table 4), but statistics for the yachting sector remain very poor
and largely unreliable across OECS countries (Bloomstein 2012). The highest
growth rate in passenger visits from 2005 to 2014 appears to have been in St. Lucia
(70.89 percent), but even here the numbers are likely understated. According to                                19
a maritime consultant at the St. Lucia Ministry of Tourism, yacht passengers are
counted in only two of the island's five ports of entry. The expert estimates that
official yacht passenger arrival numbers in St. Lucia are understated by at least 30
percent; and that in the other OECS countries the numbers are understated by at
least 50 percent (since St. Lucia is more adamant about data collection). Thus, it is
likely that the number of yacht visitors in 2014 reached at least 181,000. While this
figure is still substantially lower than arrivals of cruise passengers (2.468 million)


﻿and hotel guests (984,000), average daily spending per yacht passenger (US$65) is
almost double the spending per cruise ship passenger (US$35), and the average
length of stay is significantly longer for yacht passengers (for example, the average
stay for yachts in St. Lucia is 42 days),27 making the overall spending bill per yacht
passenger relatively high.28 It is estimated that about 60 percent of yacht passenger
spending is allocated towards food and drinks (imported and local).
Table 4: Yacht passenger arrivals, 2005 and 2014
2005       2014      % Change
Antigua & Barbuda            25,824     24,996    -3.21
Dominica                     8,572      11,909     38.93
Grenada                      4,353      3,686     -15.32
St. Kitts & Nevis            4,355      5,441      24.94
St. Lucia                    27,464     46,932     70.89
St. Vincent & the Grenadines  81,890    46,899    -42.73
Total                         152,458   139,863   -8.26
Source: Authors, based on data from the Caribbean Tourism Organization (CTO), 2015.
Food demand from the yachting sector is expected to rise in the years ahead.
The development of new marinas has opened new markets for larger yachts to visit
the region. In St. Kitts & Nevis, local yacht agents estimate that there has been an
increase of over 20 percent in the yachting sector over the past three years. Yacht
clients value quality and overall standards more than cost, and they prefer locally
produced items mostly because they are fresher. Locally produced fruits, vegetables,
bread, and seafood are commonly purchased by yachts, while meats are typically
imported since local meats generally do not meet the quality and preparation
standards demanded by yachting clients. The food provisioning for yachts is
somewhat similar to that of small to medium-sized hotels, in that it is done both
through suppliers and directly with farmers.29 Due to the variety of yacht sizes,
27  The average stay of yachts varies across OECS countries. Typically, yachts stay
longer in marinas that offer services such as fueling and yacht maintenance. The
20                                 most developed marinas and services in OECS countries are located at Antigua,
St. Lucia, and Grenada, in that order.
28  It is estimated that around 450 St. Lucians are directly employed in the yachting
sector, and 130 businesses are servicing the sector, with an overall economic
impact to the national economy of around US$59 million per year.
29  Yachts typically call the marina or an agent to source provisions, and they in turn
have their network of local farmers and suppliers that deliver local produce and
seafood. Marinas and agents also work with international provisioning companies
for certain imported items (many large provisioning companies and agents are


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
average spending per yacht varies significantly, ranging on average from around
US$4,200 per charter to US$98,000 for a super-yacht visit (Table 5).30 In Grenada
(2012), the yachting sector's estimated contribution to GDP was over US$48
million, and it directly contributed to 750 jobs. It is therefore estimated to have a
larger impact on the local economy than the cruise ship segment (Henry 2013). No
complete and reliable data on food sales to the yachting industry are available in the
OECS, but an estimated US$6 million was spent on food provisioning in the sector
in 2012, and around 75 percent of that was imported, for an estimated leakage of
over US$2.2 million that year. While some of this food and drink included products
that are not available in the OECS, charter agents and marina managers confirm
that there is strong potential to increase purchases of local foods if the linkage with
local farmers could be strengthened. For instance, given that farmers' markets are
very popular among yacht chefs and stewards worldwide, improving the availability,
presentation and marketing of such farmers markets in OECS countries is likely to
increase sales to the yachting sector.31
Table 5: Average spending per yacht type in Grenada, 2012
Yachting Segment         Average Spent per yacht ($US) Number of Yachts
Charters                4,199                    500
Short Term Owners        9,354                   2,034
Long Term Owners        20,077                   857
Super Yachts            98,000                   50
Source: Authors, based on Henry 2013.
Logistics
A major advantage that local farmers have over food imports is transport time
and cost. Since locally grown food requires little transportation, it is fresher and
saves on the high transportation cost of importing goods into the OECS. Maritime
transport costs to CARICOM countries are significantly higher than to other
regions, and within the Caribbean, the OECS countries experience the highest
transportation costs (SAnchez and Wilmsmeier 2009).32 For example, it is cheaper
located at Antigua, St. Martin, and St. Barths). Part of the food is purchased directly
from local suppliers who approach yachts by fishing boats or paddle-boards to sell                     21
seafood, bread, fruit, and vegetables. In addition, local fishermen typically publish
their contact information in marinas for chefs to pre-order fish.
30  As mentioned, these figures significantly understate actual yacht traffic in Grenada.
31  For instance, the Grenadines could be a good place to establish or improve farmers
markets in strategic locations, given the large number of yachts that tour its waters
each year.
32  Two recent World Bank studies (January 2015) looked into the efficiency and
performance of OECS ports and connectivity of Caribbean countries. They


﻿to ship a 40-foot reefer container from Miami to Shanghai (around US$3,500) than
from Miami to the OECS (around US$4,200).33 The transport segment can account
for nearly half the landed cost of imported produce and thus strongly contributes
to the price competitiveness of OECS farmers (World Bank and FAO 2008). At
the same time, high transport costs pose a challenge for intra-regional trade.34 For
instance, it costs about US$3,700 to ship a container of the type just mentioned from
St. Lucia to Antigua.3' Due to the trade imbalances in OECS countries, however,
exporters can benefit from lower rates on specific routes (as shipping lines try to
avoid shipping empty containers).
Apart from the high maritime transport costs that prevail in the OECS,
customs processes and procedures also impose hardship on importers. Customs
assessments recently conducted by the World Bank in a number of OECS countries
conclude that while customs performance varies throughout OECS countries, the
average time to clear Customs is higher than in most other regions in the world. The
assessments also identified serious challenges concerning customs transparency and
control. High clearance times are mainly a result of low efficiency, which is in turn
a consequence of limited use of information and communication technology (ICT),
risk management systems, and electronic documentation, among other factors.36
Import duties
OECS customs duties contribute to price competitiveness for OECS farmers,
although some of the newer and larger hotels are exempted from these duties.17
CARICOM's Common External Tariff (CET) allows a maximum ad-valorem import
tariff of 40 percent; OECS countries are independently allowed to set lower rates.
found that reasons for high maritime freight costs into the OECS include low
port efficiency and limited infrastructure, low customs performance, and limited
connectivity.
33  This comparison looks at a 40-foot reefer container, including all container
handling charges, excluding insurance (insurance prices vary depending on the
value of the container contents). The comparison was based on actual prices paid
in May 2015 by a large hotel in St. Kitts and Nevis; the estimate for Shanghai was
provided by a global shipping line on May 29, 2015.
34  It appears that shipping connectivity (access to regular, frequent, and competitive
freight services) in the Caribbean is a larger determinant of freight cost than
distance (SAnchez and Wilmsmeier 2009).
35  Cost obtained from an importer of bananas from St. Lucia to Antigua, shipped
22                               with Geist shipping lines.
36  According to the World Bank Customs Assessment Trade Toolkit (CATT) carried
out in recent years in several OECS countries, the main reason for slow clearance
times exhibited across OECS customs is the high rate of traditional manual
(physical) inspections of containers, due to limited use of an automated risk
assessment system.
37  Taxes on imports in the OECS include tariffs, customs service charges, excise
taxes, and environmental charges. In 2012 these taxes amounted to 33 percent of
tax revenue for OECS WTO Members as a whole (WTO 2014).


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
Value added taxes (VAT) are also applied and vary across OECS countries, ranging
from 10 to 17 percent.38 Apart from the CET and VAT, customs service charges range
from 3 percent in Dominica to 15 percent in St. Vincent.39 In 2012, the average import
duty for agricultural products in the OECS was 19.1 percent, noticeably higher than
for non-agricultural products (9.4 percent). In theory, these duties benefit local
farmers (although not consumers) by making imported goods more expensive, but
that advantage is not always present, given the import duty concessions granted
to recently established large hotels. In addition, agriculture inputs and equipment
usually attract import duties, increasing the cost of production, although duties are
typically waived following an application by the importer.40
Freshness
In the short run, fresh products hold the highest potential to be sourced locally.
Fruits and vegetables have been identified as the fresh products with the highest
potential to replace some of the currently imported fresh produce, especially given
the high perishability of these products and the premium that supermarkets and
hotels are willing to pay for freshness given their clients' demand. In addition, once
assistance is provided in strengthening skills in farm management and developing
modern agriculture technology such as greenhouses and irrigation systems, there
is potential to increase yields, variety of products, and availability of supply, thus
promoting the competitiveness of local farmers. Some types of seafood and other
fresh food also have potential. To identify which products are in high demand,
there is a need to examine the variety and quantity of fresh produce that is being
imported into each OECS country, and then focus on increasing the production
of those products that can be grown locally on a competitive basis, considering
the agro-climatic conditions of each country, existing resources, and prospects
for expansion if appropriate investments in training, production, and technology
were available. As a rule of thumb, given that smallholders are noncompetitive in
products that require economies of scale to be profitable, special attention should
be paid to highly perishable products and high-value foods in which OECS farmers
can compete. The main opportunities for locally grown fresh products to supply
tourism demand are listed in Table 6. Specific recommendations on individual food
products can be found in the recent OECS demand study.
38  OECS countries have moved towards the application of the HS2007 tariff                           23
nomenclature. Although the tariff structure and levels are based on the CARICOM
CET, they continue to vary across countries (WTO 2014).
39  Customs service charges are applied to all imports, including those from within
the OECS region. These fees are high in comparison to those exhibited in other
regions around the world.
40  While import duties for inputs into production are typically waived following a
formal application by the importer, the challenge is that this process sometime
takes several months and thus can be very burdensome.


﻿Table 6: Opportunities for locally sourcing products of OECS agriculture,
including livestock and fisheries
Product     Sourcing Potential                                Possible Improvement Measures
Fruits and  Demand for fresh produce is expanding in volume and  Potential to expand quantity and crop variety based on
vegetables  variety, and tourism is an important driver of this growth  tourism demand exists through a number of instruments,
in demand. OECS members already produce some fruits  including production and harvest planning, supply
and vegetables of relatively good quality at competitive  and demand matching, aggregation, and expansion of
prices and supply them to a range of hotels across  modern agricultural technology and techniques, such
the OECS. These advantages, combined with hotels'  as post-harvest technologies, cold storage, irrigation,
preference for fresh produce provide these commodities  protected agriculture, greenhouses, and hydroponics.
with the greatest potential to increase local supply  Technical training needs to be introduced in order to
for the tourism sector. Tropical fruits and high-value  promote the management skills required to achieve the
perishable vegetables, in particular, have strong potential quality, consistent supply, and other standards required
for expansion. Given that the tourist industry accounts  by the tourism and export markets. An emphasis may be
for only one-third of fresh food purchases in the OECS,  on enabling young entrepreneurial farmers to invest in
growers need to explore additional markets, including  modern agriculture and lead the way to a more diversified
domestic and regional (export) markets,           and dynamic agriculture.
Fish and    Fresh fish and seafood are important products for the  Despite the high demand for fresh fish and seafood,
seafood     tourism sector and are therefore already in high demand  the fishery sector has limited equipment (e.g., small
by hotels, restaurants, and marinas. Because they are  fishing boats and limited cold storage), which constrains
highly perishable, fresh fish and seafood harvested by  consistency of supply. The lack of specific products during
OECS fishermen have an advantage over imported fresh  certain seasons is also an issue. Hotels would purchase
fish and seafood. Potential also exists to increase exports  more fish if filleting were done under hygienic conditions
of certain seafood (e.g., lobster) if regional import and  (currently most fish are sold as whole). Some investment
export procedures (e.g., customs) improve,        in aquaculture is taking place and can be expanded.
Meat        Locally sourced meat has limited potential for the tourism  The upgrading and/or establishment of processing
and         sectordue to high production costs (driven by the high  facilities would facilitate meeting the hotel industry's
Chicken     cost of imported feed), limited local production capacity,  standards for hygiene, cuts, and quality. The required
and problems meeting standards for quality (including  investments are substantial, however, both at the farm
unavailability of certain types of cuts), and hygiene. A  level and at processing facilities. In addition, if local
large share of food imported by hotels consists of frozen  production costs remain significantly higher than the
meat and chicken; only a very small share is purchased  landed price of imported meat, it would be difficult for
locally. An exception is whole chicken, which is often  local producers to compete.
purchased locally.
Dairy       Similarto meat, the low price of imported dehydrated  Added-value processing, such as the production of local
milk reduces the competitiveness of local milk    goat cheeses or yogurts prepared with local fruit, may
production,                                       offer opportunities to supply a niche market.
Source: World Bank-and FA 2008; OCS ommission 2014; authors, based on field interviews.
2. Marketing of fresh agricultural produce
The   structure   of  the      prevailing  marketing    system   for fresh   produce    is
rudimentary. Virtually all marketing of fresh local produce in           ECS countries
is done by individual farmers, and until they harvest, many        farmers do not know
24                                 where or to whom they will sell. Buyers simply keep a list of farmers (the number of
farmers on the list depends on the size of demand but usually ranges from          5 to 20
farmers for hotels, and around 100 farmers for larger supermarkets) and call them
whenever they need produce delivered. In addition farmers typically call hotels and
supermarkets during harvest to inquire about demand. Farmers normally deliver
the produce themselves on days requested by the hotels, and each week buyers go
down their lists of farmers until demand is satisfied. Transportation of produce
from farms to hotels and supermarkets is often costly and inefficient, as volumes


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
are typically low and the entire cost is born by individual farmers, and vehicles
are unlikely to be utilized daily. Irrespective of the type of buyer (hotel/resort,
restaurant, supermarket, or marina), no formal contracts are used except in very
few specific cases, and there is a lack of information regarding supply and demand
prior to harvest.
Another salient feature of market structure is the low degree of farmer
organization. Farmers in the OECS are generally not well organized, and the
numbers and percentages of farmers who are actively part of a producer or marketing
organization are rather small. Where producer organizations do exist, they often
face challenges that are not unique to the OECS, such as financial problems, unstable
membership, and mistrust among individual farmer members. On the other hand, a
few producer organizations have survived and are moving forward. It is important
to analyze the experience of the more successful organizations and learn from the
ways in which they have successfully overcome these challenges.
An important aspect of market structure is the involvement of the public
sector. Ministries of Agriculture throughout the OECS are involved not only in
governing the agricultural sector through regulatory and policy measures, but are
also active in purchasing and marketing agricultural produce (and in some cases also
in farming), typically through marketing board arrangements (some include retail
operations as well). Agricultural marketing boards in OECS countries typically run
at a consistent loss to the exchequer, however, and often crowd out private sector-led
marketing activities. The infrastructure of some marketing boards (storage, chilling
units, and so on) is in a dire state because proper maintenance has been lacking. In
most cases, marketing boards have a monopoly on imports of some products, such
as rice, sugar, and powdered milk. None of these activities seem to be carried out
efficiently, which contributes to poor market performance.
Poor market information leads to uncertainty for buyers and sellers.
Throughout the OECS, the lack of market information affects both the demand and
supply sides. On the demand side, buyers (tourist establishments and supermarkets)
face uncertainty about availability of products in terms of quantity, quality, and
timeliness. On the supply side, farmers are unaware of the exact nature of the
demand from either the tourist industry or supermarkets at a given time; they are at
the mercy of buyers, who contact them to satisfy a demand that, until the moment
of contact, remains unknown to farmers.
The combination of poor market information and a rudimentary market
structure for fresh produce results in suboptimal market performance. Farmers,
who typically deliver small and unpredictable quantities to buyers, are in a difficult                   25
situation-they lack a guaranteed outlet for their produce while facing price
uncertainty. Yet the situation seems inefficient for buyers as well, given that they
have to deal with numerous suppliers who cannot consistently supply quantities
that meet certain minimum quality standards and are available at the appropriate
time. This is especially a challenge for the large hotels and cruise lines, given the
challenge of the current market structure to deliver large quantities of food that
they require.


﻿The business relationship between farmers and tourist establishments (large
hotels in particular) often suffers from a lack of trust. Problems related to delayed
payment by buyers, the inconsistent quality and quantity of products provided by
suppliers, and unequal market power (often leading buyers to dictate prices without
any negotiation) often cause mistrust to arise between buyers and sellers, and results
in sub-optimal market conduct.
Market performance is rather poor. Examples of aggregation in marketing, such
as contract farming arrangements and outgrower schemes, are scarce throughout
the OECS. The authors encountered only a couple of examples of contract farming,
including one with an agro-processor in St. Lucia and another with a hotel in
Dominica.41 In Antigua, Sandals has an arrangement with a relatively large-scale
farmer (60 acres),42 but even in this case there is neither a contract nor any kind of
planning involved.43
The lack of aggregation of smallholder supplies compromises market
performance and complicates the planning of farm production based on demand
(which in any case is not a common practice among farmers in the OECS). While
this in a sense is a logical outcome of the prevailing marketing system in which
neither prices nor quantities are known before the start of the growing season, it also
leads to shortages and surpluses, which are all too common throughout the OECS,
resulting in considerable price variation over time and unstable farm income. In
summary, the lack of aggregation in marketing not only limits farmers' access to
assured and remunerative markets (and a stable income over the seasons, with a
shorter "lean" season), but it also complicates buyers' purchasing operations and
creates a disincentive to buy locally, especially for the larger hotels.
When dealing with smallholders, marketing can rarely be seen in isolation
from production. A major constraint in the production and marketing of fresh
produce in OECS countries is the absence of a combined production-marketing
system that would ensure (i) a consistent supply of sufficient quantities of quality
produce to buyers at required times, and (ii) a reliable income for producers. Both
if these may require a certain degree of coordination in which private aggregators
link up with smallholder producers and provide services, including the supply of
inputs (often on credit), technical advice, and marketing. An important function
41 Baron Foods, a relatively large agro-processor headquartered in St. Lucia,
sources its raw products from about 30 local farmers, with whom it contracts to
produce specific crops at an agreed-upon purchasing price. The company supplies
production inputs and loans to farmers. Contracts between the hotel in Dominica
26                               and producers state guaranteed prices but do not specify quantities, which are
communicated to suppliers by phone on short notice.
42  According to the latest agricultural census in Antigua and Barbuda (2007), only
six farmers own over 50 acres. No farmer owned over 100 acres.
43  In this case, one week in advance Sandals informs the farmer of its required
products, quantities, and prices. He fills Sandals orders from his own crops and by
purchasing from other local farmers. Sales to Sandals by this farmer total about
US$220,000 annually. Still, Sandals imports the vast majority of its fresh produce
via Miami.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
of private sector-led aggregation is coordination of supply and demand throughout
the different stages of the value chain.
3. Youth involvement in agriculture
3.1. Challenges related to the aging agricultural sector
Most agricultural producers do not treat farming as a commercial business. The
majority of farmers in OECS countries are smallholders who farm less than 2 acres.
Many are unregistered. St. Vincent, for instance, has more than 6,000 registered
farmers (and an estimated 4,000 unregistered farmers) within only 390 square
kilometers. Grenada has over 9,000 farmers, only one-third of whom are estimated
to be commercial farmers. Many farmers also have off-farm incomes. Farming is
often carried out using traditional methods with limited technology and irrigation;
practices have not kept pace with changes in agricultural technology. Throughout
the OECS, only a small minority of farmers have strong skills in modern farming
methods, farm management, marketing, and bookkeeping. Most producers employ
a mixed cropping technique, where different types of crops are cultivated within
the same field (and varieties of the same crop with different life cycles). While a
mixed system helps farmers spread risks (related to demand, insects, and climate),
it results in low economies of scale per crop. Many farmers maintain a small amount
of livestock for obtaining manure and/or for weed control, as well as for selling.
The involvement of young people in the agricultural sector is very limited. An
important aspect of the field-level challenges mentioned here is that farmers tend
to be older and set in their ways, and thus less adept at taking up new technologies.
Few updated statistics on the age distribution of farmers are available. According to
interviews with officials from the various OECS ministries of agriculture, as well as
with farm groups, most farmers are rather old, however. In St. Vincent, for example,
a 2014 survey conducted by the Ministry of Agriculture found that the average age
of farmers belonging to cooperatives was 51 years. In Antigua and Barbuda, the
latest agricultural census (2007) found that only 9 percent of farmers were younger
than 34, and 70 percent were 45 or older. Team interviews with farmers across
OECS countries reveal that the majority of their children have chosen not to pursue
a career in agriculture. Opportunities on farms exist, yet they are accessible to and
appreciated by only a few young people. Apart from the stigmatization of farming
because of a history of slavery, most young people do not perceive agricultural
employment as an opportunity for a successful career. Instead, the young see the
difficult situation faced by farmers struggling with small plots, outdated technology,                  27
and the need to work other jobs to supplement their farm incomes. The difficulty of
obtaining financing and land titles, coupled with growing occurrences of weather-
related disasters such as droughts and hurricanes, makes farming appear as a risky
venture with little prospect for success. Instead, the majority of young people choose
to pursue careers that command more respect in society and are less risky, such as
law and medicine, or they prefer to work in the dynamic tourist industry.


﻿Youth unemployment is high across the OECS. While national unemployment
is high in most OECS countries, the rate of youth unemployment is even higher-
on average almost double the national rate (Figure 5). Part of the unemployment
challenge arises from a mismatch between the supply of unskilled labor and the
demand for skilled labor to fill modern jobs. Recent labor market surveys in St. Lucia
and Grenada revealed that hiring firms place high value on literacy, numeracy, and
communication and behavioral skills (World Bank 2015). In addition, companies
pointed to the shortage of skilled labor as the main constraint for improving
competitiveness. In other words, perhaps the biggest labor market challenge is the
mismatch between the skills and knowledge gained in schooling versus the skills
demanded by employers. Recent graduates receive hardly any assistance as they
transition into the labor force. High unemployment levels slow economic growth
since people have less cash to spend. Youth unemployment can also lead to social
distress, a higher incidence of crime, and economic migration.
Figure 5: Unemployment levels in OECS countries, 2014
41,8
30,6       31,5      33,8
26                                     24,4
19,9              12         1          18,
5,1        E111               12, F      10 
Saint Kitts  Antigua  Dominica    OECS    Saint Vincent  Grenada  Saint Lucia
and Nevis  & Barbuda             Average &the Grenadines
0 National Unemployment (%)  N Youth Unemployment (%)
Source: Authors, based on First Council of Ministers ofAgriculture Meeting, St. Vincent (March 27, 2015), and
data from the Government of St. Lucia (2014).
3.2. Opportunities for overcoming field-level
challenges and reducing unemployment
Young entrepreneurial farmers in the OECS have the potential to transform
the agricultural sector from subsistence farming into commercial businesses.
If young, motivated farmers could obtain the technical skills and financial support
required in modern agriculture, they could initiate farming ventures that employ
28                             modern equipment and techniques, such as greenhouses and hydroponics, to
produce food that cannot be grown using traditional methods and can substitute
some of the imported foods. Young entrepreneurial farmers would bring drive and
innovation into the workforce. They could have a transformative impact on the
growth of the agricultural sector and economy, although this impact, sometimes
referred to as the "youth dividend," typically does not occur without government
and/or outside support (Brooks, Zorya, and Gautam 2012). In addition, for young
entrepreneurial farmers to be successful, some of the traditional challenges in the


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
agriculture sector, such as issues related to land titles and to water supply, would
need to be dealt with appropriately.
The OECS agricultural sector has room for growth and can absorb young
farmers. Increasing local demand for food through growth in the tourist sector
and supermarkets, as well as through intra-regional and external demand, provides
opportunities for the agricultural sector to expand. Modern techniques such as
protected cultivation and other farming practices could allow young entrepreneurial
farmers to produce non-traditional, high-value produce that is currently imported,
such as cherry tomatoes and a greater variety of lettuce. Responding to the various
challenges mentioned above could result in growth in the sector. The productivity
gaps and underutilized land that exists across the OECS can be seen as an opportunity
to both increase labor productivity and absorb labor. Modest improvements in
management practices, tools, mechanization, and irrigation can increase farm
yields and thus income, including the yields and incomes of smallholders.
Employing young people in agriculture would help mitigate youth
unemployment and rural poverty. Leading international organizations such
as the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, and the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) have
recognized the importance of rural employment for reducing poverty and improving
food security. Although youth employment is often promoted by supporting the
creation of formal jobs in the urban sector, enhancing employment opportunities
for young people and promoting agricultural growth are complementary activities
(Brooks, Zorya, and Gautam 2012). For these improvements to take place and bear
fruit, however, countries need to develop a supportive environment for business
that encourages competition, appropriate land titling procedures, financing for
farmers, the sharing of information and provision of timely advice, the provision of
proper production inputs, and the development of appropriate skills.
Efforts to promote youth employment in OECS countries have met with some
success. In recent years OECS governments have placed a growing emphasis on
youth employment. Two projects supported by the World Bank in recent years-
the Inclusive Growth Adaptable Program Loan projects in St. Lucia (2008-09)
and Grenada (2012-13)-supported reforms by OECS governments to increase
the employability of youth through public-private partnerships for demand-
driven technical and life skills training. The Skills Training for Unemployed Youth
component of these projects also involved agriculture, including training in crop
production and livestock rearing. More than 60 percent of the young people trained
under these projects found jobs immediately after their training. At least two other
projects that are underway (not financed by the World Bank) include activities to                    29
increase youth employment. The Promotion of Regional Opportunities for Produce
through Enterprises and Linkages (PROPEL) project focuses on helping young
farmers in the OECS to increase their incomes by connecting them to high-value


﻿markets.44 The Banana Accompanying Measures (BAM) project45 also features
activities that are likely to increase employment (including youth employment) in
the sector. Finally, the OECS Commission is in the process of developing an OECS
Youth Development Strategy with entrepreneurship identified as a key pillar for
youth development.
4. Agro-processing
4.1. Food losses and limited value-added activities
Food losses are high throughout the OECS, mainly because most farmers
produce the same products at the same time. The resulting over-supply (glut)
during a relatively short period leads to low prices and revenues for farmers. It
also leads to losses, also because of the lack of storage facilities on farms. In some
islands, these problems are aggravated by marketing boards that are mandated to
buy all products that meet a minimum quality standard, resulting in large amounts
of produce, such as mangoes, tomatoes, and citrus being dumped each year.
The food processing industry in the OECS lacks the capacity to absorb, process,
and preserve all the fresh produce supplied, yet at the same time, agro-processors
experience difficulty in obtaining the amounts of products they require in a
consistent manner. There is a mismatch between what farmers produce and what
the industry demands. This mismatch, while related to seasonality, is much more of
an organizational and marketing problem. In many cases, farmers plant crops they
are familiar with or that did well the previous year, and they look for markets only at
harvest, instead of planting what the market demands and ideally lining up a buyer
for their produce before planting. Only a limited number of agro-processors operate
in the OECS, mainly because the skills and know-how are lacking, relationships
have not been developed with foreign markets, a significant amount of financing is
required to invest in processing facilities, and energy costs are very high.
Nevertheless, several interesting agro-processing initiatives are underway in
the OECS, especially in St. Lucia and Grenada. These mostly small- and medium-
sized enterprises focus on products such as jams, jellies, cassava flour and bread,
fruit juices, fruit syrup, fruit cheese, chips, coconut oil, chocolate, processed spices
44  PROPEL mainly assists smallholders to meet buyers' quality, quantity, and food
safety needs by strengthening linkages between private sector buyers, producers,
and government institutions and by increasing producers' access to appropriate
30                                financing. OECS countries included in the projects are Dominica, Grenada, St.
Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines. The project is funded by the Canadian
Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade, and Development and the Canadian
Hunger Foundation.
45  BAM, an EU support package for a number of banana-exporting countries, seeks
to facilitate the adjustment of these countries to a new trading environment.
Countries participating in BAM in the OECS include Dominica, St. Lucia, and
St. Vincent & the Grenadines. The measures began in 2012-13 and are country-
specific.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
(chili sauces, for example), medicines, or processed fish. Some examples of agro-
processors are described below by type of product:
* Hot sauces, condiments, jam and jellies, syrups: Baron Foods Ltd. is one of
the largest agro-processors in the OECS, manufacturing 150 products at plants
in three countries (with HACCP and FSSC 22000 certification),46 employing
200 people, and exporting 60 percent of its products around the world. Other
examples are the smaller De La Grenade Industries Ltd. in Grenada, or Susie's
Hot Sauce, a company in Antigua and Barbuda.
* Cassava flour and bread: Plas Kassav Inc. in St. Lucia produces cassava bread,
pone, muffins, and flour. It is based on artisanal production and is not yet
HACCP certified.
* Medicine: Noelville Ltd. in Grenada produces Nut-Med, an instant relief spray
with a blend of plant extracts, including nutmeg and mace, that relieves tight
sore joints, arthritic pains, muscle soreness, inflammation, and back pain. The
product is exported.
* Fruit juices: Summer Ltd. just started production in late 2014 and is currently
obtaining HACCP certification. It produces nectars and fruit juices from locally
grown fruits (golden apple, guava, mango, passion fruit, sorrel, soursop, and
tamarind). The company visits farmers and purchases directly from the field to
discourage larceny and to ensure freshness.
* Chocolate: The Grenada Chocolate Company Ltd., founded in 1999, produces
organic dark chocolate; all of its members are certified organic farmers. The
company has positioned itself as a sustainable enterprise. To be carbon neutral,
its operations include a solar-powered factory, sailboat and bicycle transport,
and solar-powered refrigeration. Jouvay Chocolate, a new chocolate factory,
is a partnership between Grenada's cocoa farmers and LA Budick Grenada.
As majority owners of Jouvay (70 percent), Grenada's cocoa growers are
also manufacturers, doing the added-value processing that generates higher
incomes and leads to greater financial security.
4.2. Challenges and untapped opportunities
Low capacity utilization and high cost of operating processing plants decrease
the competitiveness of the agribusiness industry. Many processing plants run at
low capacity, partially due to the seasonal availability of produce, the limited supply
from farmers, and the challenge of finding larger markets. The competitiveness of
the products is also reduced by high production costs, which mostly are the result                       31
of very high energy costs (OECS countries are highly dependent on imported fossil
fuel to generate electricity) and the high cost of importing inputs in production.
Electricity from renewable energy sources represents only a small percentage of the
overall generation mix within the OECS.
46 HACCP is Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points.


﻿Smaller enterprises generally lack the funds and knowledge to meet quality,
food safety, and labeling standards. The process for complying with food
safety standards is often lengthy, costly, and requires significant dedication and
perseverance. Consequently, only few of the agro-processors are HACCP certified,
or even ISO 22000 or FSSC 22000, which often impedes access to international
markets.
Although traditionally the focus in the OECS has been on the export of
traditional crops, many export opportunities exist for agro-processors. The
OECS generally has been seen as an exporter of traditional crops such as bananas
and nutmeg. Even though several agro-processing initiatives have emerged, many
more unrealized opportunities exist to add value to fresh produce. In Grenada,
for example, whereas cocoa beans and raw nutmeg can be exported only by their
respective cooperatives, processed products can be produced and sold by anybody.
Several agro-processors have been linking agro-processing with agro-tourism.
Taking advantage of the large tourism industry, including hotel stays and cruise
ships, many agro-processors have already liaised with hotels and tour operators to
bring tourists to their plants and factory shops, which is an important source of
income for some of them. There is still significant potential, however, to increase
this line of business.
Agro-processors find it difficult to sell to tourism actors in the OECS.
According to several agro-processors executives interviewed, while their companies
export to supermarkets, stores and other buyers in some none-OECS countries in
the Caribbean region and outside the region (such as to the U.S. and Europe),47 they
sell very little to hotels located in their own countries. They claim that the reason for
this is due to the import duty concessions received by large hotels, which incentivizes
these hotels to import the majority of their food from Miami. In addition, they
claim that with some of the large hotels and with the cruise lines, food-sourcing
decisions are made at headquarters rather than in the OECS. Thus, in the few cases
where agro-processors do sell to local tourist establishments, it is mostly sold to
smaller hotels, which use their products in their kitchens and souvenir shops.
4.3. The role of the public sector in agro-processing
Where the public sector has been directly involved in agro-processing in the
OECS, activities seem tobe inefficient. Some OECS governments have compensated
for the lack of agro-processing activities by setting up their own processing plants
(mostly with donor funds), instead of facilitating the private sector's entry into the
32                           market. These plants consistently run at a loss and in some cases have generated
conflicts with farmers and small agro-processors.
47 The United Kingdom represents one of the main export markets for OECS crops
and agricultural processed products due to a tradition of exports, familiarity with
the UK markets, and business and political ties.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
Where governments have been acting as facilitators to the industry, the market
has reacted positively. For example, OECS governments have provided concessions
for duty-free imports of equipment to agro-processing factories to make them more
competitive. In addition, some governments have provided technical assistance to
the industry. In St. Vincent, for instance, the Ministry of Agriculture with support
from FAO is providing the four established processors of coconut water (High
Mountains, Little Nut Farm, Fountain of Youth, and Seven Peaks) with technical
assistance on improving the sanitary and phytosanitary conditions under which
coconut is grown and water is bottled, improving marketing to locals and tourists,
and improving process flow. The government will provide the technical assistance,
but the financing for upgrading infrastructure and equipment will come from the
processors themselves.
33


﻿34


﻿III. RECOMMENDATIONS
T he study focuses on three essential areas for building stronger linkages:
marketing arrangements, the role of young farmer-entrepreneurs,
and the agro-processing industry. These three main recommendations
are based on analysis carried out by the team of the information collected
during detailed field interviews with a sample of "game changers" of the private
sector and key public sector actors, combined with the findings and conclusions
of previous studies on the topic. Some ideas were also drawn from a number of                  35
ongoing investment projects supported by the World Bank in the OECS and other
regions. The three main interventions presented below were found to have the
highest potential to advance the objective of strengthening the linkages between the
agriculture and tourism sectors, and increase the share of agricultural products that
are sourced locally.


﻿1. Private sector-led aggregation of smallholder produce
1.1. Promoting private sector-led aggregation
Limited aggregation is a major issue in marketing fresh produce in OECS
countries. It not only limits farmers' access to remunerative markets but also
complicates buyers' purchasing operations, especially those of large hotels, thus
it often provides a negative incentive to purchase locally. As noted, public sector
efforts at aggregation are riddled with problems, and based on their historical
performance there is little justification to promote them further. More promising
models are based on aggregation by private sector actors-off-takers who buy
from small-scale producers, thus providing them with a market for their produce.
Such aggregators presumably would also provide other types of support/services
to smallholders, possibly including planting material and other inputs (fertilizer,
chemicals, technical advice, and so on). The off-taker would be compensated
(usually in kind) for the costs of such support (plus an implicit interest rate) at
harvest time when taking possession of the produce. These types of arrangements
are also referred to as contract farming.
A marketing system based on private sector aggregators would have the
potential to overcome a number of key constraints typically faced by smallholder
producers. These constraints include: (i) limited access to finance for farming;
(ii) limited access to improved production technologies and knowledge of how
to apply them; (iii) difficulties in accessing reasonably priced and high-quality
inputs; and (iv) limited and/or costly access to markets. While the aggregator would
need to profit through the difference between the price it pays to farmers and the
price at which it sells to clients, at least two additional benefits would accrue to
the aggregator: (i) an enhanced image of being socially and environmentally
responsible; and (ii) differentiating their products from mainstream products while
satisfying new consumer demands. In addition, apart from aggregating, storing and
marketing produce, aggregators could add value to certain products through basic
activities such as washing, packaging, and cutting, which supermarkets interviewed
in particular have expressed strong interest in.
Despite some notable examples of success (including rural productive
alliances48 in a number of Latin American countries), effectively organizing
smallholders into groups that regard farming as a business and aim at achieving
48  The term "productive alliance" is used when producer organizations are playing
36                                the role of an aggregator. It brings commercial buyers, such as supermarkets,
processors or exporters together with producer organizations with the purpose
of increasing incomes and employment for rural producers through their
participation in modern supply chains. The concept of rural productive alliances
has been successfully applied in several Latin American countries with support
from the World Bank. Because producer organizations can be unstable owing to
poor management, lack of capacity to manage conflict, and lack of social cohesion,
a strong producer organization is a prerequisite for a successful rural productive
alliance.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
scale has often proven to be a challenge throughout the developing world. Farmers
often need outside assistance to organize into producer groups. Since such help has
rarely been forthcoming in the OECS, it is not surprising that farmers' efforts to
form associations on their own have not always been successful. Some producer
organizations in the OECS have the potential to act as aggregators, and those with
the best performance should be supported to achieve this role. Nevertheless, it would
not be enough in this context; there is a need for private actors to step in and assume
the required organizational and aggregation roles. These actors could be traders,
wholesalers, agro-processors, or even larger (lead) farmers, who buy from multiple
small farmers. Smallholder farmers would produce according to a plan agreed upon
with the aggregator and according to terms and conditions detailed in a written
contract. Besides marketing (including the physical purchasing of commodities as
well as providing market information), contracts may cover input supply, financing,
and other services (such as technical assistance).
Contract farming-type arrangements may be particularly suitable for
strengthening agriculture-tourism linkages in the OECS. Tourism-oriented
enterprises are willing to pay a price premium for fresh produce with specific
attributes such as freshness, size, color, uniformity, maturity, and even invisible
attributes such as being organically grown or possessing zero chemical residues.
Given the specific crop management methods and substantial supervision required
to achieve such attributes, contract farming arrangements could be an attractive
way to match supply with demand. The small farm sizes in the OECS countries
should not act as a barrier to contract farming arrangements, given the intensive
nature of horticulture, which is largely scale-neutral and is also a main interest of
the tourism industry as far as local sourcing is concerned. On the other hand, small
farm sizes do increase supervision costs. International experience suggests that a
good practice is for lead producers, aggregators, or cooperatives to enter into semi-
formal or formal arrangements with tourism operators to meet their supply needs
(International Trade Organization 2010).
Assistance is needed to finance the establishment and facilitate the development
of aggregation schemes and contract farming arrangements. Contract farming
arrangements (or aggregation schemes in general for that matter) face substantial
upfront establishment costs. The initial investments to set up a smallholder-
based contract farming arrangement may include establishing the logistics of an
extension and field supervision network; conducting the initial training of farmers
and supervisors; obtaining equipment for land preparation and harvesting by
smallholder farmers; developing infrastructure for post-harvest activities such as
cleaning, grading, bulking, and packaging; and developing transportation and cold                        37
storage facilities. Contract farming arrangements may also require a number of
growing seasons to develop, both in terms of quantity and quality; typically the
majority of these establishment costs are incurred during the first two to three years
of operation.
Such assistance may contain a matching grant mechanism to finance
competitively selected and financially viable business plans for the elaboration
of aggregation schemes. Such business plans could finance: (i) investments (goods,


﻿works, equipment) for aggregators (such as transport, storage, post-harvest, or
cold chain facilities) and for producers (such as equipment for land preparation
and harvesting, small irrigation infrastructure including water harvesting, or
protected agriculture structures); and (ii) technical assistance to the aggregator and
its eventual supervisors on topics such as logistics, storage, food safety, marketing,
labeling, agronomy, accounting, communication and ICT, and to producers on
good agricultural practices, agricultural technology, innovation, climate smart
agriculture, and post-harvest handling. Rigorous financial analysis of the contract
farming/aggregator schemes is crucial for the design of a matching grant structure,
as is careful analysis of business plans to determine eligibility for receiving such a
grant. In addition to a technical description of the proposed subproject, business
plans should include a thorough financial viability analysis (including a clear cost-
benefit analysis with and without the matching grant), a market feasibility analysis,
an environmental analysis, a description of the beneficiary population and ideally,
have secured up-front resources from the private financial sector to support the
business plan. A matching grant contract is signed between the project and the
grant recipient (specifically, the aggregator).
Incorporate approaches to minimize the risk of failure. Plenty of contract
farming schemes have failed, especially those involving smallholders in developing
countries. To mitigate the risk of conflict between sellers and buyers, third-party
verification-of quality or arbitration-for instance, by a non-governmental
organization (NGO)-can play a constructive role, especially in environments
where legal recourse is an imperfect option.
Assist in improving the policy environment and strengthening institutions.
Aside from piloting contract growing schemes, assistance may strive to enable the
bureaus of standards in the OECS countries to implement grades and standards
established by them, which would facilitate communication and negotiation between
farmers and buyers and make it easier to define contracts. Where public extension
services are working relatively well, public-private partnerships in extension may be
promoted, under which public extension services (for a fee) may assist the buyer in
providing the required technical assistance to smallholder farmers. The provision of
mediation services (by a public extension agent, for example, or another person or
body acceptable to both buyer and farmers) as an alternative grievance mechanism
is also a public good that may be promoted.
1.2. ICT platform to match supply and demand
38                               ICT can play an important role in private sector-led aggregation of fresh
produce. This technology can provide farmers real-time market intelligence (on
prices, demand, quality standards, and weather, for example), which could contribute
to higher farm income.4 Despite the fact that information provision already is a key
element in most types of aggregation arrangements-especially in contract farming
schemes, which enable farmers to make better-informed production and marketing
49 See Jansen, Dixie, and Torero (2010).


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
decisions and to participate more actively in value chains-ICT is still important
in making information available in a more efficient and therefore cheaper manner
(for example, through mobile phone messaging). The relevance of ICT thus lies
in improving communication between buyers and sellers, improving agronomic
performance by providing information to farmers, and reducing the risk of side
selling (and therefore failure). An aggregator can facilitate access to ICT; this needs
to be accompanied by efforts from the public sector (which could provide weather
information, for example) and private sector (information on demand, quality
standards, and technical advice) to improve both the information content of ICTs
and the ability of potential users to employ these technologies.
One of the key recommendations of the Agro-Tourism Demand Study is the
establishment of a data collection system to capture hotel demand and match it
with agricultural supply data. Such an ICT system has the potential to facilitate
a more efficient trade in agricultural products by providing reliable and timely
marketing information. International experience also suggests that employing
initiatives that address both food supply and demand are more likely to succeed than
initiatives that focus on only one of the two. Thus, by mitigating current marketing
and production planning challenges faced by local farmers and tourism actors,
an IT platform that matches supply and demand would likely prove beneficial in
strengthening the linkages between the two sectors.
2. Advancing farming through the promotion of young
entrepreneurial farmers
The promotion of young entrepreneurial farmers would support the emergence
of a more diversified, dynamic, and commercial agriculture in the OECS
countries. Enabling young entrepreneurial farmers to achieve employment at farms
employing modern agriculture technology and techniques or to establish their own
innovative farming enterprises will revitalize OECS agriculture, helping it to shift
from subsistence farming and a focus on traditional exports toward an increasingly
diversified, dynamic, and commercial agriculture with improved linkages to the
tourism sector and the local economy. This was also one of the main conclusions
of the World Bank-FAG study (2008). To realize this shift, there is a need to (i)
identify young entrepreneurial and driven farmers and provide them with the skills
and training necessary to establish and successfully operate a farming enterprise
based on modern technology; and (ii) assist trained young farmers in launching
agricultural enterprises and marketing their products.
2.1. Capacity building and vocational training program                                           39
Identify young entrepreneurial farmers with the highest potential to excel in
the program. The selection process for the vocational training program would
be competitive, based on previously identified, transparent criteria following the
launch of a local awareness campaign to attract a pool as large as possible. The
ideal candidates would be young individuals aged 16-35, who are either farmers
themselves or have shown a strong interest in farming, are bright and driven, and are


﻿interested in eventually starting up their own farm employing modern technology.
The reasons for targeting this relatively wide age group are that its members face
similar challenges (such as difficulty obtaining skills, employment, and financing),
they are still young enough to adopt new technologies, and can be motivated to
embark on innovative ventures.
This group would require practical training to strengthen skills in agriculture,
business, and entrepreneurship. These young people would require specific,
practical training in the skills needed to establish and successfully run modern and
environmentally friendly farming enterprises. The training would be as practical as
possible and focus on a variety of topics, including agricultural entrepreneurship,
horticulture, plant biology, plant protection and production, agriculture logistics,
value chains, business, marketing, and ICT. Classroom training would also include
basic and life skills, such as communication and teamwork. Vocational training
would take place through study abroad and on-farm internships in the OECS and
larger Caribbean countries.
The program would finance scholarships for study abroad. While some
vocational training in agriculture is available in OECS countries, mainly through
local colleges, extension officers, and workshops organized by the Caribbean
Agricultural Research and Development Institute (CARDI), it is limited (basic) and
insufficient to provide program participants with the skills to establish successful,
modern and innovative agricultural enterprises. A more appropriate place to receive
such training would be at the nearby University of the West Indies (UWI), which
has campuses at Jamaica, Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago.
Following study abroad, program participants would participate in on-farm
internships. International experience suggests that combining technical training
in the classroom with internship or on-the-job workplace training can increase
trainees' understanding of the subject matter as well as their employment prospects.
Therefore, following their study abroad, program participants would be sent to a farm
that employs modern agricultural techniques such as greenhouses, hydroponics,
organic farming, and aquaculture,50 which would enable them to practice what they
learned at UWI. The internships would not only further their understanding of
modern farming operations but also help them to establish relationships with other
farmers. Program participants could either intern in an OECS member country or
in a different Caribbean country. While there are not many modern farms in OECS
countries, they do exist. Program participants would have a say in choosing the
40
50  While wild fish stocks across the world have been in decline because of increasing
consumption, aquaculture is expanding and can be seen as a sustainable way to
deliver important food to consumers. Due to the limited fish quantities available
in in OECS countries waters, aquaculture may be a solution for providing fish and
seafood both to local demand and potentially to tourists as well.
51  For instance, the authors visited an aqua farm is Antigua, and met with a young
entrepreneur that has two hydroponics greenhouse in Nevis. A few farmers have
greenhouses throughout the OECS.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
kind of farm their internship would take place at, based on their interests and plans
for an enterprise they wish to establish or work at.
Mentors would counsel program participants during the entire training
program. Mentoring is critical to ensure a successful training experience and
transition into establishing a farming enterprise or seeking employment. Mentors
would provide any kind of support needed by participants, from technical questions
related to agriculture to ideas on where to conduct the internship. In addition, a
network of program participants would be established to develop contacts and
promote information sharing.
2.2. Program for enterprise start-up
Provide financing, information and advice to facilitate young farmers to establish
their own agricultural enterprises. Even if young, motivated, entrepreneurial
farmers have developed the skills and a solid business plan to establish and operate
an enterprise, they still need assistance. To facilitate the establishment of small
and medium enterprises (SMEs) in agriculture and agribusiness, young farmers
need financing, information, and advice. For instance, bank loans for agricultural
businesses are very costly in the OECS and especially for young people, because banks
perceive agricultural ventures to be risky and because young people typically lack
collateral. Therefore, the enterprise program would combine financing (matching
grants) with hands-on coaching and technical advice, which have been known to
work well, especially with young people in light of their limited experience. The
program would also provide support (assistance in financing or technical advice) to
selected agro-related companies with plans to scale up.
The selection process for the start-up program would entail a business plan
competition. The competition would identify business plans with the highest
prospects of success. Preference would be given to enterprises that use modern
agriculture techniques, focus on producing higher value or highly perishable
products, and ideally also have secured up-front resources from the private financial
sector to support the business plan. Successful participants in the study abroad
and internship program would be encouraged to apply for the enterprise start-up
program. Start-up enterprises could be composed of more than one owner, in cases
where two or more young farmers would like to partner. The program would also
have a website with information on the program for young entrepreneurs, and it
would maintain a network of agricultural enterprises, farmers, and farm groups in
order to facilitate networking and information exchange.
Provide assistance with marketing to lay the groundwork for success. Even                             41
before their enterprises would be established, participants in the enterprise
start-up program would strategize about marketing and begin to obtain relevant
information and contacts. Once their enterprise would be established and before
crops are planted, farmers ideally would have identified a buyer for their products
and set a selling price that is profitable for their business. Given the importance of
marketing for any enterprise to succeed, the program would also assist participants
in this regard. For example, young farmers could take advantage of the aggregation


﻿schemes proposed in the second recommendation of this chapter (for private sector-
led aggregation of smallholder produce). In addition, participants could utilize the
IT platform matching supply of agricultural products with hotel demand, which
is also proposed in that section. Moreover, the program would be in a position to
connect farmers with the new agro-processing ventures that would be promoted
(discussed in the third recommendation), as well as connect farmers with large
hotels to discuss potential linkages. Finally, farmers would be encouraged to explore
regional markets and could obtain advice from their mentor on how to do so.
3. Promoting agro-processing
Promote start-ups and established SMEs and producer groups in the agro-
processing industry and improve their forward and backward linkages. While
some interesting agro-processing initiatives exist in the OECS, the sector is small and
underdeveloped. Constraints for developing agro-processing enterprises include a
lack of skills and knowledge of how to put a strong business plan into place; set
up or improve a plant; link with farmers; enter new markets; comply with quality,
food safety, or labeling standards; or acquire the equipment and inputs needed
at a low cost. Difficulties in accessing capital at affordable terms limit the scale of
investments in infrastructure, equipment, and tools required for a transformational
impact. The findings presented in this report point to the following two priority
areas for agro-processing interventions in the OECS: (i) improve skills for the agro-
processing industry, and (ii) promote investments and productive alliances that put
those skills to work.
3.1. Improve skills for the agro-processing industry
Through training, technical assistance, and study tours, improve the pivotal
skills enabling agro-processors to successfully build a plant, operate it, and
market their products. Training would target skills including financial literacy,
marketing, food processing and machinery, packaging, quality control, and
food safety and hygiene. Training could be short or longer term, and conducted
in-country or abroad. The training should be hands-on, practical, and directly
calibrated to strengthen the industry. Study tours could be organized at the local,
regional, or international level.
Facilitate access to new markets through training, business roundtables, and
participation in trade fairs. Improved marketing skills would be necessary but
not sufficient for penetrating markets and establishing the strong and lasting client
42                           relationships that are critically needed by agro-processors. Access to new markets
would be promoted by facilitating the participation of current and prospective agro-
processors in trade fairs and direct visits to potential clients. In addition, national
and regional business roundtables would be organized to strengthen the match
between supply and demand.
Specific technical assistance would be needed for agro-processing enterprises
to meet quality, food safety, and labeling standards and improve traceability.
The rigorous international standard adopted to support food safety and minimize


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
potential risks and hazards is HACCP. ISO 22000 standards and FSSC 22000
certification are designed to augment HACCP in relation to food safety and are
also relatively demanding. The priority should lie with HACCP compliance, which
requires substantial dedication, time and funds. The labeling laws of export markets
must also be met and can be complicated (one example is for exports to the EU, for
which EU Regulation 1169/2011 provides consumers with complete information on
the content and composition of products).
3.2. Promote investments and alliances for agro-processors
Provide support to promising agro-processing initiatives. Start-ups, as well as
established SMEs and producer groups involved in agro-processing, would be
assisted in the development of financially viable business plans. Competitively
selected business plans would then be partially financed with matching grants
for infrastructure, equipment, tools, and other investments. High energy costs in
the OECS make it attractive to invest in diversified strategies to generate power
for processing plants, including energy-saving technologies and greater use of
renewable energy.
Create alliances for agro-processorswith farmers or farmer groups, commercial
partners, technical service providers, or financial intermediaries. Following the
same model for marketing fresh agricultural products, alliances with farmers or
farmer groups would improve the quality, quantity and consistency of the supply
of raw materials to processing plants. Formal contracts with individual farmers
or farmer groups for certain crops would replace "gentlemen's agreements" (or no
agreements at all). Agro-processors would provide improved services to farmers,
such as inputs on credit and technical assistance. They would also contribute to the
fight against larceny by purchasing products directly from the farmers. A formal
agreement with at least one buyer would be a prerequisite to participate. Alliances
would be encouraged with technical partners such as CARDI, NGOs, or private
firms, which would provide technical assistance for farmers and the processing
firm. Ideally, alliances would also be established with financial intermediaries, who
would provide loans to complement the matching grants.
43


﻿44


﻿MAKE
IV. LAYING THE GROUND
FOR CONCRETE INTERVENTIONS
I n order to develop some of the interventions recommended in this
document, specific additional analysis on agriculture-tourism linkages
would be helpful. Apart from conducting a review of the agricultural sector
in the OECS, which would contribute to a deeper understanding of the sector,
further analysis would provide additional key information as inputs into the design
of possible policy interventions. These include:
4.1. The identification of key products that could be promoted in each country.           45
The idea behind such a study would be to identify fresh food with the highest
potential to replace imports in each OECS country. Some of this information
was already gathered through the 2014 OECS demand study. There is a need
to build on that information, however, by developing farm budgets to fully
understand production costs and productivity, as well as by carefully examining
current import trends and biophysical and agro-climatic conditions of
individual countries. Such a study could be carried out through key informant


﻿surveys for key commodities. Once potential products are identified, a value
chain analyses for each product would help to understand the breakdown in
costs and times, as well as potential bottlenecks.
4.2. A market scoping study focused on potential aggregators. This short study
would be aimed at identifying potential aggregators in OECS countries with an
interest in the recommended aggregator program.
4.3. A study to examine the potential for intra-regional and extra-regional
markets. Given that the tourism industry's demand for fresh food is limited,
an expansion of agricultural production would require additional markets in
order to spread risks and increase profits. A study looking into the potential
of exports (looking at revealed comparative advantage, for instance) would be
helpful for production planning and for informing OECS governments so that
they could deal with the constraints identified.
4.4. A study of logistics constraints in the OECS. A better understanding of
logistics constraints would enable governments to design interventions to
reduce logistics costs and times. Such a study would also look at the following
areas related to logistics: trade logistics, customs, and maritime shipping.
4.5. A study of the yachting industry food supply chain. Given the lack of
information regarding both the number of yacht passengers arriving in OECS
countries and the supply chain of obtaining fresh food, this study would enable
governments to better understand the current contribution of the yachting
sector to the local economy and identify better ways to strengthen the linkage
between marinas and local food suppliers.
46


﻿REFERENCES -ANNEXES
References
Blommestein, Erik. 2012. "Meeting Yachting Information Needs for Planning and
Policy in the Caribbean." Paper presented at the International Seminar on
Yachting, Fort de France, Martinique, May 30-June 1. http://www.ceregmia.
eu/Yatching2012/Docs/BLOMMESTEIN_Erik.doc.pdf.
Brooks, Karen, Sergiy Zorya, and Amy Gautam. 2012. "Global Food Policy Report:                  47
Jobs for Africa's Youth." Washington, DC: International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI). http://www.ifpri.org/gfpr/2012/employment-
agriculture.
Caribbean Tourism Association. 2015. Latest Tourism Statistics Tables. http://www.
onecaribbean.org/statistics/latest-tourism-statistics-tables/.


﻿DFID (UK Department of International Development). 2004. PPT (Pro Poor
Tourism) in Practice, Business Implementation of Pro Poor Tourism: Case
Study Briefs. Brief #3: Tourism Agricultural Linkages: Boosting inputs from
local farmers.
ECOSOC (United Nations Economic and Social Council). 2012. Annual ministerial
review. New York. http://www.un.org/en/ecosoc/docs/adv2012/oesc_12
amr_sg_rep.final.26_apr_2012.pdf.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2014. FAO
Statistical Yearbook 2014. Santiago: Regional Office for Latin America and
the Caribbean. http://www.fao.org/docrep/019/i3592e/i3592e.pdf.
2000. An Integrated Approach to Land and Water Resources Management in
the Caribbean. Keynote Address at the First Technical Meeting, Caribbean
Land and Water Resources Network (CLAWRENET), Bridgetown,
Barbados. http://www.fao.org/docrep/004/yl717e/yl717e21.htm
Henry, Andr6. 2013. "The Maritime and Yachting Sector in Grenada Economic
Impact Assessment: Final Report." http://www.grenadaworld.com/
LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=RXkaiLkLGAg%3D&tabid=58.
International Trade Center (ITC). 2010. "Inclusive Tourism: Linking Agriculture to
Tourism Markets."
Jansen, Hans, Grahame Dixie, and Miximo Torero. 2010. "The Impact of
Telecommunications on Agricultural Incomes in Developing Countries." In
Markets, Marketing, and Developing Countries: Where We Stand and Where
We Are Heading, edited by Hans Trijp and Paul Ingenbleek. Wageningen:
Wageningen Academic Publishers. Pp. 122-29.
Ministry of Agriculture, Antigua and Barbuda. 2012. "2007 Antigua and Barbuda
Census of Agriculture Final Report" St. Johns. Processed.
OAS (Organization of American States). 2013. "Assessment of the Opportunities for
the CARIFORUM Yachting Sector in Exporting Services to the European
Union (EU) under the CARIFORUM-EC EPA" http://c-nsc.org/download/
trade_in_services/February%202014-Yachting.pdf.
OECS Commission. 2014. "Agro-Tourism Demand Study."
SAnchez, Ricardo J, and Gordon Wilmsmeier. 2009. "Maritime Sector and Ports in
the Caribbean: The Case of CARICOM Countries." Santiago: Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.
48                                eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/6/36706/1cl3008i.pdf.
UCAR (Unidad para el Cambio Rural). Undated. "Programa de Servicios
Agricolas Provinciales, Unidad de Seguimiento y Evaluaci6n de Impacto,
Proyecto Piloto J6venes Emprendedores Rurales "Promoci6n de Cultura
Emprendedora." Buenos Aires: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
Office of the President. http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/acg/
Proyecto%20piloto%20j%C3%B3venes%20emprendedores%20rurales.%20
Promoci%C3%B3n%20de%20cultura%20emprendedora.pdf.


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2013. "Freight
Rates and Maritime Transport Costs." Chapter 3 of Review of Maritime
Transport 2013. New York. http://unctad.org/en/PublicationChapters/
rmt2013ch3_en.pdf.
UNWTO (United Nations World Tourism Organization). 2014. Annual Report
2013.  Madrid.   http://dtxtq4w60xqpw.cloudfront.net/sites/all/files/pdf/
unwto_annual_report_2013_0.pdf.
World Bank. 2008. "OECS: Increasing Linkages of Tourism with the
Agriculture, Manufacturing and Service Sectors." Washington, DC.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/7922/
440600ESWOP 106 10Box334086B0 1 PUBLIC1 .pdf?sequence= 1.
2012. Agricultural Innovation Systems: An Investment Sourcebook.
Washington, DC. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDS
ContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/03/01/000356161_20120301005432/
Rendered/PDF/672070PUBOEPI0067844BO9780821386842.pdf.
2014a. Implementation Completion and Results Report on a Credit in the
Amount of US$3.0 million Equivalent to Grenada for a OECS Skills for
Inclusive Growth Project in Support of the Second Phase of the OECS Skills
for Inclusive Growth Program. Report No: ICR2872. Washington, DC.
Processed. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContent
Server/WDSP/IB/2014/03/12/000333037_20140312124311/Rendered/
PDF/ICR2872OPO95680COdisclosedO30100140.pdf.
2014b. Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit to the Republic
of Mali for a Skills Development and Youth Employment Project. Report
No: 85768-ML. Washington, DC. June 3. Processed.
2015a. "An Efficiency and Performance Assessment: OECS Ports." Policy
Research Working Paper No. 7162. Washington, DC.
2015b. "Connectivity for Caribbean Countries: An Initial Assessment.
Policy Research Working Paper No. 7169. Washington, DC.
World Bank and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2008. "Backward
Linkages of Tourism in the Agriculture Sector for the OECS Countries."
(Ford, Tanimichi, and Werbrouck). Processed.
WTO (World Trade Organization). 2014. "OECS-WTO Members Trade Policy
Review WT/TPR/S/299." May. Geneva. https://www.wto.org/english/
tratop_e/tpr_e/s299_e.pdf.                                                              49


﻿Annex 1: List of actors interviewed by the World Bank team
OECS       Organization Name  Organization Type  Titte/s            Meeting            Adtoa
Information
St. Lucia  Bay Gardens Resort  Hotel            General Manager,    In person Email    78 rooms, purchase
Purchasing Manager                     from 4 local farmers
Purchasing Manager
Sandals Grande     Hotel             for the 3 Sandals   In person          301 rooms
Resorts in St. Lucia
Ti Kaye Resort     Hotel             Purchasing Manager  In person          33 rooms
Fond Doux
Plantation and     Eco-tourism resort  Manager           In person          17 rooms
Resort
Prod ucer of cassava
Plas Kassav       Agri-tourism       Manager             In person          products
Plantation tour
Fond La Ti Sable   Agri-tourism      Owner               In person          and cassava bread
making
Lazy Lagoon       Trading Company    General Manager     In person
Exports fruit to
Wilcrest Holdings  Agriculture Exporter  Owner           In person          Canada
Perishables
Consolidated Foods  Retailer (some   Manager, Divisional  In person         10 supermarkets and
Limited (CFL)     wholesale business)  Head Purchasing -                    1 club store
Perishables
. Process of 150
Baron Foods       Agro-processor     CEO                 Audio              products
General Manager
Belle Vue Farmers'  Farmers Group    Marketing Manager VP
Cooperative                          of National Association
of Cooperatives
Ministry of                          Deputy Director of
Government         Agriculture Services,  In person
Agriculture                          Fisheries Biologist
Director of Product
Ministry of Tourism  Government      Development,        In person Audio
Maritime Consultant
Department of                        Permanent Secretary,
50                    Planning & National  Government      Deputy Chief        In person
Development (DPND)                   Economist, Three
Economists
Head, Economic
Development Policy
OECS Commission    Intergovernmental  Unit Agriculture   In person
Economist Program
Officer, Tourism


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
OECS        Organization Name  Organization Type  Title/s              Meeting            Infrmton
St. Lucia Bureau of  Government        Director             In person
Standards
Marketing Board    Government          Accountant           In person
Fish Marketing Corp  Government        Senior Manager      In person
Grenada     Spice Island Resort  Hotel            Food & Beverage Cost  In person          64 rooms
Controller
General Manager,                        225 rooms, all
Sandals             Hotel              Purchasing Manager,  In person          inclusive resort, 12
Cost Control Manager                    restaurants
True Blue Bay       Hotel              Owner Executive Chef  in person         50 rooms
Calabash Hotel     Hotel               Owner and Hotel     In person           30 rooms, Boutique
Director                                Luxury Hotel
Grenada Hotel and                      Executive Director
Tourism Association  Association       Officer Consultant     person
(GHTA)
De La Grande       Nutmeg processor    Manager             In person           agri-tourism taking
Industries                                                                     place
Nut-Med            Nutmeg processing   Owner                In person          agri-tourism taking
place
Flowers farm site                                                              Largest flowers farm
visit          Flowers farm       Owner                in personinGea.
visit                                                                          in Grenada.
Summer Ltd (fruit  Fruit Processor     Founder and Manager  Audio
juices)
OECS Commission    Intergovernmental   Program Officer,    In person           Based in St. Lucia
Tourism
Cocoa Association  Association         Accountant           In person
Herbs Growers      Association         Member              In person
Association
Horizon Yacht      Yachting            Owner and Manager    In person
Charters
Restaurant Owner,
Bananas Restaurant  Restaurant         Farmer, Lobster     In person
Exporter
Superarket         Private             Supervisor          In person                                      51
Supermarket
North East Farmers  Farm Group         President           In person
Organization
Farm               Private Farm        Farmer              In person           Farm visit
Grenada Cooperative
Nutmeg Association  Association        Member              In person
(GCNA)


﻿OECS       Organization Name  Organization Type   Title/s             Meeting            Ainomtion
Minister Permanent
Ministry of                           Secretary Department  In person
Agriculture                           Heads Chief Planning
Officer
Grenada Marketing &
National Importing  Government        Chairman            In person
Board (MNIB)
Fishermen.
Assoiain           Association        Member              In person
Association
Poultry Association  Association      Member              In person
Dominica                                                                                 73 rooms, 2
Fort Young Hotel   Hotel              Purchasing Manager  In Person           restaurants, built
1669
Dominica
Agricultural       Private Firm       Chairman             In Person
Producers and
Exporters (DAPEX)
Ministry of Tourism  Government       Permanent Secretary  In Person
(PS)
Ministry of                           Permanent Secretary  In Person
Agriculture                           (PS)
Chief, Development
Ministry of Finance  Government       Planning Finance    In Person
Secretary
Nature Island                         Treasurer Secretary
Pineapple          Association        Member              In Person
Association (NIPPA)
Caribbean Vintage
Sparkling Wine and  Association       Manager              In Person
Juice
Business Development
OECS Commission    Intergovernmental  Officer, agro-       In Person
processing
Antigua                                           Executive Chef,                         100 rooms, all-
Galley Bay Resort  Hotel              Warehouse Supervisor  In Person         inclusive resort, 4
restaurants
Hermitage Bay      Hotel              Executive Chef      In Person           27 rooms, all-
52                                                                                                     inclusive resort
Farm Visit to Tilapia  P              Tilapia Farmer,     In Person
Farm                                  Proprietor
Epicurean Fine Foods Supermarket      Purchasing Manager   Audio              Privately owned
& Pharmacy
Team Fresh         Farmer Group       Vice President       In Person
Farmers            Private Farms      Several farm owners  In Person & Audio


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
OECS        Organization Name   Organization Type   Title/s               MeetingA                ton
Information
Large Farmer        Private             Owner                 Audio & Email
Lead supplier for   Farmer              Owner                 Audio
Sandals
Ministry of         Government          Extension Officer,   In Person
Agriculture                             Liaison Officer
Central Marketing                       General Manager,
CororaionGovernment Agency         Ofcrin Person
Corporation                             Officer
Agricultural
Development         Government Agency   Officer              In Person
Corporation
Ministry of Tourism  Government         Director of Agro-     In Person
Tourism Officer
Antigua and Barbuda
Agricultural Forum  Farm Group          Member                In Person
for Youth (ABAFY)
St. Vincent  Buccament Bay                          General Manager,                          112 rooms, all
Resort              Hotel               Executive Chef       In Person            inclusive resort
Purchasing Manager
Farmers             Private farms       Multiple farm owners  In Person
Farmer Groups:
OINGCO, WALCO,                          Representatives and
RFCO, South         Farmer Groups       Members of farm      In Person
Windward Co                             groups
Caribbean
Agriculture Research  Regional Institute  Officer            In Person & Audio
and Development
Institute (CARDI)
Inter-American
Institute for
Cooeraionon    Regional Institute  Officer              In Person
Cooperation on
Agriculture (IICA)
Poultry Association  Association        Farmer                In Person
Pineapple
Cooperative         Association         Member, Farmer        In Person
(PINGCO)
Minister of Agriculture
Ministry of                             Diversification Officer,                                              53
Government          Permanent Secretary,  In Person
Agriculture                             Chief Agricultural
Officer
Ministry of Tourism  Government         Diversification Officer  In Person and Audio
Three Officers


﻿OECS       Organization Name  Organization Type   Title/s             Meeting            Ainomtion
AgriculturfExtensio
Agricuture Extension  Government     Area Supervisor      In Person
Station Visit
Farm Visit         Private farm       Vegetable Farmer,   In Person
WALCO member
Farm Visit         Private farm       Watermelon Farmer'  In Person
RFCO member
OECS Commission    Intergovernmental  Agriculture Economist  In Person
St. Kitts                                                                                 34 rooms (12 will be
Ocean Terrace Hotel  Hotel            General Manager      In Person          added)
Marriott Hotel     Hotel              Purchasing Manager  In Person and Audio  391 rooms
Restaurant Owner   Restaurant         Owner                In Person
Christophe Harbour  Private Marina    Director of Yachting  Audio
OECS Commission    Intergovernmental  Agriculture Economist  In Person
St. Kitts & Nevis
Hotel and Tourism  Association        Representative      In Person
Association
St. Kitts Farmers Co-  FarmerGroup    Secretary President  In Person
operative Society
Farmers            Farmers            Farm owners and/or   In person and Audio
workers
Producer           Farm groups        Representatives and  In Person
organizations                         members
Nevis      Four Seasons Resort  Hotel             General Manager     In Person           196 rooms
Finance Director
OECS Commission    Intergovernmental  Agriculture Economist  In Person
Nevis Growers                         President, Multiple                     Including
Cooperative Society  Farmer Group     members (farmers)    In Person and Audio  hydroponics farmer
(NGC)
Nevis Agro
Processors                 .          President, Member,  In Person
Cooperative                           Agro Processor
(NAGROC)
54                       Marketing Division  Government        Marketing Officer   In Person
Nevis Agro         Government         Manager              In Person
Processing Plant
Superfoods         Supermarket        Owner and Director   In Person
Manager


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
OECSid      Organization Name  Organization Type  Title/s              Meeting             Ainomtion
Barbados   Caribbean Regional                     Project Coordinator
Organization for    Intergovernmental  Technical Officer,  In person
Standards and                          Standards
Quality (CROSQ)                        Development
Project Director,
Canadian Hunger     Development Agency  Deputy Project     In person
Foundation                             Director, Director of
Programs
Attach6, Social and
European Union     Intergovernmental   Rural Development   In person
Section
Miami, FL   Florida-Caribbean                     President, Sr. Vice
Cruise Association  Association        President           In person
(FCCA)
Chief Strategy Officer,
Carnival Cruise Lines  Cruise Line     Chief Procurement    In person
Officer
Royal Caribbean    Cruise Line         VP Supply Chain     In person
Management
CEO and Director
Caribbean Hotel &       .              General, Director   In person
Tourism Association  Association       of Membership
Development
Jamaica     Sandals Resorts    Hotel              Procurement Officer  Audio
Costa Rica  Four Seasons Resort  Hotel            Director of Food &   Audio               184 rooms
Beverages
Peru       JW Marriott         Hotel              Purchasing Manager,  In person           300 rooms
Food & Beverages
Bethesda,  Marriott            Hotel              Procurement          Audio
MD         International                          Department
55


﻿Annex 2: Semi structured interview guideline
Tourism Actors (Hotels, Yachting, Cruise Lines):
Tourism Actor Characteristics:
* Number of rooms
* Number of hotel employees
* Average length of stay
* Average rate per room per day
* Occupancy rate
* Peak vs. off season
* Number and type of restaurants
* Type of hotel (whether all inclusive, luxury, etc.)
* Premises-grown fruit trees and vegetable garden
* Products/items purchased locally
* Capacity of restaurants (number of seats)
* Taxation on food imports
* Number of yachts
* Marina infrastructure
* Trends of the yachting industry
* Effort by the tourist operator to emphasize that food is grown locally
Food Sourcing Pattern and Strategy:
* Percent of food purchased locally
* Type of food purchased locally
* Sources of local supply
* Number of farmers purchased from
* Number of wholesalers and supermarkets purchases from
* Value of produce purchased from the various sources
56                             * Logistics of receiving and storing the food
* Challenges regarding purchasing locally
* Relationship with farmers (years, trust, etc.)
* Comparison of local product with imported food (price, quality, etc.)
* Types of agreement with farmers (contract, payment, etc.)
* Ordering procedure (telephone, internet, time in advance, etc.)


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
* Logistics of importing food (suppliers used, time, costs, challenges, etc.)
* Margin that executive chef has to make per guest per day
* Quality control carried out on purchased food locally and imported
* Preferences for purchasing local foods from a consolidator vs. directly from
farmers
* Communication with farmers
* Agri-tourism activities
* Food variety (produce, chicken, meat, fish, etc.) with potential to increase local
production and sales to hotels
* Purchases from local agro-processors
* Logistics of yachting food purchasing ad delivery
* Guests preference for locally produced food
* Corporate requirements and guidelines to approve suppliers
Agro-processors:
General Characteristics:
* Type of products produced at the agro-processor facility
* Number of employees, their ages and education
* Business climate/ environment
* Operation challenges
* Years of establishment
* Finances (sources, revenue, debt, etc.)
* Buyers - local and international
* Certification
* Challenges
* Taxation on imports into production and machinery
* Bookkeeping
Food Sourcing
* Percent of food purchased locally                                                                  57
* Type of food purchased locally
* Sources of local supply
* Number of farmers purchased from
* Logistics of receiving and storing the food


﻿* Challenges concerning purchasing locally
* Relationship with farmers (years, trust, etc.)
* Comparison of local product with imported food (price, quality, etc.)
* Types of agreement with farmers
* Ordering process
* Logistics of importing food (suppliers used, time, costs, challenges, etc.)
* Quality control carried out on purchased food locally and imported
* Preferences for purchasing local foods from a consolidator vs. directly from
farmers
* Communication with farmers
* Agri-tourism activities
* Relationship with farmers
* Sales to hotels
* Relationship with Marketing Board
Farmers:
* Farm size
* Farm ownership
* Farmer age and education level
* Number of workers and their ages and education levels
* Workers' compensation
* Main products being grown on farm
* Farm budget (cost of production of main products grown)
* Main production seasons, and lean season
* Technology used on farm
* Sources for inputs into production
* Buyers
* Government extension services and general relationship with the Ministry of
58                                 Agriculture
* Ways of obtaining technical advice (extension, CARDI, etc.)
* Agri-tourism
* Crop management
* Logistics (storage, transportation, packing, insurance, etc.)
* Relationship with hotels and other tourism operators


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
* Challenges for selling to hotels
* General challenges (operational, management, marketing, etc.)
* Taxation on imports of inputs into production and farm equipment
* Relationship with Marketing Board
. Access to finance
. Access to land
* Access to water
* Access to information
* Insurance
* Organic production
* Cost and ease of obtaining relevant certifications
* Bookkeeping
* Certification (GAP, HCCP, etc.)
Supermarkets:
General Characteristics:
* Number of supermarket outlets owned
* Ownership
* Competition
* Financing
* Year established
Food Sourcing
* Type and value of food and drinks purchased locally
* Number of local farmers supplying the supermarket
* Logistics of delivery of produce to supermarket
* Percent of produce and other food imported vs. purchased locally
* Restrictions on food imports
* Payment terms with farmers and other suppliers                                                      59
* Coordination/planning with farmers of their production
* Relationship with local farmers
* Agreements with farmers and other suppliers
* Price negotiation
* Challenges for local food purchases


﻿* Prices for a number of fruit and vegetables
* Food sourcing strategy
* Logistics of importing containers (cost, time, customs, Port, etc.)
* Mark up on fruit and vegetables
Government Ministries and Agencies:
* Initiatives carried out by the government to strengthen the linkages between
the agriculture and tourism sectors
* Initiatives carried out by donors and others
* Main challenges for the growth and sustainability of the agriculture and
tourism sectors
* Initiatives carried out by the government to strengthen the sectors
* Strategic crops
* Scheduling/planning of production
* Subsidizes given to the two sectors
* Protection provided to the two sectors
* Characteristics of farmers and hotels
* Food safety
* Farmers productivity and capacity
* Enabling environment
* Food safety bill to ensure food safety
* Coordination between the ministries
* Coordination with the private sector
Marketing Boards:
* Year established
* Ownership, management, employees
* Finances
60                              * Objectives
* Volumes
* Margin
* Assets (outlets, storage, etc.)
* Number of active farmers who sell to them
* Use of crop planning or forecasting system


﻿Linking Farmers and Agro-processors
to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern Caribbean
* Purchasing policy
* Percent and value sold to hotels, retail outlets, supermarkets wholesalers,
exports
* Attempts to match supply and demand
* Relationship with hotels
* How prices with farmers and clients are established
* Imports by the marketing board
* Extension services
* Challenges
Wholesalers and Traders:
* Ownership
* Assets
* Sources of finance
* Types of products/items traded
* Main customers
* Number of local farmers they source from
* Relationship with farmers
* Assistance provides to farmers
* Planning of production with farmers (loans, tech' advice, etc.)
* Type of agreement with farmers
* Payment terms with farmers
* Logistics of getting food from farmers, storage and distribution
* Food imports from abroad (type, value, duties, restrictions, etc.)
* Margins
* Products with potential to increase sales
* Seasons
* Cost of importing a container from Miami
* Challenges                                                                                             61
* Assistance from government and other donors
* Imports that hold potential to be substituted by local production
* Standards being followed
* Purchase from farm groups
* Purchase from marketing board


﻿
﻿
﻿Partial funding for the publication provided by:
Ind ~It 'Is and
I*in        OiPIn uation
Clip Pnigram
ACP-EU Competitive industries and Innovation Program
The World Bank
THE WORLD BANK                           1818 H Street, NW,
IBRD- IA I ORL BAN r3OUPWashington, DC 20433, USA.
www.worldbank.org/agriculture


