Report No: ACS18562




Republic of Moldova
Moldova Climate Adaptation Investment
Planning Technical Assistance



October 2016




GEN03

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Standard Disclaimer:




This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the
work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-
750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                             ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Acronyms                                                                iv
Executive Summary                                                               vi
    Background & rationale                                                       vi
    Costs of inaction on climate adaptation                                     vii
    Recommended adaptation investments                                           ix
1   Introduction & rationale                                                  -1-
    1.1   Background                                                          -1-
    1.2   Approach, methodology & terminology                                 -4-
    1.3   Climate and socio-economic scenarios used for future projections    -6-
2   Analysis of vulnerable sectors                                           - 11 -
    2.1   Forestry                                                           - 11 -
    2.2   Agriculture                                                        - 16 -
    2.3   Water                                                              - 27 -
    2.4   Energy                                                             - 34 -
    2.5   Infrastructure (roads & buildings)                                 - 39 -
    2.6   Health                                                             - 45 -
3   Cross-sector results                                                     - 54 -
    3.1   Costs of inaction                                                  - 54 -
    3.2   Adaptation investments                                             - 60 -
    3.3   Uncertainty and further work                                       - 66 -
    3.1   Poverty, gender & social dimensions                                - 68 -
4   References                                                               - 71 -




                                                                                      iii
List of Acronyms
AAC      Annual Allowable Cut
ACSA     Agency for Consultancy and Training in Agriculture
BASE     Bottom-up Climate Adaptation Strategies towards a Sustainable Europe
BAU      Business as Usual
BCR      Benefit Cost Ratio
CBA      Cost Benefit Analysis
CIAT     International Center for Tropical Agriculture
CSA      Climate-Smart Agriculture
ECC      Emergency Command Centres
EIB      European Investment Bank
ENPI     European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
ES       Ecosystem Services
ESA      Ecosystem Services Approach
ESMAP    Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
EU       European Union
FAO      Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FES      Forest Ecosystem Services
FIRSM    Forest Institutional Reform Strategy of Moldova
FLEG     Forest Law Enforcement and Governance
FMP      Forest Management Plan
GD       Governmental Decision
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GIS      Geographical Informational System
Ha       Hectares
HHWS     Heat-Health Warning Systems
IPCC     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPSS     Infrastructure Planning Support System
IRR      Internal Rate of Return
LPA      Local Public Authorities
MAFI     Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
MDL      Moldavian lei/ currency
MENR     Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
M&I      Municipal & Industrial
NBS      National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova
NFF      National Forest Fund
NFMS     National Forest Monitoring System
NTFP     Non-Timber Forest Products
         Projection of Economic Impacts of Climate Change in Sectors of the
PESETA
         European Union Based on Bottom-up Analysis
PPP      Purchasing Power Parity
RCP      Representative Concentration Pathway
RM       Republic of Moldova
SDES     State Department of Exceptional Situations
SSPs     Shared Socioeconomic Pathways


                                                                                iv
TA     Technical Assistance
TEV    Total Economic Value
TUB    Transylvania University of Brasov
USD    Unites States Dollars
VOLL   Value of Lost Load
VSL    Value of a Statistical Life
VLYL   Value of a Life Year Lost
WB     World Bank
WEAP   Water Evaluation and Planning System
WRM    Water Resources Management
WSS    Water Supply & Sanitation
WUA    Water Users’ Association




                                              v
Executive Summary

Background & rationale
Moldova ranks as the most climate vulnerable country in Europe, according to the widely used ND-
GAIN1 vulnerability assessment methodology. Temperature and rainfall have increased in Moldova
over the last century, and severe floods and droughts have been occurring more regularly in recent
times. For example, in the years prior to 2007, average annual losses from climate-related disaster
losses were estimated at over USD60m per year, but in the same year, a severe drought occurred
which was later assessed to have caused around USD1 billion of damage and losses.
Looking forward, climate models predict further mean temperature rises and more variable rainfall
with anything from a slight increase to a significant decline in total precipitation. Even under
scenarios with an increase in mean rainfall, however, water availability will decrease due to
increased temperatures and rates of evapotranspiration. Rainfall will also become more variable and
more concentrated due to the more common extreme events.
In general, climate adaptation issues in Moldova have been well characterized. The National Climate
Change Adaptation Strategy identifies 6 sectors at particular risk. Agricultural productivity will
significantly decrease due to increasing water stress on crops, even without accounting for the
increasing impact of extreme weather events (i.e., hailstorms and late frosts, major floods and
droughts, or changes in patterns of disease and pests). Total water availability will fall below total
demand within a couple of decades. Health effects of climate change will include increases in heat-
related ailments (including cardio-vascular disease), transmission of gastro-intestinal diseases, air
pollution and allergies, as well as higher numbers of casualties from natural disasters. The
productivity of forests will diminish and pathology patterns are expected to change. Peak energy
consumption patterns will shift from the winter to the summer, energy distribution / transmission
infrastructure may also be impacted and the country’s potential to reduce energy imports through
development of renewable sources (mainly solar, biomass, wind, and geothermal) could be
compromised. Transport infrastructure could be disrupted.
The current study extends existing analyses through a quantitative assessment of adaptation
investment opportunities and returns across the target sectors. To achieve this, the study evaluated
the cost of inaction in each sector, i.e., the expected annual opportunity cost of not being better
adapted to prevailing climate conditions. The cost of inaction was calculated on the basis of both:
          potential savings from reducing harmful effects of climate (or from reducing the cost of
           defending against harmful effects), and
          potential gains from enhancing primary production that is directly dependent on climate
           (i.e., agricultural & forest products & services, water services, and weather-based renewable
           energy generation).

The cost-of-inaction concept therefore embraces climate-smart development, encompassing both
investments from avoided costs and the gains from proactive investment in opportunities2. The cost


1
    Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index - http://index.gain.org/
2
 This contrasts with a concept of climate change adaptation based on strict additionality, which would focus
on avoiding costs of changes in climate relative to an historical baseline, in order to differentiate climate
change adaptation from development investments. However, distinguishing between adaptation and
development can be difficult in practice, and always requires comparison against a counterfactual. It is likely to



                                                                                                               vi
of inaction was calculated for the present time and 2050, to understand how future climate change
may affect investment opportunities. The costs of inaction indicate how total potential (annualized)
savings and gains are distributed across the target sectors. Cost-benefit analysis was then used to
estimate the economic viability (in net present value terms) of specific investments that exploit those
potentials.



Costs of inaction on climate adaptation
The economy of Moldova already bears significant costs from climate extremes and foregoes
potential benefits. These real and opportunity costs will continue to grow with future climate
change. Figure 0.1 summarizes the expected annual costs of inaction, at present and in 2050, across
the target sectors. Potential savings from better protection against current harmful climate impacts
are estimated to be substantial, amounting to more than USD100 million per annum in total. These
are mostly due to damages caused by flooding and a variety of weather impacts on agriculture, as
well as the cost of climate-related health impacts (extreme heat mortality and food-borne disease).
Evaluated costs of inaction in infrastructure (other than flood damage) are relatively negligible.
However, the potential gains in expanded production due to improved adaptation to climate are
even larger. In agriculture, improving performance to the level of neighboring countries could result
in around a couple of hundred million USD of increased output per year3. Production potentials in
the forestry and water sectors (from forest restoration and improving the provision of water supply
and sanitation (WSS) services) are smaller but still significant.
In future, the potential savings from protecting against climate damage are expected to increase in
all sectors, totalling at least USD600 million per annum by 2050. This is partly related to an increase
in the volume and value of assets at risk in line with GDP growth. But particularly in agriculture and
health, the frequency and severity of harmful climate events are also expected to increase. In
contrast, the potential gains from enhanced production are expected to increase less rapidly.
Estimates of unrealized production in forestry, agriculture, and energy in 2050 are not very different
from the present. It is only in the water sector that the unrealized potential increases dramatically.
In the absence of increased storage capacity, seasonal water constraints are expected to impact
industry and irrigation
The present total cost of inaction on climate adaptation is estimated at around USD600 million,
equivalent to 6.5% of GDP. This value is expected to more than double in real terms by 2050 to
around USD1.3 billion4. Given the projected economic growth rates used in the analysis, however,
these future costs represent a smaller fraction of future GDP.




be more efficient to explore all options to increase the net benefits from climate-dependent processes and
sectors.
3
 In energy, power production from climate-dependent renewables could potentially be increased by over
USD100 million per year, but because the current economic viability of these potentials is still uncertain, these
don’t feature in the priority recommended investments.
4
 In comparison, the direct costs of climate change by 2050 (i.e., the decrease in production caused by climate
change, plus the increase in damage and costs of prevention) are expected to be of a similar magnitude at
around USD1 billion, 70% of which are incurred in the agriculture sector.



                                                                                                              vii
                            Present annual costs of inaction, US$m
  400

  300

  200

  100

    0
           Forestry     Agriculture     Water         Energy            Health      Roads        Buildings
 -100

                                             Production    Protection


Figure 0.1: Comparison of present (above) and 2050 (below) annual costs of inaction across assessed sectors
(both presented in 2015 dollars). Costs of inaction related to potential gains from enhancing climate-
dependent production are represented as positive values (blue). Costs of inaction related to potential savings
from reducing harmful effects of climate and the costs of protecting against them are represented as negative
values (orange). The total cost of inaction in each sector is the sum of the magnitudes of both potential gains
and savings (i.e. the combined height of the orange and blue bars). The confidence limits represent the range
of values obtained from the climate, price, and shared socioeconomic pathways (SSP) scenarios used in the
analysis. They do not encompass all sources of uncertainty.

                       Future annual costs of inaction in 2050, US$m
  600

  400

  200

    0
           Forestry     Agriculture     Water         Energy            Health      Roads        Buildings
 -200

 -400

                                             Production    Protection




Much of the current and predicted impacts of climate variability and climate change are
concentrated in rural areas, where populations have fewer resources to cope. Agricultural
production is very sensitive to weather conditions, but 98% of Moldovan farmers are small-holders
(typically of 0.8-10 ha) lacking access to rural finance to improve productivity and resilience. The
rural poor also have less access to domestic water supply and sanitation services (WSS) and to other
infrastructure, such as roads, that will be put under increasing pressure by climate change. In total,
75.4% of urban populations have sewerage connections, compared to 1.6% in rural areas. Women
are also likely to be more vulnerable to unfavorable climate conditions and future climate change,
both because they already have fewer resources at their disposal, and because they are likely to be
disproportionately impacted by climate. Many impoverished women are farmers, but female-
headed farms are a third smaller than male-headed (0.81 vs 1.2 ha) and receive less investment
(women own only 12% of existing agricultural machinery), and are more rarely connected to a water
supply (55% vs 75%).




                                                                                                             viii
Recommended adaptation investments
A set of potential adaptation investments have been identified across the target sectors, which
would reduce (although not eliminate) the costs of inaction. A little under half of the total volume of
investment (USD1.85 billion of USD4.22 billion) are considered high priority for implementation in
the near future (see table 0.1).
Priorities were identified based on estimated economic returns, the size of potential investments,
and qualitative assessments of impact on gender and poverty. These consist of:

       Agriculture: The biggest challenges and investment opportunities are in agriculture.
        Rehabilitation/modernization of centralized irrigation systems and drainage infrastructure
        will make a major contribution to increasing current productivity and mitigating future
        climate impacts. These are expected to have good rates of return as long as they can be
        combined with successful institutional capacity-building for management of irrigation
        systems. Other options include small-scale on-farm irrigation systems, soil management and
        climate risk management technologies (e.g., anti-hail nets), and the potential for changes in
        crop mix towards perennial crops (i.e., grapes and fruit trees), which will be more resilient to
        climate change.
       Forests: Ecological rehabilitation and expansion of forests and forest belts are expected to
        have high returns on suitable land, and to have a high poverty and gender impact.
        Restoration of degraded forests and pasturelands also promotes agricultural productivity
        through improved watershed function and protection from harsh weather.
       Human Health: Although there is uncertainty around the scale of climate-related health
        impacts, modest investments in heat warning systems and public health campaigns are
        expected to have high returns.
       Water: Improvement in municipal supply systems to reduce losses, and building a small-
        scale storage reservoir on the lower Nistru River, present immediate, modest investment
        opportunities with high returns. In coming decades, larger-scale storage infrastructure will
        be needed. The ideal size and timing of these requires more analysis, and the institutional
        capacity to effectively manage a variety of water investments would also need to be
        strengthened.
       Flood Control: A substantial set of structural and non-structural measures for flood control is
        expected to provide substantial economic returns from the reduction of damages and loss,
        based on the recent work of EIB (2016).
       Disaster risk management: A set of modest investments is expected to provide key gains for
        public safety as well as substantial economic returns, i.e., improvements to emergency
        prevention and preparedness, including training facilities, new Emergency Command
        Centers in the North and South, and improving emergency response capabilities.

The study relied on estimating literature to estimate many of the returns, and was not able to carry
out separate cost-benefit analysis under both current and future conditions. Nevertheless, proposed
investments are considered robust with respect to future climate changes, i.e. they are adaptive
both to current climate conditions and to future climate change. The earlier investments are made,
the sooner benefits will be realized.
The only major proposed investments for which immediate implementation is not recommended are
the development of larger-scale multi-purpose water storage infrastructure on the lower Nistru and
Reut. The viability of these is dependent on predicted future restrictions on overall water availability.




                                                                                                       ix
Table 0.1: High Priority Investments - in the near to mid-term

Sector             Description on investment                          Period for        Amount in      Indicative             Uncertainty      Impact on     Impact
                                                                      capital           USD (Mn.)      economic return        of benefits      poverty       on
                                                                                                                    5                   6
                                                                      investment                       (BCR or IRR)           and costs                      gender
Agriculture:       Rehabilitate/Modernize Centralized Irrigation      2017 to 2040      975.0          IRR: 8% to 15%         Medium           Medium         Medium
Water              Systems
Management         Rehabilitation/Modernization of Drainage           2017 to 2026      120.0          IRR: 8% to 15%         Medium           Medium         Medium
                   infrastructure in irrigated areas
                   Institutional Reforms/Capacity Building            2017 to 2024      140.0          n/a                    Medium           High            High
Forestry           Ecological reconstruction of forests               2020 to 2029      91.3           IRR: 3% to 14%         Medium           High            High
                   Ecological reconstruction of forest belts          2020 to 2029      4.9            IRR: 4% to 15%         Medium           High            High
                                                                                            7
Health             Heat Health Warning System                         2017+             0.4            Current BCR: 3.1       High             Medium         Medium
                                                                                                       to 170
                                                                                                       2050 BCR: 9.9 to
                                                                                                       920
Water              Improving Municipal and Industrial Water           2017+             2.8-5.5        BCR: 61 to 70          Low              Medium         Medium
Supply             System Efficiency by 10% Reduction in
                   Losses
                   Water Storage in Lower Nistru (100MCM)             2030+?            18.4           BCR: 2.6 to 6.4        Low              Medium        Medium
                   Water Storage in Reut (1MCM)                       2020              0.3            BCR: 20 to 59          Low              Low           Medium
Flood              Structural Measures                                2020-2040         360.8          BCR: 2.1               Medium           Unknown       Unknown
Prevention         Non-Structural Measures                            2020-2040         136.6          BCR: 5.6               Medium           Unknown       Unknown
WSS                Rehabilitation of existing and construction of     2020-2040         409            BCR: 2.5-3.2           Medium           High          Medium
                   new WSS infrastructures                                              [350-439]
Disaster           Improved training facilities                       2020              11             BCR: 2.1 to 4.1        Medium           Medium         Medium
Response           Creation of Emergency Command Centres in


5
  In several cases, the benefit-cost analysis relied on values in the literature. Therefore the analysis could not be fully standardized and in some cases the results are
reported as benefit-cost ratios, and in others as internal rates of return.
6
  Ratings are given here for the significance of uncertainty of benefits for each investment. Red = high uncertainty, amber = medium uncertainty, and green= low
uncertainty. A discussion of the basis of these ratings for each sector is given in the section “Uncertainty in the Analysis and Critical Knowledge Gaps” of this Executive
Summary.
7
    Costs incurred in years of a heatwave.



                                                                                                                                                                         x
Sector       Description on investment                   Period for   Amount in   Indicative        Uncertainty   Impact on   Impact
                                                         capital      USD (Mn.)   economic return   of benefits   poverty     on
                                                                                               5              6
                                                         investment               (BCR or IRR)      and costs                 gender
Management   North and South
             Improving emergency response capabilities




                                                                                                                                       xi
There is a high degree of uncertainty around current climate impacts (i.e., how bio-physical
processes respond to variation in climate parameters) and around the pricing of non-market goods.
Extrapolating several decades into the future greatly exacerbates the uncertainty in the study, both
in terms of future climate projections, but even more profoundly in the uncertainty around future
socio-economic conditions, i.e., demand and prices for goods and services, availability of alternate
technologies, etc. The most important knowledge gaps, and therefore priorities for investment in
additional studies, are summarized as follows, in approximate order of importance:
   1. The energy sector analysis lacked data on potential costs savings related to thermal
      efficiency of buildings. There could be very large opportunities to reduce energy expenditure
      on heating and cooling of living spaces. Under the cost of inaction concept, these would
      qualify as potential savings in the management of current adverse climate effects, whether
      or not domestic energy demand will be impacted by future climate change (cursory analysis
      suggests there perhaps won’t be any overall increase).
   2. Agriculture potentials have only been approximately characterized, and effects of future
      climate change on agricultural production remain imprecisely known. Given the importance
      of the sector for adaptation, additional work is recommended.
   3. The optimal scale and timing of water storage investments to address future shortages
      remains to be determined.
   4. Data on damage and losses from extreme weather is generally incomplete. More systematic
      reporting systems, including impacts of smaller-scale events, such as hailstorms and frosts,
      would improve understanding of the scale of the losses, and therefore the extent of
      investment in mitigation, that would be justified.
   5. The analysis of maintenance costs for roads and buildings was based on generalized models
      for international construction standards. These should to be ‘ground-truthed’ against the
      actual construction standards and maintenance practices in use in Moldova.




                                                                                                 xii
1 Introduction & rationale

1.1 Background
Despite a sharp decline in poverty in the 2000s, Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in
Europe. Although landlocked and therefore having no exposure to sea-level rise, Moldova ranks as
the most climate vulnerable country in Europe, according to the assessment by a respected climate
assessment agency, ND-GAIN8. In 2007, the average annual losses from climate-related disaster
losses in Moldova were estimated at over USD60m per year. In the same year, a severe drought
occurred which was later assessed to have caused around USD1 billion of damage and losses. Severe
floods and droughts have been occurring every couple years in recent times.
Temperature and rainfall have increased in Moldova over the last century. Climate models predict
further mean temperature rises, but are uncertain with regard to precipitation, which may show
either a slight increase or significant decline. Even under scenarios with a slight increase in
precipitation, water availability would decrease due to increase temperatures and rates of
evapotranspiration. Rainfall will also become more variable and extreme events more common.
A significant body of work has already been carried out on climate impacts and adaptation in
Moldova. As a result, the general issues and vulnerabilities are fairly well characterized, although
typically not in quantitative terms:
          In 2007, the World Bank collated data on natural disasters, and made a rough calculation of
           their cost to the national economy. Natural hazards were estimated to cause annual losses
           of 3.5-7 per cent of Moldova’s GDP – losses that were mostly in the agricultural sector.
          UNDP’s 2010 Human Development Report focused on climate adaptation, and included a
           broad review of the vulnerabilities across key sectors, including agriculture and water
           resources.
          In 2012, the World Bank completed a quantitative analysis of future climate-change impacts
           in the agriculture sector, including effects on crop productivity and demand for water
           resources. The cost-benefit analysis of some adaptation options took future climate
           conditions into account. This study was the precursor to the work presented here on
           adaptation options in agriculture. The World Bank has also piloted climate resilient
           agricultural practices through the Agriculture Competitiveness Project.
          In 2014, the Government of Moldova, through the Ministry of Environment and with support
           of UNDP and the government of Austria, developed and approved a National Climate
           Change Adaptation Strategy, which re-iterated much of the earlier information on
           vulnerabilities and needs, and included an initial action plan to 2020. The cost estimate for
           the action plan was roughly USD155m, but specific investments and costs were not very
           clearly elaborated, nor the allocations between sectors explained – e.g. two-thirds of the
           entire budget was for energy investments, 68 times greater than the amount indicated for
           agriculture sector investments, despite the paramount importance of agriculture to the
           economy and to rural vulnerability.




8
    Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index - http://index.gain.org/



                                                                                                   -1-
       The UNDP / Ministry of Environment National Adaptation Planning (NAP) project has also
        been deeply engaged in assessing institutional and policy aspects of climate change. They
        have recently conducted an institutional capacity assessment, and are currently preparing
        adaptation strategies for the forest and health sectors, as well as policy reviews for the
        energy and transport sectors.
       Some work on irrigation investment needs and integrated water resources management for
        the two major rivers running through Moldova (the Nistru and the Prut) has recently been
        conducted, largely by MCC, who have rehabilitated 10 irrigation schemes, as well as
        conducting feasibility studies for several others. The EIB also has a TA underway to map
        flood risks and assess infrastructure investment needs for their management.

The National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy identified 6 sectors at particular risk from climate
change. Expected climate issues within those sectors are summarized as follows:
Forests
Moldovan forests, the best-preserved ecosystems compared to other natural remnants (e.g.
wetlands, steppes), are already fragmented and stressed, and climate-related changes in species
composition are being observed. Climate change is expected to have substantial negative impacts on
forests, especially in the southern and eastern parts of Moldova. It is expected to reduce the
productivity of natural forests and to change pathology patterns. Changes in the vitality of forests
has a cross-sectoral impact on agriculture and land management as well.
Agriculture
Climate change could seriously undermine Moldova’s food security, as shown by the severe drought
of 2007, which worsened both the overall quantity and quality of food available to rural inhabitants.
It is expected to significantly reduce the productivity of most current crops in Moldova (although
cereals are more severely impacted than tree crops) before even accounting for the impacts of
extreme events, which include hailstorms and late frosts (icing), as well as major floods and
droughts, or changes in patterns of disease and pests. Climate change with changing rain patterns
may also worsen the challenges of land management and increase such erosion events as landslides,
etc. Even though climate change can induce some positive changes, the overall balance of the
climate change effects projected for the next 100 years is not favourable for Moldovan agriculture.
Water Resources
Utilization of water resources is already much lower in Moldova than during Soviet times, and
potable water supply is a problem in many rural areas owing to decreased ground water level and its
quality. Despite low levels of current use, water availability is expected to fall below total demand
within a couple of decades, and the south of the country could experience a one to two-thirds
reduction in resources by the 2080s. The most populated and economically important regions are
the most vulnerable to expected climate change. Some of these regions are already facing water
shortages. Addressing deficits in these regions will be critical for supporting a sustainable economic
recovery. Due to climate change, Moldova is expected to experience increasing frequency of short-
term water oversupply, particularly in the form of flash floods, as well as seasonal droughts.
Energy
Climate change is likely to affect the energy distribution infrastructure, patterns of demand and
energy production capacities. Infrastructure may suffer as a result of more frequent and more
violent extreme weather events, damaging supply grids, while growing demand in the summertime
could cause transmission lines to sag. The patterns of demand will change, shifting peak energy
consumption from the winter to the summer. Additionally, climate change could potentially affect




                                                                                                 -2-
the country’s abilty to reduce energy imports9, through reducing the potentials for renewable
sources, such as hydropower, solar, biomass and wind.




9
    Moldova currently imports 95% of its non-wood fuel energy



                                                                                         -3-
Transport
Climate change will have several effects on the transport sector. First, lasting heat waves can worsen
or even destroy the asphalt pavement of national roads. Second, high temperatures during
summertime can cause deformation of railroad lines, accelerate the physical wear-out of metal parts
in bridges and even cause thermal deformation. Moreover, higher temperatures may require the use
of more heat-resistant engines. Still more critical, climate change is set to significantly constrain the
development of riverine transport, if water levels are lowered. Besides higher temperatures,
extreme weather events can also have a significant impact on transportation, both in urban and
rural areas.
Health
The health effects of climate change will include increases in heat-related ailments (including cardio-
vascular disease), transmission of gastro-intestinal diseases, air pollution and allergies, as well as
higher numbers of casualties from disasters.



1.2 Approach, methodology & terminology
The goal of this study was to apply a consistent and repeatable analytical framework across the 6
target sectors to assess and compare (i) the size of the climate adaptation challenge in economic
terms, and (ii) adaptation investment opportunities and returns. For (i), the study assessed the costs
of failing to be better adapted to the prevailing climate conditions. These opportunity costs, referred
to as the cost of inaction, included both the costs of failing to fully protect against the negative
impacts of climate (the cost of inadequate or no protection), as well as the costs of failing to take full
advantage of climate-dependent production opportunities (the value of unrealized potential
production). The costs of inaction are expressed as expected annual values – i.e., this is a flow rather
than a stock concept.
Climate-dependent production is considered to include primary production that relies directly on
climate conditions (i.e., ambient temperature, water, sunlight or wind), effectively agriculture &
forestry (i.e., production processes depending directly on natural photosynthesis), water services
and weather-based renewable energy source (i.e., solar and wind, in addition to hydropower).
Unrealized climate-dependent potential production is any incremental production above and
beyond current output that is realistically attainable under the prevailing climate conditions.
The cost of inadequate protection is estimated as the sum of (i) the value of physical damages and
losses caused by climate-related events (e.g., flood damage, crop losses due to drought or climate-
related disease, etc.), and (ii) avoidable defensive expenditures (i.e., expenditures on preventing
climate-related damage or harm that could be avoided through adoption of better mitigation
strategies). Unavoidable defensive expenditures (e.g., the cost of a flood defence system that
represents the most cost-effective option available) are not included within the costs of inaction,
because the intention is to assess the opportunity cost of not implementing improved protection or
mitigation.
Previous work on the economics of adaptation within the World Bank has tended to evaluate the
costs of future climate change, i.e., any losses in production or increases in damage and related costs
over future decades, in comparison to a hypothetical no-climate-change scenario. This approach has
a number of limitations, however:
       It is based on the concept of additionality – i.e., the precept that climate change adaptation
        should be distinct from and incremental to normal economic development, which is linked
        to the desire of donors to ensure that funding for climate change adaptation is distinct from
        and additional to regular development support. In practice, however, the distinction


                                                                                                     -4-
        between adaptation and development is frequently artificial. Irrigation investments, for
        example, achieve both, and in under-developed countries development is often the best
        form of adaptation. Practitioners are increasingly aiming to circumvent this distinction by
        referring to climate-smart development.
       It tends to focus attention on a limited set of interventions, i.e., those related to reducing
        damage or losses, as opposed to those that enhance production, regardless of which is more
        cost-effective.
       Its assessment for any given point in time is predicated on a past climate baseline and
        counterfactual no-climate-change scenario. It is not therefore designed to assess whether a
        sector or system is well adapted to current climate conditions, but rather to limit the
        disruptions associated with future climate change.

The present study is primarily focused on identifying current climate adaptation opportunities,
especially the most cost-effective interventions that will improve performance of climate-dependent
or climate-affected sectors, yet it is not constrained by externally imposed additionality
requirements. It has therefore elected to assess the costs of inaction as a basis for understanding the
adaptation (or climate-smart development) opportunities in the targeted sectors. However:
    1. The impacts of ongoing and future climate change remain of interest. Costs of inaction were
       assessed for the mid-term future (2050) as well as the present, in order to understand how
       climate challenges will change and their influence on the selection on adaptation
       investments.
    2. As the costs of inaction is a new concept, we have also assessed a more traditional measure
       of the costs of climate change. This evaluates any decrease in production and increase in
       damages or defensive expenditures between 2015 and 2050 as a result of climate change.
       As for the cost of inaction, it is expressed as an expected annual cost.




                        Production & costs in Model Sector, US$m
            200

            150

            100

             50

              0
                                 Present                               2050
            -50

           -100

                        Production                   Unrealized production
                        Defensive Expendfiture       Avoidable defensive expenditure
                        Damage & losses


Figure 1.1: Climate-related annual production and impacts illustrated for a hypothetical sector for the
present and 2050. Climate-dependent production (actual and potential) are shown as positive values, and


                                                                                                  -5-
costs associated with climate-related physical damage and losses are shown as negative values. The costs of
inaction are defined as the sum of the magnitudes of unrealized potential production, damage & losses, and
avoidable defensive expenditures (i.e., the parts of the columns with a black border). In this hypothetical case,
the cost of inaction increases by 2050, as although unrealized production is little changed, damage & losses
and avoidable defensive expenditures have increased. Note that actual production and non-avoidable
defensive expenditures do not contribute to the costs of inaction, but are shown for completeness. They do,
however, contribute to the cost of climate change, which is considered to be the sum of the (climate-driven)
decrease in actual production and increase in damage & losses and all defensive expenditure up to 2050.


Costs of inaction have been calculated for the present time (nominally 2015) and for 2050 within
each of the target sectors: forestry, agriculture, health, energy, water, and infrastructure (roads and
buildings). The results for each sector are presented in a standard graphical format, as illustrated in
figure 1.1.
There is some overlap between the 6 sectors, and therefore the assignment of specific topics to
individual sectors was to some extent arbitrary, although guided by the general principle of
allocating to the sector in which the related adaptation investments would lie. For instance,
irrigation is included under agriculture, whereas flood damages and mitigation are included under
the water sector. General disaster preparedness and response is a cross-cutting theme, but in this
study was considered under the health sector due to the common link to emergency services.
The study drew primarily upon existing national and comparable international datasets, but some
new modelling of climate impacts and processes was also included. The latter consisted of:
          Modelling the availability of water resources under future climate changes by updating an
           earlier model with more data on water abstraction points.
          Modelling the costs of maintaining Moldova’s road network and building stock in the face of
           changing climate, and the relative benefits of reactive maintenance (i.e., repairing damage
           as it happens, using construction standards based on historical climate patterns) versus
           proactive maintenance (i.e., upgrading design standards based on expected climate change).

Future (i.e., 2050) costs are expressed in terms of 2015 dollars without discounting.



1.3 Climate and socio-economic scenarios used for future projections
In order to undertake climate-related economic analysis for future time-points, both climate and
socio-economic scenarios have to be taken into account. To account for socioeconomic
development, in this study we have used the so-called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs)
available at IIASA data base under the label OECD v9_13032510. These scenarios are part of the new
framework adopted by the climate research community for integrated assessment of future climate
impacts. They are based around different storylines of how the world could develop. The storylines11
are as follows:
          SSP1 – Sustainability – a world making good progress towards sustainability and
           development goals. In this world there is reduced resource intensity and fossil fuel


10
     https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb/dsd?Action=htmlpage&page=about#intro
11
  For more information on the storylines see
https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb/static/download/ssp_suplementary%20text.pdf



                                                                                                            -6-
        dependency. There is rapid development of low-income economies and reduction in
        inequality.
       SSP2 – Middle of the Road – a world where current trends continue, with some progress
        towards development goals. Uneven development of low-income countries. There are weak
        global institutions and achievement of Millennium Development Goals is delayed by several
        decades;
       SSP3 – Fragmentation – a world characterized by regionalization, with little progress in
        addressing sustainability concerns. High population growth globally.
       SSP4 – Inequality – a world with high levels of inequality both between and within countries.
       SSP5 – Conventional development – in this world, conventional development oriented
        towards economic growth is stressed as the solution to social and economic problems.
        Under this scenario, there is an energy system dominated by fossil fuels and there are high
        greenhouse gas emissions.

Quantitative estimates of these pathways include different assumptions regarding population,
economic development, land use or energy use. Each SSP has a single population and urbanization
scenario while for GDP, three alternative interpretations are provided. In our case we have only
focused in OECD GDP estimates. The GDP and population data for each scenario are included in
Tables 2-11-1 and 2-11-2 and in figures 1.2 and 1.3 below. All the scenarios involve optimistic
projections for GDP, but pessimistic projections of population (i.e., significant population decrease).


Table 1.1: GDP PPP projections under SSP scenarios (billion USD2005/yr)
     Scenario                2005         2010        2020        2030      2040      2050
SSP1_v9_130325                 8.492        9.951      15.745      27.087    42.874    55.235
SSP2_v9_130325                 8.492        9.951      15.611      23.964    33.148    40.618
SSP3_v9_130325                 8.492        9.951      15.896      23.508    29.962    34.834
SSP4_v9_130325                 8.492        9.951      15.505      23.707    32.801    39.880
SSP5_v9_130325                 8.492        9.951      15.529      27.969    45.143    57.002

Table 1.2: Population projections under SSP scenarios (million)
     Scenario                2005         2010        2020        2030      2040      2050
SSP1_v9_130325                 3.767        3.573       3.187       2.821     2.469     2.123
SSP2_v9_130325                 3.767        3.573       3.197       2.850     2.511     2.181
SSP3_v9_130325                 3.767        3.573       3.289       3.089     2.877     2.692
SSP4_v9_130325                 3.767        3.573       3.178       2.791     2.411     2.045
SSP5_v9_130325                 3.767        3.573       3.113       2.634     2.191     1.775




                                                                                                  -7-
Figure 1.2 Moldovan PPP GDP projections under SSP scenarios (USDbn USD 2005)




Figure 1.3 Moldovan population under SSP scenarios (million)



To account for different climate scenarios, we have followed the emissions scenarios described in
the IPCC SRES, which describe four different storylines of the relationship between the forces driving
emissions and their evolution. The main families are described below:



  The Emissions Scenarios of the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)

  A1. The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world of very rapid
  economic growth, global population that peaks in mid-century and declines thereafter,
  and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying
  themes are convergence among regions, capacity building and increased cultural and



                                                                                                 -8-
  social interactions, with a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita
  income. The A1 scenario family develops into three groups that describe alternative
  directions of technological change in the energy system. The three A1 groups are
  distinguished by their technological emphasis: fossil intensive (A1FI), non-fossil energy
  sources (A1T), or a balance across all sources (A1B) (where balanced is defined as not
  relying too heavily on one particular energy source, on the assumption that similar
  improvement rates apply to all energy supply and end-use technologies).

  A2. The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very heterogeneous world. The
  underlying theme is self-reliance and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns
  across regions converge very slowly, which results in continuously increasing
  population. Economic development is primarily regionally oriented and per capita
  economic growth and technological change more fragmented and slower than other
  storylines.

  B1. The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent world with the same
  global population, that peaks in mid-century and declines thereafter, as in the A1
  storyline, but with rapid change in economic structures toward a service and
  information economy, with reductions in material intensity and the introduction of clean
  and resource-efficient technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to economic,
  social and environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but without
  additional climate initiatives.

  B2. The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world in which the emphasis is on
  local solutions to economic, social and environmental sustainability. It is a world with
  continuously increasing global population, at a rate lower than A2, intermediate levels
  of economic development, and less rapid and more diverse technological change than
  in the A1 and B1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented towards environmental
  protection and social equity, it focuses on local and regional levels.

  Source: IPCC. https://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/tar/wg1/029.htm


Data limitations (i.e., frequent use of existing studies, rather than new physical models of climate-
related processes) have not allowed us to be fully consistent in the use of these scenarios across all 6
sectors. Table 1.3 below shows the scenarios used for the assessment of different sectors in this
report.
Table 1.3: Socio-economic and climatic scenarios used in sector analyses
Sector                     SSP Scenarios Used         Emissions Scenarios
                                                      Used
Forestry                   SSP1, SSP3, SSP5           A1B
Agriculture                SSP1, SSP2, SSP3           A2, A1B, B1
Water                      SSP1, SSP3, SSP5           A1B, A2, B1
Energy                     SSP1, SSP3, SSP5           A1B, A2
Health                     SSP1, SSP3, SSP5           A1B, A2, B1


                                                                                                   -9-
Roads & buildings                      --               A1B, A2


For most of the analyses, the actual climate projects under the selected emissions scenarios were
based on data from Taranu et al. (2012), who state that “The model simulations for precipitation and
temperature used in this study stem from 10 of the global coupled atmosphere ocean general
circulation models (AOGCMs) made available by the World Climate Research Program (WCRP)
Coupled Models Intercomparison Program Phase 3 (CMIP3) [14]: CSIROMk3 (Australia’s
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Australia), ECHAM5-OM (Max-
Planck-Institute for Meteorology, Germany), HadCM3 (UK Met. Office, UK), BCCR_BCM2.0 (Bjerknes
Centre for Climate Research, Norway), CCCma_CGCM3_T63 (Canadian Center for Climate Modeling
and Analysis, Canada), NIES_MIROC3.2_medres, NIES_MIROC3.2_hires (National Institute for
Environmental Studies; Japan), MRI_CGCM2.3.2 (Meteorological Research Institute, Japan),
NCAR_CCSM3 (National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA), GFDL_CM2.1 (Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory, USA) model experiments for SRES A2, A1B and B1 were downloaded from:
http://www.ipcc-data.org/gcm/monthly/SRES _AR4/index.html.
The new models of water availability and infrastructure were based on climate scenarios as detailed
in table 1.4.


Table 1.4: Details of climate scenarios used in modelling of water availability and infrastructure costs.
THIS STUDY’S     GLOBAL GENERAL CIRCULATION MODEL BASIS FOR THE SCENARIO      RELEVANT IPCC SRES SCENARIO
SCENARIO

                 Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques, Coupled
 High Impact                                                                               A1B
                                     Model 3 (France)

   Medium         Center for Climate Modeling and Analysis, Coupled GCM
                                                                                           A1B
   Impact                            3.1.t63 (Canada)

 Low Impact          Goddard Institute for Space Studies, ModelER (US)                     A2




                                                                                                            - 10 -
2 Analysis of vulnerable sectors
2.1 Forestry

2.1.1 Overview
Moldova has the lowest forest cover in Europe at 11.4% (c. 446,600 ha). Forests tend to occur in hilly
areas with the majority of them located in the central part of Moldova, with slightly less in the north
and even fewer in the south. The forests are mainly broadleaved - oak, ash, hornbeam, black locust
and poplar being the most significant species (WB 2014, TUB 2015). According to the National
General Cadaster Registry, 86.6.1% of the national forest estate is owned by the state (through the
public authority, Moldsilva, and its forest units), 12.7% by Local Public Authorities (LPAs), circa 4%
are properties of other state institutions (e.g. Botanical Garden, Central Authority for Waters), and
private ownership is low at around 0.6%.
Based on the Ecosystem Services Approach (ESA), recent studies have identified a range of
important benefits from forests in Moldova, extending beyond the direct provision of goods, such as
timber, to ecosystem services, such as carbon sequestration. The forest sector’s direct economic
contribution is relatively small at just 0.28% to GDP in 2014, while wood products represented only
0.5% of total exports and 1.7% of total imports in 2012. However, analysis completed under the ENPI
FLEG Program estimates total consumption of fuelwood in Moldova is nearly 3 times the official
harvest, indicating significant volumes of illegal harvesting (WB 2014, Galupa et al. 2011)
Additionally, the forests provide critical habitat for biodiversity (GD 2015) and other essential
environmental benefits such as soil protection, water regulation and carbon sequestration. Most
sector analyses (WB 2014, Popa 2013, TUB 2015) highlight under-used potential in the forestry
sector, especially in terms of water and soil regulation, tourism, household use of forest products
and carbon sequestration. Protective forest belts have a long tradition in Moldova, being established
post-1947 as shelter belts for agricultural land, riparian buffers and protection of transportation
routes and reduction of soil erosion. The total extent of forest belts is 30,300 ha. The main species
are black locust (36%) and walnut (38%), but there are 12 other indigenous species and 8 exotic
species (Postolache 2008). There are no centralized data regarding the present status of forest belts,
however different sources (Clima East 2013) indicate that many areas are affected by illegal logging,
abusive and uncontrolled grazing, waste pollution or different degradation factors. Different studies
(Turcanu and Platon, 2014) indicate that forest belts contribute to increased agricultural
productivity.



2.1.2 Climate impacts & current costs of inaction
Forests provide a range of goods and environmental services. All primary production in the forestry
sector is dependent on climatic conditions, and any steps to improve forest productivity enhance
climate benefits, represent climate-smart development, and are adaptive in the broad sense defined
above.
A recent study (TUB, 2015) estimated the total current economic value of Moldova’s forests to be
USD66.77 million. This figure includes the values of provisioning services (timber, fuelwood, NTFPs,
mushrooms and game: USD42.64 million in total) and of environmental services, such as carbon
sequestration (USD2.59 million, based on a price of $4.2 per ton of CO2 eq.), soil protection
(USD14.62 million, based on a rule of thumb of a 10% decrease in forest cover providing a 12%
increase in soil loss), and hydrological regulation (USD6.92 million, based on a rule of thumb of a
10% increase in forest cover within a given basin leading to a 20% decrease in water treatment
costs).


                                                                                                 - 11 -
Currently foregone climate-dependent production was estimated on the basis of a potential value
for forest services under an optimal forest management scenario consistent with national forest
policies and objectives, including the Forest Sector Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (GD 2016c).
The following assumptions were involved:
     Ideal forest coverage would be 15% of national territory, based on areas of degraded and
        unproductive land that could be reforested.
     The annual allowable cut is 40% of total annual woody biomass growth (as at present), but
        illegal logging is reduced to 25% of the present level.
     The distribution of tree species is optimized to local conditions, meaning a significantly
        higher percentage of oak stands, and degraded forests are regenerated. This results in a 10%
        increase in value of NTFPs produced per unit area, and a higher proportion of timber (as
        opposed to lower-value fuelwood) in the annual harvest (15% rather than 10%).
     Values of water regulation, soil protection, and carbon sequestration increase in accordance
        with the increased forest area and productivity.
The resulting optimized production is estimated at USD106.41 million, of which provisioning services
account for USD71.54 million, carbon sequestration for USD4.61 million, soils protection for
USD21.16, and hydrological regulation for USD9.11 million. Thus current foregone production,
calculated as the difference between the potential and current value of forest ecosystems, is
estimated at USD39.64 million.

Figure 2.1. Actual and potential values of forest services (USD million per annum) under current climate
conditions.
 120


 100


  80
                                                                Water regulation value

  60                                                            Soil erosion regulation
                                                                Carbon sequestration
  40                                                            Provisioning services


  20


   0
             Current value             Potential value

Climate-related factors also cause losses in the forestry sector, but the costs are relatively minor in
relation to production. Current annual damages are estimated at USD18,000 due to fire, USD177,000
due to pests, and USD219,000 from drying of trees (i.e., drought), making a total of USD414,000. It is
estimated that around USD300,000 per year is also spent on pest treatments, representing current
defensive expenditure, but that this figure would fall to around USD135,000 under optimal
management, and therefore that USD165,000 of the spending on pest management is avoidable
defensive expenditure.




                                                                                                       - 12 -
2.1.3 Future costs of inaction
Future climate change will affect both the growth of tree species (eventually leading to changes in
species’ distributions, although this is not expected to be significant by 2050), and the frequency and
extent of damages from disease, drought and fire. A range of mostly regional studies were used to
assess these expected impacts, which were modelled under only one emissions scenario (A1B –
being that used by the key source for tree species growth projections, Taranu 2012), but three SSP
scenarios (SSP1, SSP3 & SSP5 – which had only moderate effects on the expected prices of forest
services). The key impacts of climate change to 2050 are expected to be as follows:
     A decrease in availability of water resources is expected to limit growth. Different species
        will react differently, but native oaks should generally fare better than non-native species.
     Temperature increase, changes in precipitation and a reduction in year-round water
        availability are expected to lead to a 15% increase in area affected by pests, a 25% increase
        in area of drying, a 30% increase in fire risk, and increased soil erosion.
     The greatest impact is expected to be felt in the South (where there is already the lowest
        degree of forestation, at 7.7% of land area), followed by the Centre (which has the biggest
        surface coved with forest, 209.4 thousand ha or about 14.5% of total land area).
Foregone production in the year 2050 is calculated in a similar fashion as before, by comparing the
productivity of a business-as-usual scenario (involving the current forest estate and management
practices) to the same ideal forest management scenario, under future climate conditions.
Forest production in 2050 is estimated at around USD55 million (range 54.2 – 56.4 million), under
business-as-usual. Moving to optimal forest management would increase production by around
USD48 million (range 46.7 – 49.7 million). Damage from pests, drought and fire amount to around
USD0.45 million, and another USD0.47 million is spent annually on pest control, USD0.2 million of
which could be avoided under an optimal management scenario.

                             Production & costs in Forestry, US$m
            120

            100

              80

              60

              40

              20

               0
                                  Present                                  2050
             -20

                          Production                      Unrealized production
                          Defensive expenditure           Avoidable defensive expenditure
                          Damage & losses


Figure 2.2: Climate-related annual production and impacts in the forestry sector for the present and 2050.
Unrealized production increases (representing an increase in the cost of inaction) as actual production falls by
2050. Defensive expenditure and damage & losses also increase, but are too small to be shown clearly.




                                                                                                         - 13 -
The impact of future climate change means that future production under the business-as-usual
scenario is significantly lower than current production, but the potential benefits of moving to
optimal forest management (i.e., the foregone production) are higher, mostly due to the fact that
the optimal management scenario involves greater representation of native oaks, which are better
adapted to future climate conditions. Nevertheless, total potential production is slightly lower in the
future. The annual costs of climate change by 2050 would be represented by the loss of production
under business-as-usual, plus the increase in damage and defensive expenditure. This comes to
around USD12 million per annum.



2.1.4 Adaptation investments
Potential adaptation investments for the forestry sector are implied in the ideal management
scenarios used to calculate the production deficits, and essentially consist of both ecological
reconstruction of the present forest resources and the expansion of forest vegetation. Stable
complex forests are less sensitive to damages caused by forest fires and pests and are less affected
by drought. Their regulating services in terms of water and soil erosion protection, and their
productivity, are increased. Included in the options are the rehabilitation and expansion of shelter
belts and riparian buffers, which provide elevated environmental services in terms of protecting
crops and water sources. There are also needs for research and action to identify and propagate
resilient tree varieties, and for improved management of risks from intensifying pests and forest
fires.
The cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of investment options was carried out based on the mapping of
potential intervention areas and estimates of the multiannual costs by ICAS (2016b). The costs
include removal of present forest vegetation (for ecological reconstruction), preparing the land,
value of materials and works (human and machines) for planting and maintaining the plantations
until they become forest, costs for forest management (thinning, sanitary cuttings, forest
management planning, guarding, harvesting, etc.).
A summary of the analysis is given in Table 2.2.3. Uncertainty of benefits has been given a
preliminary rating of moderate for all options due to the following:
    1. Necessity for successful implementation of the Forest Institutional Reform Strategy of
       Moldova (FIRSM) as a prerequisite for any significant investment initiatives in the sector -
       without this institutional reform to increase transparency, effectiveness, and efficiency of
       forest management, there is an increased risk of benefits not being realized near to their full
       potential.
    2. All the investment effort must be accompanied by strengthening of the research and
       production capacity in terms of germplasm management and capacities for seedlings
       production and afforestation, as well as improved management of forest fires and forest
       pests.
    3. Certain limitations imposed by the data used/valuation methodology and the assumptions
       made for the evaluation (e.g., prices for selling sequestered carbon, growth, productivity,
       and species distribution predictions).




                                                                                                 - 14 -
Table 2.1. Summary of Potential Investments in Forestry
Description   on   Period      for    Amount     Indicative    Uncertainty   Impact    Impact    Overall
                                                     12
investment         implementation     in USD     IRR           of Benefits   on        on        Priority
                                      (Mn.)                                  poverty   gender

Ecological         2020 to 2029           91.3   2.9% to       Moderate      High      High      High
reconstruction                                   13.5%
of forests
Ecological         2020 to 2029            4.9   4.1% to       Moderate      High      High      High
reconstruction                                   14.7%
of forest belts
New forest belts   2025 to 2034                  5.3% to       Moderate      High      High      Medium
                                          56.5   10.4%
Afforestation of   2030 to 2044                  5.1%     to   Moderate      High      High      Medium
degraded land                            199.7   6.5%
Afforestation of   2030 to 2044                  3.6%     to   Moderate      High      High      Medium
degraded                                         9.3%
pastures                                  28.3


Rates of return depend on quality of forest areas and species used (see annexes for further details),
and tend to be higher for forest belts (i.e., shelter belts and riparian buffers) due to the enhanced
environmental services these provide for crop production and hydrological regulation.
The high ratings for impact on poverty reflect the importance of forest services for rural populations
(Popa et al. 2014), including for income and consumption of non-timber forest products and wood
resources (pole/logs, timber, fuelwood, and tree branches). In poor rural communities, the lower the
household income, the higher the dependence on the forest. Gender impact is also high as all family
members are involved in forest product collection, preparation, and selling activities.



2.1.5 Constraints & uncertainty
For the forestry sector, key sources of uncertainty are:
        Estimation of potential ecosystem services values for forest. For the provisioning services
         the estimates are quite precise, based on the estimated annual allowable cut provided by
         the forest management plans, with variations raging by 10-15 %. The demand for wood is
         not expected to decrease, and therefore uncertainty only arises due to price evolution.
         Regarding the regulating ecosystem services, uncertainty is greater as estimates were based
         on rules of thumb developed from studies in other countries with more or less similar
         conditions. Values of carbon sequestration ecosystem services are based on assumptions
         regarding the C transaction price (USD4.2 per ton CO2 eq.) and the availability of markets for
         sequestered carbon, but only contribute around 5% of the total value of forest production.
        Climate change impacts on forests. Available studies are limited and only provided a basis to
         include one emissions scenario, A1B, in the assessment. However, predicted growth rate
         changes for the period up to 2050 are not very dramatic and the change in species


12
  Inserted here is an indicative IRR range. A range is necessary due to variation between species included in
the investment and due to site conditions.



                                                                                                        - 15 -
        distribution is limited for such a short period (considering the average production cycle for
        oak-based forests is around 100 years).
       Impacts of pests and forest fires. Available studies are limited so estimates are extrapolated
        from damages recorded in the last 5 years
       Investment benefits. An important source of uncertainty is how successfully the Forest
        Institutional Reform Strategy of Moldova (FIRSM) will be implemented. Without institutional
        reform to increase transparency, effectiveness, and efficiency of forest management, there
        is an increased risk of benefits not being realized near to their full potential.



2.2 Agriculture

2.2.1 Overview
Agriculture has traditionally played a key role in Moldova’s economy, shaping the country’s
landscape. The prevailing climate and quality of soils have historically determined agricultural
specialization, especially in high-value crops such as fruits and vegetables. The sector represented
about 13 percent of Moldova’s GDP in 2014, with a value of about MDL 14.5 billion (about USD 1.05
billion). About 26 percent of the active population were engaged in some form of agriculture in
2013. In 2013, agricultural land accounted for about 75 percent of total land area, of which 73
percent was arable, 12 percent under permanent crops, and 14 percent pastures.
The nature and practice of agriculture in Moldova have changed greatly since the end of the Soviet
era, with land devoted to high-value crops reduced by half, loss of most irrigated areas, and an
overall decrease in land productivity. This is in part related to a lack of investment and credit in the
sector, resulting in application of low-yield technologies and in reductions of agricultural inputs,
especially fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals. The agricultural sector receives only 9.7
percent of capital investments in the country, with foreign investments representing only about 4
percent of the total in 2013 (Moroz et al, 2015).
Crop cultivation made up about 66 percent of the total value of agriculture in 2013. Crop selection
has become less diversified in recent years, with cereals and industrial crops occupying about 90
percent of sown areas. The makeup of total crop production has been volatile recently, partly as a
result of extreme weather events.
Animal production occupied about a third of agricultural land in 2013, a share that has declined since
the 1990s. In recent years, many corporate farms have ceased milk and meat production. Thus
households and small-scale farms currently account for a high proportion of livestock holdings and
livestock product output. This includes 86 percent of beef production, 70 percent of pork
production, 93 percent of sheep and goat meat production, about 50 percent of poultry meat
production, about 97 percent of total milk production, and 61 percent of egg production in 2013.
The poultry sector retains intensive production, including over 40 industrial enterprises.
Agrofood exports constituted about 45 percent of total exports from Moldova in 2015. The wine
industry represented 7 percent of its exports worldwide in 2015, employing more than 200,000
citizens. Exports of wine amounted to more than USD160 million.
Factors contributing to low productivity in the agriculture sector in Moldova can be summarized as
follows (Moroz et al 2015; World Bank 2012):
     Water supply. This includes: limited access to large-scale irrigation and small-scale storage
        reservoirs and to technologies making the most efficient use of irrigation water (e.g., drip
        irrigation); sub-optimal use of local water sources; and inefficient or limited drainage
        infrastructure.


                                                                                                  - 16 -
     Low rate of adoption of modern agronomic practices and technologies. This includes land
        management (changes in planting patterns, crop rotation, and inter-cropping), improving
        varieties, optimizing fertilizer application, introducing alternative crops, and changing the
        distribution of existing crops.
       Unsustainable land management, which contributes to land degradation and has resulted in
        significant soil erosion, loss of organic matter, and soil pollution. In 2014 942,422 ha (about
        37 percent) of agricultural land was classed as degraded with about 13 percent of that total
        heavily eroded and about 29 percent moderately eroded. The total has increased by about 7
        per cent since 2008. It is estimated that the annual costs of foregone agricultural production
        due to erosion are USD 40 million USD (from World Bank, 2007), with a range of USD 60 to
        70 million per year for financial losses from soil erosion given in World Bank (2012b). The
        fertile chernozem soil types are among the most vulnerable to certain climate risks
        (including storms, droughts). Forecasts for changes in soil quality under climate change
        conditions imply a reduction and limitation of productive potential, including through
        increased erosion (Moroz et al, 2015).
     High vulnerability to extreme climate events coupled with inadequate use of protective
        measures, such as: moving vegetable production to greenhouses; applying mulch or other
        plant protection to soil; using hail nets; and distributing timely meteorological information
        to farmers.
     Insufficient provision of extension services for a number of technical options, such as
        cultivation of alternative crop varieties.
     Inadequate provision of agricultural market information to assist farmers in decision-making.
     Institutional and market issues, such as limited access to finance, distortions in agricultural
        input and output markets, and weak public services.



2.2.2 Climate impacts & current costs of inaction
All primary productivity in agriculture, from both crops and livestock, is dependent on climate, and
Moldova is considered to have a production deficit in comparison to countries with similar
conditions but significantly higher agricultural productivity.
Current foregone production of crops was assessed by comparing Moldovan yields with those of
neighbouring countries based on FAO data. Models of potential agricultural yields undertaken by the
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA, 2015) were also reviewed. The FAO data
show a consistently lower yield of cereal, vegetables, and fruit for Moldova than for Romania, the
European average, and Eastern Europe. FAO livestock productivity figures for Moldova were similarly
compared with regional neighbours.




                                                                                                 - 17 -
Table 2.2: Comparison of Yield Gaps (IIASA simulations and international comparisons)
      Calculated yields based on IIASA         FAO data on regional yields14 (tonnes/hectare)
                   13
       simulations (tonnes/hectare)
Crop         Current Potential Potential Moldova Romania Europe                    Eastern
             yield      (no         w/ irrig.                                      Europe
                        irrig.)
Barley             1.5          4.6        4.7    1.84         2.79          3.38        2.41
Maize                 3.9            8.6          12.9            3.18           4.19    6.26    5.07
Millet                1.2            2.4           3.0 n/a
Potato               22.2           40.5          44.3        10.39             15.23   19.56   15.13
Rape                  1.0            2.3           2.7            1.29           1.88    2.70    2.04
Rye                   1.6            4.6           4.7 n/a
Soya                  1.5            2.9           4.3            1.51           2.08    1.82    1.60
Sugar                23.0           57.2         122.4        27.09             37.30   53.66   38.51
beet
Sunflower             1.6            4.3           5.5            1.55           1.72    1.60    1.56
Wheat                 2.1            6.5           9.3            2.44           3.06    3.74    2.81


Table 2.3: Estimated potential livestock production in Moldova assuming average yields of Romania, Europe
and Eastern Europe (1000 tonnes)
                    Moldova    Romania    Europe    Eastern
                    actual     yield      yield     Europe
                    production                      yield
Beef                       9.5       11.8      18.0      13.8
Sheep Meat                 2.1        1.4       2.0       2.0
Pork                         64.5           64.2           68.5          66.6
Chicken                      38.8           41.6           42.6          44.2
meat
Milk                        524.6          429.0         2294.1      2082.8
Eggs (Hens)                  34.8           19.2           36.6        33.1
Source: Own calculations based on FAOstat data


Current primary agricultural production is around USD710 million per annum15, including USD619
million from crops and USD91 million from livestock. Based on the comparisons with international
data, current foregone production is around USD250 million (range 145-335 million, based on the
broad range amongst international comparators), including USD235 million in crops and USD15
million in livestock.
Extreme weather events have high impacts on agricultural output in Moldova. Figure 2.3 illustrates
recent trends in gross agricultural production showing high fluctuations during years of extreme


13
   Own calculation of average actual yield simulation, yield potentials, and yield gaps based on data from
(IIASA, 2015) for administrative districts.
14
     Own calculations based on FAOstat data.
15
     Based on those crops and livestock for which the climate analysis could be conducted.



                                                                                                        - 18 -
weather events, in particular for crop production in the drought years of 2009 and 2012. Livestock
production shows much less volatility during this period. The MAFI report for the 2012 drought
suggested that the crop failures greatly exceed drought impacts on the livestock sector, but livestock
are still affected by events that impact on the availability of feed (particularly fodder for
winterisation), and extreme events can also facilitate outbreaks and propagation of diseases.

Figure 2-3: Moldovan agricultural production in recent years: 2015 prices; million lei
 30000


 25000


 20000

                                                                                   Тotal
 15000
                                                                                   Crops

 10000                                                                             Animals


  5000


        0




Extreme events impacting the agriculture sector include:
           Droughts Estimates show droughts as the most significant extreme event in terms of losses
            to agriculture. Regular droughts have a significant impact on agricultural production and
            exceptional droughts can be catastrophic. During the period 1990 to 2014, there were ten
            years with droughts, with severe droughts in 2007 and 2012 (Government of RM, 2015). The
            drought in 2007 has been estimated as resulting in USD 1.2 billion in losses (UNDP, 2012).
           Floods Estimates of agricultural losses from floods are lower than for droughts. Annual losses
            are estimated at about 5 million USD (World Bank 2007).
           Other severe weather events Summer storm events include torrential rains, hail, and heavy
            winds, sometimes in combination (and available reporting of damages sometimes combines
            these phenomena). There are limited data on damages caused by frosts, although frost is
            known to be a common problem for farmers in spring and autumn. For example, a failure in
            the winter wheat harvest in 2002/3 is attributed to an early frost in the autumn of 2002
            combined with a drought (World Bank, 2007).
           Climate-related diseases Agricultural plant health issues include cereal and dry bean pests,
            western corn rootworm threat, and Mediterranean fruit fly. However, there is little
            quantitative information on losses or their relationship to climate change.

Based on the estimates given in the World Bank (2007) report and estimates using the SDES
database, a tentative estimate of average annualised losses due to weather events (drought, flood,
hail, rain, wind, frost and landslides) is USD 34 million per year. However, this is likely to be very
conservative as the largest drought losses occurred after 2007, and there is little information


                                                                                                    - 19 -
available on a range of more frequent, smaller-scale events. Defensive expenditures (i.e., the costs
of measures taken to avoid losses from pests and extreme events) were not assessed.



2.2.3 Future costs of inaction
Estimates of the impacts of climate change on yields of key crops in Moldova (wheat, maize,
sunflower, sugar beet, and grapes) for the A2, A1B and B2 emissions scenarios (to 2020 and 2050)
are from the study by Taranu (2014). These show significant negative impacts on wheat and maize
yields in the medium- and long-term, and on sunflower and sugar beet from the medium-term, with
positive impacts on grapes in the short- and medium-term (Table 2-3-1). It is assumed that in the
absence of climate change there would be an underlying average 1% growth in yields per year.
Values of projected harvests were calculated for SSP1, SSP2 and SSP3 (SSP4 and SSP5 were not
available), based on estimated crop price changes in Europe16 (in Frank et al. 2014, from GLOBIOM
model). The most significant cumulative losses in comparison to a no-climate change scenario are for
maize and wheat, followed by sunflower. Grape is the only crop showing increases in total harvest
and value under climate change scenarios.

                                                                                           17
Table 2.4. Summary of average future yield change projections in Republic of Moldova (%)
                         2020s                          2050s                          2080s

Crop             A2      A1B        B1        A2         A1B        B1         A2       A1B        B1
Wheat            -9      -13        -12       -34        -41        -27       -71       -56       -38
Maize            -9      -16        -14       -48        -52        -35                 -74       -49
Sunflower         4        2          3       -10        -13         -7       -33       -21       -11
Sugar Beet        0       -5         -1       -10        -12         -5       -20       -19       -10
Grapes           17      13          14        6          3           6        -9        -1        4
Source: Taranu (2014)


Estimates of impacts on key livestock products were made under emissions scenarios A2, A1B and
B2 from Taranu (2014). Losses are based on increased heat stress and mortality for animals, as well
as on impacts to feed crops. Yield changes relative to a no-climate change scenario are summarized
in Table 2.5 below. Production values were estimated in the same manner as for crops.
Overall, agricultural production is forecast to grow to USD1.006 billion by 2050 (USD877 million from
crops and USD129 million from livestock), as underlying productivity improvements slightly exceed
expected losses due to climate change.




16
  Use of Europe-wide price projections can be justified if one assumes greater market integration, so prices
tend to converge across countries. However, projections for future population in Moldova show very large
reductions, which would imply a reduced domestic demand for agricultural products, which is not reflected in
the current price assumptions.
17
  These are projections of future yield changes in the Republic of Moldova (as % over 30 years) relative to
1981-2010, based on an Ensemble from 10 GCMs for SRES A2, A1B, and B1 emission scenarios.



                                                                                                        - 20 -
Table 2.5: Summary of yield change projections for livestock products in Republic of Moldova (%)
                                 2020s                              2050s
                 A2              A1B          B1         A2          A1B         B1
Milk              -7             -12          -11        -31         -34         -23
Eggs              -2              -6           -5        -20         -22         -14
Wool              -1              -2           -2         -5          -5          -4
Beef             -12             -21          -18        -56         -61         -42
Pork              -8             -14          -12        -37         -41         -28
Mutton            -3              -6           -6        -17         -18         -12
Poultry           -5              -9           -7        -22         -26         -17
Source: Taranu (2014)


The relative effect of climate change on both the actual and potential production of individual crops
is assumed to be the same. Therefore the overall change in foregone production is less than that for
actual production, as the crops which are least affected by climate change contribute relatively more
to future output. Despite the addition of variation from differing emissions and SSP scenarios, the
biggest source of uncertainty for future projections remains the original variation in estimates of
production deficits for crops (see Table 2.6 below) and for livestock. Unrealized production is
estimated at around USD250 million (range 145-355 million), including USD243 million in crops and
USD7 million in livestock.
Table 2.6: Foregone production under Climate Change and SSPs combinations (mil. USD 2014, each cell gives
range based on the original high and low estimates of yield deficits for Moldova)
Scenario            SSP1               SSP2             SSP3
A2             137.4 – 342.1     136.5 – 339.9      135.9 – 338.6
A1B            128.7 – 320.5     127.7 – 318.0      127.1 – 316.5
B1             153.8 – 383.1     153.2 – 381.6      152.8 – 380.7


Future damages and losses in the agricultural sector are expected to increase due to both an
increased frequency of extreme events and an increased asset base at risk. Increased frequency of
events has been estimated recently for European countries in a paper by Fischer and Knutti (2015),
while the value of the future asset base is assumed to be proportional to GDP18, which in turn is
based on the three SSP scenarios. The 2050 estimate of expected annual damages and losses is
around USD335 million (range 320 – 350 million; see Table 2.7).
Table 2.7: Expected Annual Damages from Climate-Related Extreme Events (USD mil.)
Scenario              Baseline       2020        2030       2040       2050
A2                         34.86    81.77     148.39      246.36     334.62
A1B                        34.86    84.75     154.16      256.34     350.12
B1                         34.86    85.97     151.69      242.83     319.63
As % of GDP                 0.7%     1.0%       1.1%        1.2%       1.3%
GDP (USD Bn.)                 4.8      8.3     13.83       20.79      25.92




18
     The agricultural proportion of GDP has stayed relatively constant in recent years.



                                                                                                   - 21 -
Figure 2.4 summarizes the current and future costs of inaction in the agriculture sector, as described
above. The expected annual cost of climate change by 2050 is around USD700 million, calculated
from the difference in future production under the climate change and no-climate change scenarios
(roughly USD430 million, including USD235 million from crops and USD195 million from livestock)
and from the portion of the increase in damages and losses that are attributable to the increased
frequency and extent of extreme events (roughly USD270 million).


                          Production & Costs in Agriculture, US$m
            1400
            1200
            1000
             800
             600
             400
             200
               0
            -200                  Present                                  2050
            -400
            -600

                         Production                      Unrealized production
                         Defensive expenditure           Avoidable defensive expenditure
                         Damage & losses


Figure 2.4: Climate-related annual production and impacts in the agriculture sector for the present and 2050.
The value of production increases to 2050, with a slight decrease in unrealized production. Damages and losses
show a pronounced increase by 2050, driving the overall increase in costs of inaction.



2.2.4    Adaptation investments
Investment in water supply options
A number of priority interventions for irrigation, drainage, and on-farm technologies are
summarized in Table 2.8, which shows investment totals per type of investment, including ratings for
uncertainty of benefits, poverty, and gender impacts. These investments address the current
productivity deficit in Moldovan agriculture but also aim to make the sector more resilient to climate
change. The favourable potential for on-farm irrigation technologies (in particular, drip and sprinkler
irrigation systems for vegetables and fruits) is underlined by the significant improvements in gross
margins compared with BAU practices found in ACSA demonstration projects. An important
complementary program, dealing with institutional reforms of Apelei Moldovei, the key agency
responsible for water infrastructure, WRM, and WSS, is considered to be a prerequisite for
sustainable and viable irrigation investments, due to the need for ongoing management of irrigation
and drainage infrastructure. Assessment of water infrastructure options requires further detailed
analysis.

Investment in other agronomic options
There are a number of promising options for investment in on-farm climate risk management
measures, including: improved varieties; improved soil/land management; alternative crops/changes
in distribution; and extreme events risk management (such as hail nets and greenhouses). There are,


                                                                                                       - 22 -
however, key knowledge gaps in defining the potential scale of these investments. A number of
demonstration plots under the ACSA Climate Risk Management Project show promising results. For
example, soil management (Mini Till) shows a change in gross margins (compared with BAU
practices) ranging from 18 percent for maize to 30 percent for wheat and sunflower, and 43 percent
for soybean, while annual income in the demonstration apple orchard was 4,200 euro/ha higher
with an anti-hail net system (calculated from ACSA, 2014). Also, vegetable-producing greenhouses
showed significant improvements in gross margins. There have been a small number of replications
of these demonstrations, but it is necessary to further assess the market potential, land suitability,
and availability aspects to understand the potential for further scaling up of these and other options
on existing and newly sown areas.

Potential for expansion of high value crops
Field evidence (from ACSA-funded demonstration plots) and a literature review indicates the
potential for expanding high-value crops in Moldova, in particular fruits and vegetables. This can be
justified by both current suitability of soil and climate conditions, which give the country a
comparative advantage in growing most temperate fruits and (irrigated) vegetables, and suitability
under future climate change, given that available research (discussed in Section 2.1) suggests more
favourable conditions under future climate scenarios for some fruit crops, including grapes. High-
value crops also offer higher potential for increased incomes from domestic sales and exports19.
Given that existing ACSA demonstration sites for adaptation investments focusing on high value
products are likely to be in the most promising conditions and have mainly been set up by
experienced commercial farmers, further analysis is needed of the real potential for and constraints
to more widespread adoption. Land consolidation and tenure issues may also influence the ability to
make longer-term investments, and any shifts from annual to perennial crops will affect subsistence
farmers differently than commercial farmers. The impacts for subsistence farmers therefore need to
be assessed thoroughly in any investment decisions supporting this expansion.
The Agricultural Support Fund of the Government of Moldova also recognises the need to shift the
focus of investment support towards high value products. Any expansion in high value crop
production also needs to be linked to development of appropriate post-harvest infrastructure, which
has been identified as a weak link in fruit and vegetable supply chains in Moldova (World Bank
2012b) and has high capital requirements.
A climate-smart agriculture analysis, prepared for Moldova by CIAT, also identifies improved pasture
and livestock management as one of the adaptation options with the greatest potential. However,
this is not included in the table above, as there was insufficient information for Moldova to calculate
economic returns.




19
  Profitability for cereals in 2010 ranged from 171 USD per ha for wheat to 348 USD per ha for maize. This
compares to 1885 USD per ha for apples, 1993 for table grapes, and 4319 for tomatoes (from ACSA farm
budget survey).




                                                                                                    - 23 -
 Table 2.8: Summary of Potential Investments in Agriculture
Description on            Period for      Amount       Indicative       Uncertai    Impact       Impact       Overall
investment                implementati in USDm IRR20                    nty of      on           on           Priority
                          on                                            Benefits    poverty      gender
Water Management
Rehabilitate/Moderniz     2017 to 2040          975 8% to 15%           Medium      Medium       Medium       High
e Centralized Irrigation
         21
Systems
Investments in on-farm 2017 to 2040             130 8% to 15%           Low         High         High         High
irrigation                From 2031 the                                 Medium      Medium       Medium       Medium
              22
technologies              cost is O&M
Rehabilitation/Moderni 2017 to 2040             120 8% to 15%           Medium      Medium       Medium       High
zation of Drainage From 2026 the
infrastructure         in cost is O&M
irrigated areas
Investments            in 2025 to 2040          118 8% to 15%           Medium      Medium       Medium       Medium
Drainage Infrastructure From 2032 the
in rainfed areas          cost is O&M
Upscaling of small-scale 2017 to 2040           13.6 8% to 15%          Low         High         High         Medium
                   23
irrigation systems        From   2023 the
                          cost is O&M                                   Medium

Investments             in   2017 to 2040           65   8% to 15%      Low         High         High         Medium
improved         on-farm     From 2026 the
technologies           for   cost is O&M                                Medium
                    24
rainfed cultivation
Institutional                2017 to 2024          140   n/a            Medium      High         High         High
Reforms/Capacity             (Apele
         25
Building                     Moldovei),
                             2017 to 2040
                             (WUAs)


20
  Benefits of water management options vary depending upon crop mix over the area under consideration.
The Benefit Costs Ratios in the World Bank 2012 study shows great variation between different crops and
regions within specific water management investments. Inserted here is an indicative IRR range.
21
   Combines investments in Centralized Irrigation Systems for Prut, Nistru and Reut river systems. The cost
consists of Operations & Maintenance (O&M) from 2031 onwards for Prut and Nistru, and from 2026 onwards
for Reut.
22
  This covers a variety of technologies (such as drip, sprinkler, gated pipes for gravity irrigation in furrows for
cereal crops, central pivot systems) for which benefits will vary and assessment is needed on a case-by-case
basis. Assessment of medium-to-high poverty and gender impacts reflects this variation in technologies.
23
  This covers using farm ponds, low lift, and groundwater where water quality is not an issue for which
benefits will vary and assessment is needed on a case-by-case basis. Assessment of medium poverty and
gender impacts reflects the relatively lower level of total investment.
24
  This includes contour bunds, in-field water retention and small watershed management structures. Benefits
will vary and assessment is needed on a case-by-case basis. Assessment of medium poverty and gender
impacts reflects the relatively lower level of total investment.
25
   Includes restructuring of Apele Moldovei and associated state-owned enterprises (pre-requisite for any
large-scale irrigation or drainage investment), and creation of functioning Water Users Associations (WUAs) in
each system. Poverty and gender impacts are indirect but potentially high if reforms are successfully
implemented.



                                                                                                            - 24 -
Other       Agronomic                                    BCR
Practices
Improved       varieties   2020 to 2029     286      Rainfed           High         Medium      Medium       Medium
                     26
research investment                                  Maize: 3 to
                                                     23
                                                     Irrigated
                                                     Maize: 11
                                                     to 34
                                                     Rainfed
                                                     Wheat: 9
                                                     to 34
                                                     Irrigated
                                                     Wheat: 14
                                                     to 83
Improve         agricultural 2020 to 2029 561        Rainfed           Low          High        High         Medium
extension services and                               Maize: 1.7
demonstration              for                       to 3.3
optimized          fertilizer                        Irrigated
              27
application                                          Maize: 1.7
                                                     to 5
                                                     Rainfed
                                                     Wheat: 1.7
                                                     to 3.3
                                                     Irrigated
                                                     Wheat: 3.3
                                                     to 5.8
                                                           28
Extension services and demonstration for on farm-practices
Better                   Soil                        n/a               Case         High        High         Medium
management                (no                                          specific
till/mini till)
Alternative                                          n/a               Case         High        High         Medium
crops/changes               in                                         specific
distribution
Greenhouses                                          n/a               Case         Medium      Medium       Medium
                                                                       specific
Anti hail/UV nets                                        n/a           Case         High        High         Medium
                                                                       specific




26
 Illustrative investment scenarios for improved varieties research are based on benefit cost ratios given in the
World Bank 2012 report and have been scaled up to all areas currently sown for those crops.
27
  Illustrative investment scenarios for optimised fertilizer application are based on benefit cost ratios given in
the World Bank 2012 report and have been scaled up to all areas currently sown for those crops.
28
  Investment amounts for these options not given due to knowledge gaps in potential for scaling up these
options, as discussed in conclusions on knowledge gaps.



                                                                                                           - 25 -
Figure 2.5. Proposed climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices in Moldova (CIAT, 2016)




                                                                                         - 26 -
2.2.5 Constraints & uncertainty
In the agriculture sector, key sources of uncertainty are:
       Production potential: Estimated potential crop and livestock production is based on
        international comparisons. There is a large range between the high and low-bound
        estimates of the gap between actual production and potential production, with the high
        bound about 2.5 times the lower bound on average, although there is much variation in this
        range between specific agricultural products. More research is needed to establish the real
        potential production per crop and per region in Moldova, taking into account local soil and
        economic conditions.
       Climate change yield impacts: Estimates for long-term changes to yields due to climate
        change are dependent on the available crop and livestock modelling results, which come
        with a high degree of variability between models. Using the best available projections of
        yield impacts in Moldova produces considerable variation between cost of inaction
        estimates for different emissions scenarios (A2, A1B and B1). For estimates of costs of
        inaction for crops in 2050 the variation is about 20 percent between the highest and lowest
        emission scenario for any given SSP. The comparable variation is much higher for livestock,
        the highest scenarios being about 4 times the lowest, reflecting the high variation in
        available projections of livestock yield impacts between emission scenarios. In general, the
        response of crops to climate-related diseases is still not well understood and crop simulation
        models do not include yield reduction due to weather-induced pest and disease (Taranu,
        2014). Also, endogenous adaptation (i.e., adaptation measures adopted by farmers without
        external intervention, such as changing crop varieties) is not modelled. Detailed discussions
        with farmers would be necessary to understand the types of adaptation strategies available
        to them and likely to be adopted in the absence of additional external support.
       Socio economic scenarios: The variation between cost of inaction results for different socio
        economic scenarios (SSP1, SSP2 and SSP3) for any given emission scenario is much lower
        than the variation between emission scenarios, although again it is higher for livestock
        estimates than for crop estimates.
       Extreme event losses: Estimates of total losses in the agricultural sector from extreme
        events are affected by reporting issues. The lack of comprehensive recent data on losses has
        resulted in high uncertainties regarding the baseline figures used for estimation of future
        damages. In addition, this study was not able to assess the level of avoidable and
        unavoidable defensive expenditures to mitigate the impacts of extreme events or climate-
        related disease.
       Investment benefits: Benefits from large-scale irrigation investments depend on successful
        institutional reforms in Apele Moldovei and associated state-owned enterprises. Returns on
        irrigation investments will also vary significantly depending on where the interventions are
        made, with an IRR range of 8 to 15 percent estimated. Greater knowledge about the
        potential scale of both improvements to other agronomic practices and changes in crop mix
        (especially the potential for expansion of high-value crops) is an important requirement for
        investment decisions. However, prioritization of institutional reform and of water
        management investments in general is considered robust.



2.3 Water
This section looks at the cost of inaction and investment needs related to the provision of water
supply and sanitation (WSS). The supply side, however, does not deal with irrigation rehabilitation
and investment or with drainage issues, which have been covered in the agricultural section.


                                                                                                - 27 -
2.3.1 Overview
Moldova has two main rivers, the Nistru and Prut, which flow south from Ukraine, and a smaller one,
the Reut, which originates in Moldova. Water quality in these varies between moderately polluted to
clean (KPC, 2013).
Groundwater is abstracted through approximately 120,000 springs and wells and 3,000 functional
artesian wells. Groundwater supplies potable water to the majority (65%) of the population. There
are significant issues with groundwater quality, including water hardness exceeding national
standards (KPC, 2013).
There are 3,500 small- to medium-sized reservoirs, with surface area of at least 300km2. Two large
reservoirs supply the country as well, the Costesti-Stînca on the Prut river (678 million m3), which is
jointly operated with Romania, and the Dubusari on the Nistru river (235 million m 3) (Climate
Change Post, undated).
A significant part of the population still needs to be connected to water infrastructure in Moldova.
Some estimates suggest there are 100,000 people in urban areas and 189,500 in rural areas who
should be connected by 2020. In addition, 227,200 people in urban areas and 432,700 in rural areas
require connection to wastewater services. Moldova has also suffered from a number of significant
droughts and floods in recent years, including the 2007 drought, which cost approximately USD957
million to the agriculture sector, and the 2010 flood, which cost USD48.3 million across a range of
sectors.


2.3.2 Climate impacts & current cost of inaction
Climate determines the availability of freshwater resources, and therefore all primary production
that relies on water could be viewed as climate-dependent. This study did not attempt to enumerate
all water-dependent production, however. Instead, it assessed unrealized production in terms of (i)
deficits in overall water availability in relation to actual demand, and (ii) deficits in the provision of
water supply and sanitation (WSS) services.
Overall water availability and demand were assessed using the Water Evaluation and Planning
System (WEAP) and other tools (see annexes for details). Demand was assessed for municipal &
industrial (M&I), irrigation, hydropower, and cooling for thermal energy plants based on installed
infrastructure for abstraction and use, providing an allowance for maintenance of ecological flows.
The assessment indicated that, at present, there is little overall shortage of freshwater resources.
The only deficit is in the lower Nistru, which has an annual average deficit of 23 million m 3 for
thermal energy generation, the cost of which is accounted for under the energy sector.
GTZ (2013) estimated that roughly 290,000 people in Moldova lacked connections to a potable
water supply, and an additional 66,000 are in need of sanitation connections. No reliable data exists
for Moldavia on the value of these unrealized services, but WHO (2004) estimated the total
economic benefits of granting access to improved water and sanitation services in Eastern Europe at
USD23.93 per capita. Converting to 2015 dollars and multiplying by the number of additional
connections needed gives an estimate of around USD32 million in unrealized WSS services.
Damages and losses within the water sector are assessed as the expected annual value of damages
and losses due to flooding. This has been recently estimated to be around USD62.20 million (EIB
2016). Defensive expenditures against flood damage were not evaluated.




                                                                                                    - 28 -
2.3.3 Future costs of inaction
The National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for Moldova identifies a number of key risks for
water resources in the country (see Table 2.9).
Table 2.9: Risks and Opportunities of climate change to the Water Sector
Detail of magnitude of                                             Location
risk/opportunity                                North         Centre       South Chisinau
Water quality affected by higher water
temperatures and variation in runoff   Low                    Medium       High   High
Changes in water demand (increase as
a result of population growth,
economic development and irrigation
requirements                                    Medium        High         High   High
Changes in river flows - both increase
and decrease                                    Medium        High         High   High
Increased risk of drought and water
scarcity                                        Medium        High         High   High
Increased irrigation requirements               Medium        High         High   High
Decreased water availability from
surface sources or ground water                 Medium        High         High   High
Higher pollution with pesticides and
fertilizers to water due to higher
runoff                                          Medium        High         High   High
Flood increase in frequency and
intensity                                       Medium        High         High   Low
Source: National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy of the Republic of Moldova


The WEAP model was used to estimate the impacts of both climate and socioeconomic change on
overall water demand and availability by the 2040s. Even in the absence of climate change, the
projected growth in demand for water means that significant shortages are expected by the 2040s
(see “Base 2040s” scenario in table 2-4-2, which is generally exacerbated under the 3 emissions
scenarios used.
The costs associated with future unmet demand were valued on the basis of actual charges for
water: USD0.50 per m3 for M&I use and irrigation costs of 0.15 lei per m3 in Puhaceni to 0.22 lei per
m3 in Jorile (MCC, 2015). Prices were projected into the future based on expected income growth
and an income elasticity of demand for water, which it assumed to be between 0.3 and 1 (based on
the literature).




                                                                                               - 29 -
Table 2.10: Unmet water demands by catchment, cubic metres
                                                                               CLIMATE SCENARIO AND DECADE
       BASIN
                                 Base 2010s                        Base 2040s                      Low 2040s                   Medium 2040s                     High 2040s
Irrigation
Lower Nistru                                               0              103,000                         202,000                          282,000                      540,000
Reut                                                       0              303,000                         993,000                        2,779,000                     9,301,000
Upper Nistru                                               0                  58,000                      107,000                          140,000                      281,000
Kogilnic                                                   0                          0                              0                              0                                  0
Prut                                                       0                          0                              0                              0                                  0
All                                                        0              464,000                    1,302,000                           3,200,000                10,122,000
Municipal and Industrial
Lower Nistru                                               0           63,983,000                   53,604,000                          47,291,000               106,264,000
Reut                                                       0            2,175,000                    2,797,000                           2,305,000                     3,765,000
Upper Nistru                                               0            8,485,000                    3,888,000                           3,207,000                     8,731,000
Kogilnic                                                   0                          0                              0                              0                                  0
Prut                                                       0                          0                              0                              0                                  0
All                                                        0           74,643,000                   60,288,000                          52,803,000               118,702,000
Thermal
Lower Nistru                                23,329,000                 30,856,000                   50,164,000                          54,512,000                89,846,000
Reut                                                       0                         NA                            NA                              NA                             NA
All                                         23,329,000                 30,856,000                   50,164,000                          54,512,000                89,846,000
Source: estimates from Industrial Economics

Table 2.11: Value of unmet M&I and irrigation water demands by catchment, USDMn.
              Income                                 SSP1                                                   SSP3                                                SSP5
             elasticity       Base          Low           Med          High          Base           Low          Med          High      Base      Low            Med            High

Low water            0.3             62.2          50.2         44.0          99.1          52.0          42.2         37.5      84.9      66.3          53.8           47.7           108.2
value                     1      201.7            163.0        142.9      321.5         110.5             89.8         79.9     181.4     248.0         201.6          179.3           407.1

High water           0.3       1,826.9        1,475.6       1,292.4      2,905.5      1,524.3        1,231.5       1,079.2    2,427.1   1,942.7    1,569.5        1,375.5          3,093.3
value                     1    5,924.6        4,785.3       4,191.4      9,422.7      3,239.3        2,617.1       2,293.9    5,159.0   7,270.4    5,873.9        5,148.4         11,579.1




The value of unmet demand is dominated by the M&I usage and evaluated at roughly USD95 million
[range 38 – 405 million]. The value of the deficit in WSS services is assumed to remain the same
without further investment, and therefore the overall estimate for unrealized production by 2050 is
around USD127 million [range 70 – 437 million].
The estimate for expected annual damage & losses due to flooding by 2050 is around USD276
million based on the EIB study. Figure 2.6 summarizes the current and future costs of inaction in the
water sector, as described above.
The annual expected cost of climate change by 2050 is calculated from: (i) the difference in future
unrealized production between the no climate change and climate change scenarios (roughly USD40
million, although there is a lot of variation in terms of M&I unmet demand across the three
emissions scenarios); and (ii) the portion of the increase in damages and losses beyond that
expected without climate change (roughly USD165 million, adjusting for the increased asset base at
risk as before). The total cost of climate change in the water sector is therefore estimated at roughly
USD205 million.




                                                                                                                                                                               - 30 -
                              Production & costs in Water, US$m
             150
             100
              50
               0
             -50                  Present                                2050

            -100
            -150
            -200
            -250
            -300

                         Production                    Unrealized production
                         Defensive expenditure         Avoidable defensive expenditure
                         Damage & losses


Figure 2.6: Climate-related annual production and impacts in the water sector for the present and 2050. The
costs of inaction show a strong increase to 2050 from increases in both unrealized production and damage &
losses.



2.3.4 Adaptation investments
Further investment in infrastructure for rural water supply may be one option for adaptation in
terms of increasing water provision for agriculture and rural populations. Cost-benefit analysis of
small-scale water supply shows a BCR of 2.5 to 21.3 in the pan-European region (including Moldova)
(UNECE and WHO, 2011). A detailed estimate of these investments has not been made, however, as
detaled data were not available.
Improvements in the efficiency of municipal and industrial (M&I) supply systems (i.e., reducing
losses) appear to be economically favorable across all basins, even at the present time, and with
returns increasing in later decades. Calculated BCRs vary between 14 to 69.9 depending on the
socieoconomic scenario and whether a 10% or 15% reduction in losses is targeted, based on the
following assumptions:
    1. Capital costs range from USD0.04 per m3 to USD0.17 per m3. O&M is taken to be 2% of
       capital costs per annum (Sutherland and Penn, 2000).
    2. Water value is USD0.50 per m3 in 2014, and increases with per capita GDP using the
       conservative 0.3 income elasticity.
    3. Efficiency systems are established to meet 2040s deficits.
    4. A 6% discount rate is applied.
    5. The lifetime of a supply system is 25 years.
Another option to address expected water deficits in Moldova from 2020 onwards is the
construction of water storage reservoirs. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for reservoirs of
varying size on each of three basins, using construction costs adapted to Moldova from Ward et al
(2010), estimates of the values of water for M&I, irrigation, and thermal energy generation, and the
following assumptions:


                                                                                                     - 31 -
    1. The discount rate was taken as 6%.
    2. Construction would start in 2020 and would take 5 years for the smaller reservoirs and 6
       years for the largest one).
    3. The assessed lifetime was set at 30 years (i.e., to 2050).
    4. Water is allocated to meet unmet demand first to the use with the highest value, then to the
       use with the second highest, and so on.

The following tables present results for the Lower Nistru, Reut and Upper Nistru. In each case the
economically optimal size of the reservoir is highlighted in bold. Note, however, that water demand
and benefits of additional storage increase in later years, so if the investments were made later,
larger reservoirs might be favored.

Table 2.12: Benefit Cost Estimates for Lower Nistru Water Storage (Base Case)
Size of Reservoir        PV of Costs        PV of Benefits              BCR      Unmet Demand
(MCM)                     USDMn                                                    Satisfied
                                               USDMn.
         1                    0.3             6.7 to 20.5          19.5-59.4          M&I
         25                   6.2           168.6 to 383.8       27.1 to 61.8
        100                  18.4           413.2 to 937.5       66.5 to 151.0   M&I, Irrigation,
                                                                                 Thermal Energy
        500                  43.2           401.0 to 919.7       64.6 to 148.1


Table 2.13: Benefit Cost Estimates for Reut Water Storage (Base Case)
Size of Reservoir        PV of Costs        PV of Benefits              BCR      Unmet Demand
(MCM)                     USDMn                                                    Satisfied
                                               USDMn.
         1                    0.3             6.7 to 20.5          19.5-59.4          M&I
         25                   6.2            12.7 to 31.6          2.0 to 5.1
        100                  18.4            12.7 to 31.6          0.7 to 1.7    M&I, Irrigation.
        500                  43.2            12.2 to 31.0          0.3 to 0.7


Table 2.14: Benefit Cost Estimates for Reut Water Storage (Base Case)
Size of Reservoir        PV of Costs        PV of Benefits              BCR      Unmet Demand
(MCM)                     USDMn                                                    Satisfied
                                               USDMn.
         1                    0.3             6.7 to 20.5          19.5-59.4          M&I
         25                   6.2           47.0 to 117.0         7.6 to 18.8
        100                  18.4           47.0 to 117.0          2.6 to 6.4    M&I, Irrigation.
        500                  43.2           45.6 to 114.6          1.1 to 2.7


For the case of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services, calculation of total investment needs to
address connection deficits and benefits until 2050 yielded benefit-to-cost ratios from 2.5 to 3.2.
The EIB’s (2016) Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment (PFRA) identified 84 structural and 30 non-
structural flood management measures. For these, a detailed investment plan has been prepared



                                                                                                - 32 -
   with a total investment of €325 million for structural measures and €120 million for non -structural
   measures, including maintenance.
   Table 2.15 gives a summary of potential water sector investments, including ratings for
   uncertainties, impacts on poverty, and impacts on gender.
   Table 2.15: Summary of Potential Investments for Water Sector
Description     of    Period        of     Amount         in   BCR       Uncertainty      Impact on    Impact       Overall
investment            implementation       USD (Mn.)                     of Benefits      poverty      on           Priority
                                                                                                       gender
Improve Municipal
and      Industrial
(M&I)        Water    Capital
System Efficiency     investment over      2.78 to 5.48        61.1 to   Low              Medium       Medium       High
Reducing 10% of       1 year, O&M over                         69.9
losses                25 years
                                           10.63 to 23.9       14.0 to   Low              Medium       Medium       Medium
Reducing 15% of                                                16
losses
Improving Rural                            Not assessed        2.5 to    Low              High         High         Medium
Water Supply                                                   21.3
100           MCM     Construction over          18.4          66.5 to   Low              Medium –     High         High
reservoir in lower    5 years                                   151.0                     impacts on
Nistru                                                                                    farmers
25 MCM reservoir      Construction over          6.2           7.6 to    Low              Low          High         Medium
in upper Nistru       5 years                                   18.8
1 MCM reservoir       Construction over          0.3           19.5 to   Low              Low          High         High
in Reut               5 years                                   59.4
Water Supply and      Rehabilitation of          409           [350-     2.5-3.2          Medium       High         Medium
Sanitation (WSS)      existing      and                        439]
                                                                                          (20-30%)
                      construction of
                      new           WSS
                      infrastructures
Structural    flood   2020-2040                 360.8          2.12      Medium:                                    High
mitigation                                                               Estimated as
measures                                                                 avoided
                                                                         damages of
Non-structural        2020-2040                 136.6          5.60                                                 High
                                                                         flooding.
flood mitigation                                                                                 Unknown
                                                                         Based     on
measures
                                                                         hydraulic
                                                                         modelling
                                                                         with       all
                                                                         uncertainties
                                                                         mentioned.


   The viability of the above investments is considered to depend on institutional reform of Apele
   Moldovei, the agency responsible for water resources management in Moldova.



   2.3.5 Constraints & uncertainty
   For the water sector, key sources of uncertainty are:



                                                                                                                - 33 -
      The impact of climate change on water availability in Moldova has been assessed only in
       summary fashion, using a relatively simple model.
      Economic valuation of water services. There is uncertainty both in the size of costs (e.g., for
       water used in thermal energy production, reduction in energy generation was simply
       assumed to be proportional to unmet demand) and in values of water in other sectors,
       including for the elasticity of demand with growth in future incomes (a range between 0.3
       and 1.0 was used). Water values based on existing willingness-to-pay studies were
       considered unrealistically high, therefore values based on current prices were used, but the
       latter should be considered as lower-bound estimates.
      The most critical adaptation investment decision affected by high uncertainty is the
       investment in additional water storage. Modeling indicates that future water shortages are
       likely to occur and that they will have major economic impacts, but the modeling done for
       this study did not allow the optimal timing and size of investments to be determined in a
       robust manner. Given the importance of water storage, further analysis of hydrological
       projections, adaptive management strategies, and climate triggers is warranted.
      For flood risk management, data used in this report come from the EIB study, “The
       Management and Technical Assistance Support to Moldova Flood Protection Project.” But
       the EIB report states that its hydrological analysis and calculated flood flows are subject to
       significant uncertainty, and further quantification was not provided.



2.4 Energy

2.4.1 Overview
The Energy sector in Moldova faces a number of challenges, the main one being its heavy
dependence on imports (especially of natural gas), which currently meet about 75% of demand.
Domestic heat and electricity are largely produced by old, inefficient, and expensive combined heat-
and-power (CHP) generation plants.
Electric energy in Moldova is therefore expensive. Domestic generation from CHP plants has a
regulated price of USD115/MWh, compared to a European average of USD60/MWh. The overall
average price of electricity is USD80/MWh, once lower-priced imports are taken into account.
A recent ESMAP and World Bank study investigated current energy supply issues in Moldova. Heavy
dependence on natural gas imports from Ukraine and the disputed area of Transnistria leads to
significant concerns about security of supply. Connection to the Romanian transmission network is
recommended to diversify Moldova’s outside energy sources. Some estimates suggest that excess
supply from Transnitria may be depleted by the end of 2020. If this were the case, then increases in
demand beyond that year would need alternative sources to avoid load shedding.
The investments required to implement a recommended scenario in the ESMAP study are estimated
to range from USUSD421-441 million over the period 2017 to 2019. Implementation would result in
a 20-year levelized tariff of about USUSD 15.5 cents/kWh, which is affordable and acceptable.



2.4.2 Climate impacts & current cost of inaction
Current production from climate-based renewable energy sources is only valued at around
USD286,000 per annum—from hydroelectric power.

                                                                                                 - 34 -
Moldova has been estimated, however, to have significant unrealized potential from climate-
dependent renewable energy:
       Potential wind energy production, according to the Moldova Renewable Energy Strategy, is
        372,160 MWh, although significant investment in the Moldovan energy system would be
        needed before it could absorb such distributed production.
       Hydroelectric power potential is estimated to be 3 billion kWh/year (Ciofu et al, 2014), while
        actual generation is only 1% of that. But the extent to which this potential could be realized
        is debatable, given the geopolitical context of the rivers in question. A recent study suggests
        between 10% and 86% of possible investments in hydropower would be economically viable
        (IRENA, 2012).

Current unrealized climate-based renewable energy production is accordingly estimated at around
USD150 million (range 105 – 195 million) per annum.
Unrealized thermal energy production due to the current deficit in water supply in the Lower Nistru
is estimated at USD4.6 million per year, based on the current import price and the assumption that
energy production is proportionately impacted by water supply shortage.
Extreme weather events can also cause significant damage to Moldova’s energy supply system:
       A severe frost in 2000 damaged 3,402 km of power lines, 42,174 power transmission towers
        and poles, 6,995 phone lines and 2,715 phone poles. The estimated economic cost was
        USD31.6 million.

       Flooding in 2010 cost USD0.78mn to the energy sector.
But flood damages have already been accounted for under the Water sector, and severe frost and
ice-storm damage is so rare that annual expected costs are uncertain. In comparison to other
factors, these numbers are relatively small, and it is not clear whether frost damage would increase
under future climate change. Therefore damages and losses from extreme events are not considered
further for the energy sector.
Energy use for domestic heating and cooling also represents a defensive expenditure against
unfavourable climate conditions, and energy saving from improved efficiency would represent an
avoidable defensive expenditure (and therefore a cost of inaction). Improving energy efficiency is a
recognized agenda in Moldova, but the study was not able to generate estimates of current energy
expenditures on domestic heating and cooling, or on the potential savings from improved efficiency.



2.4.3 Future costs of inaction
Future energy production from hydropower and thermal power is expected to decline in the face of
reduced water availability. The use of the WEAP model suggests a decline in water available in rivers
by 2040, so that hydropower generation will fall from its current annual level of 299 mWh to
between 219 and 272 mWh, depending on the scenario.
For thermal power, there could be unmet demand from 19% to 34% of optimal cooling water use in
the lower Nistru Basin by 2040.
The figures below represent the expected losses in hydropower and thermal power generation
across three emissions scenarios, and the associated costs based on two price scenarios
(substitution cost is based on the current import price, USD0.055 per kWh, or the current production
price USD0.102/kWh). Note that the contribution of hydropower losses is essentially negligible in
relation to thermal energy, as current hydropower production is very limited.


                                                                                                 - 35 -
Figure 2.7: Hydroelectric power losses due to climate change under different climate scenarios (million kWh)




Figure 2.8: Thermal power losses due to climate change under different climate scenarios (million kWh)




Figure 2.9: Costs of climate change to energy production in Moldova under different climate & price
scenarios (USDmn)




                                                                                                      - 36 -
The value of this loss of power generation is therefore estimated at around USD10 million (range 4.6
– 21.5 million), which represents unrealized production, and is additional to the earlier estimate of
USD150 million of unrealized production from unexploited climate-dependent renewables.
Energy demands for heating and cooling are also likely to change with expected warmer winters and
warmer summers in the future. Cooling demand will increase while heating demand will fall. De Cian
and Wing (2014) model the demand for energy globally based on econometric relationships
between energy demand, climate, and changes in socioeconomic factors through the shared
socioeconomic pathways (SSPs). Their analysis suggests, overall, energy demand for Moldova may
fall – with the reduction in winter demand outstripping the increase in summer demands. Hence, we
do not consider that changing energy demands will lead to an increase in defensive expenditures in
Moldova.



                              Production & costs in Energy, US$m
            180
            160
            140
            120
            100
              80
              60
              40
              20
               0
                                  Present                                  2050

                          Production                      Unrealized production
                          Defensive expenditure           Avoidable defensive expenditure
                          Damage & losses


Figure 2.10: Climate-related annual production in the energy sector for the present and 2050. Unrealized
production (and therefore the cost of inaction) increases slightly to 2050 due to shortages of water for thermal
energy generation.
Figure 2.10 summarizes the current and future costs of inaction in the energy sector, as described
above. The annual expected cost of climate change by 2050 is around USD6 million; calculated on
the basis of expected losses to thermal and hydropower energy production, above those currently
being experienced.


2.4.4 Adaptation investments
The Renewable Energy Strategy of Moldova foresees a significant increase in renewable power
generation and UNEP (2014) has suggested wind power could reach up to 27.2% of Moldova’s
energy generation by 2030 under a green development scenario.
A cost-benefit analysis was carried out for investment in wind power, on the basis of displacing
energy imports at USD0.055 per kWh, and under the assumptions in the table below. Costs of wind



                                                                                                         - 37 -
 technology may fall over time, but even at the present time wind generation may be economically
 viable. Total investment potential is estimated at USD235 million.
 Table 2.16: Key parameters for CBA of wind power options in Moldova
 Full load production time          hrs                  2500
 Efficiency electricity             hrs           2500
 Power per plant                    MW              2.3
 Cost per plant                     USDm          3.63
 Cost per MW                        USDm/MW 1.57826087
 Lifespan                           years           20
 Expected generation capacity       MWh        372,160
 2020
 Carbon value                       USD/ton                   20



 Table 2.17: Summary of Potential Investments for Energy Sector
Description     of Period          for   Amount       BCR      Uncertainty of       Impact on   Impact       Overall
investment         implementation         in USD               Benefits             poverty     on           Priority
                                           (Mn.)                                                gender
Windpower            Construction over    234.9     1.25 to        Low – based on   Medium –    Low          Medium
generation       –   1 year, with O&M                2.43          market prices    some jobs
significant                                                                         created
investment in wind
power generation


 Potential options for improving water storage to protect energy security concerns are addressed in
 the water section.
 Studies by GTZ (2013) and Cohen et al (2016) suggest that the total cost of renovating private and
 public building stocks in Moldova to improve heating and cooling efficiency could be on the order of
 hundreds of millions of dollars per year over a couple of decades. Energy efficiency investments
 often have high returns, and some available estimates based on international experience suggest a
 benefit/cost ratio of 4.4 for investments in retrofitting to avoid temperature increases of 1.6-2.4ºC
 (Bengtsson et al., 2007). However, in the absence of more specific data for Moldova on current
 expenditure for heating and cooling and on potential savings from available energy efficiency
 measures, the very high investments potentially suggested are considered to require further
 scrutiny.



 2.4.5 Constraints & uncertainty
 In the energy sector, key sources of uncertainty are:

        The technical and economic viability of identified potentials for hydropower and other
         weather-based renewables.
        Extreme events were not considered separately from the general assessment of flood
         damage, but these are not expected to be very large on average.
        Valuation of future energy. Valuation of lost energy production used a lower-bound
         estimate based on current market prices (i.e., on the assumption that any deficit could be


                                                                                                         - 38 -
        substituted through additional generation or purchase, and that these prices would not
        change significantly in future). The value of lost load, which would be much higher, was not
        used because of a lack of studies on this in Moldova.
       There is no good national-level modeling of change in energy demand under climate change,
        and our estimate that the country’s overall energy-demand increase in summer will be offset
        in winter comes from an international econometric study.
       Domestic energy efficiency agenda. Although very large expenditures on renovation of
        Moldova’s building stock to improve energy efficiency have been suggested, robust figures
        on the potential energy savings and their values were not readily available, and therefore
        this study was not able to assess the cost of inaction related to the failure to improve energy
        efficiency or the BCR of the suggested investments. This is a key gap in the current study.



2.5 Infrastructure (roads & buildings)

2.5.1 Overview
This section analyses the vulnerability of roads and buildings in Moldova to climate change by
applying the Infrastructure Planning Support System (IPSS) to GIS inventories of infrastructure at
risk. Moldova’s networks of paved, gravel, and earthen roads were documented from existing
sources, and are summarized in Table 2.18.
Table 2.18. Summary of road assets analysed
             Paved (kilometres)                         Gravel (kilometres)   Total (kilometres)
Moldova road Primary Secondary               Tertiary
stock        3,796      77                   1,225      2,905                 8,002


The study also estimated the stock of three different building types for Moldova—houses (both
urban and rural), hospitals, and schools—using a variety of techniques. These three building types
make up a substantial percentage of the total building stock. Data from the National Bureau of
Statistics of the Republic of Moldova provide a base to estimate the number of buildings per district.
The area per building type was estimated using census data and, where data were not available,
estimates were based on U.S. Department of Energy reference buildings. Rural dwellings are
considered to be private dwellings, while the remaining buildings are considered to be public
buildings. Table 2.19 shows the building stock in square meters.


Table 2.19. Building stock for Moldova
Rural           Urban            Hospitals        Primary      Secondary    Vocational
Dwellings       Dwellings        (sq. meters)     Schools (sq. Schools (sq. Schools & Colleges
(sq. meters)    (sq. meters)                      meters)      meters)      (sq. metres)
49,099,850      32,401,431       1,870,000        1,215,732       3,261,030      417,480




2.5.2 Climate impacts & current cost of inaction
Maintenance costs for external infrastructure tend to be a function of climate and degree of use.
This section focuses on the costs of routine wear-and-tear for Moldova’s road network and building


                                                                                                   - 39 -
stock in relation to climate (damage from extreme events is assessed under flood damage in the
Water Sector). The analysis was conducted using the Infrastructure Planning Support System (IPSS)
model (see annexes for further details).
IPSS assumes that infrastructure is built according to recommended specifications for historic
climate conditions, and then calculates maintenance costs based on the number of times threshold
values of climatic stressor variables are exceeded and the related damage incurred. The model
therefore assumes that required maintenance is always carried out, however severe the impacts of
climate. This is termed reactive adaptation. For historic climate conditions in Moldova, the model
estimates expected annual maintenance costs of around USD2.1 million for the road network and
around USD8.7 million for buildings.
The model is also able to evaluate the costs of upgrading construction specifications to better resist
climate extremes. This is termed proactive adaptation, and in the model occurs through upgrading
infrastructure at the time of replacement to resist the most extreme weather parameters it will
experience during its economic life (perfect knowledge of future climate is assumed).
Applying the proactive adaptation strategy under historic climate conditions increased overall costs
for road repair and maintenance, but reduced the cost of maintaining public buildings by around
USD3.3 million per year. This figure therefore represents avoidable defensive expenditure for the
building stock.



2.5.3 Future costs of inaction
Applying a range of future climate change scenarios increased the overall expected maintenance
costs for both roads and buildings under reactive adaptation to around USD10 million (range 9 – 22
million) and USD36 million (range 23 – 47 million), respectively, by 2050. Maintenance costs for
unsealed roads and for non-wooden buildings, both of which are primarily driven by rainfall, were
little affected or even decreased under the climate change scenarios, whereas maintenance costs for
sealed roads and wooden buildings, which are more strongly affected by temperature, showed
marked increases.
Proactive adaptation remained a more costly strategy for roads, except in the high climate change
scenario, when it resulted in savings of around USD7.8 million per year on average.

Figure 2.11. Projected cumulative maintenance costs for paved roads under proactive and reactive
adaptation strategies
                 800

                 700

                 600

                 500
   Million USD




                 400

                 300

                 200

                 100

                  0
                       Historic           Low                   Medium              High

                                         Proactive   Reactive



                                                                                                   - 40 -
- 41 -
Table 2.20. Additional expected annual maintenance costs for all roads under climate change (USD Mn.)
CC Scenario                         2020s            2030s       2040s          2050s
No CC       Paved                     0.0              0.1         0.1            0.1
            Gravel                    1.3              6.5         6.5            6.5
            Total                     1.3              6.6         6.6            6.6
Low         Paved                     4.8              4.1         8.0            5.8
            Gravel                    0.1              4.4         4.7            2.2
            Total                     4.9              8.5        12.7            8.0
Medium      Paved                     0.3              5.9         2.9            4.9
            Gravel                    1.5              5.2         6.1            3.4
            Total                     1.8             11.2         9.0            8.4
High        Paved                    15.3             30.2         6.0            4.1
            Gravel                    8.6             16.0         6.0            3.8
            Total                    23.8             46.2        12.0            8.0


Proactive adaptation for non-wood buildings remained the cheaper strategy under all climate
change scenarios, but the expected annual savings fell to USD1.1 million (range 0.9 – 2.6 million) as
rain damage became less important.
Table 2.21. Cumulative and decadal average cost impacts of climate change vulnerability 2015-2050 (USD
millions/no discounting)
Building    Proactive adaptation                       Reactive adaptation
Type
            2020    2030     2040    2050    Cum.      2020s 2030s 2040s 2050s Cum.
Public buildings (investments are for drainage and roofing adaptations)

Historic   USD0.0 USD3.9 USD3.4 USD2.5 USD96.6 USD0.0 USD7.1 USD7.1 USD7.1                    USD213.3
Low        USD0.0 USD2.4 USD2.4 USD0.3 USD50.4 USD0.0 USD4.1 USD4.1 USD0.0                    USD81.9
Medium USD0.0 USD2.9 USD2.8 USD0.6 USD61.9 USD0.0 USD4.9 USD4.6 USD0.4                        USD99.9
High       USD2.1 USD7.3 USD2.0 USD0.4 USD109.0 USD3.5 USD14.9 USD3.0 USD0.2                  USD201.8

Private dwellings (no adaptations available – all costs are reduced lifespan)

Historic    -        -        -        -         -           USD13.6 USD0.3 USD0.3 USD0.3 USD90.9
Low         -        -        -        -         -           USD9.1 USD27.5 USD28.0 USD11.9 USD728.9
Medium      -        -        -        -         -           USD33.3 USD28.4 USD29.8 USD45.4 USD1,234.9
High        -        -        -        -         -           USD54.4 USD16.7 USD31.9 USD61.7 USD1,428.9


Figures 2.12 & 2.13 summarize the current and future costs of inaction for roads and buildings, as
described above. The expected annual cost of climate change for infrastructure in Moldova by 2050
is around USD35 million, which is calculated from the increase in expected annual defensive
expenditures (roughly USD8 million and USD27 million for roads and buildings, respectively).




                                                                                                     - 42 -
                              Production & costs in Roads, US$m
              0
                                 Present                                 2050
             -2

             -4

             -6

             -8

            -10

            -12

                         Production                     Unrealized production
                         Defensive expenditure          Avoidable defensive expenditure
                         Damage & losses


Figure 2.12: Climate-related annual costs in the roads sector for the present and 2050. Defensive expenditure
(maintenance costs) increases by 2050.



                            Production & costs in Buildings, US$m
              0
                                 Present                                 2050
             -5
            -10
            -15
            -20
            -25
            -30
            -35
            -40

                         Production                     Unrealized production
                         Defensive expenditure          Avoidable defensive expenditure
                         Damage & losses


Figure 2.13: Climate-related annual costs in the buildings sector for the present and 2050. Defensive
expenditure (maintenance costs) increases by 2050. There is a predicted decrease in avoidable defensive
expenditure, representing a decrease in the cost of inaction.



2.5.4 Adaptation investments
Potential adaptation options for infrastructure are implied in the strengthening measures included in
the IPSS model. For non-wooden buildings, this essentially involves increasing the specification of
roof drainage to handle maximum expected rainfall volumes. The results of the analysis suggest that



                                                                                                       - 43 -
this would be an economic investment, regardless of climate change. There are no adaptation
measures modelled for wooden housing, which represents the majority of rural residences.
Table 2.22 shows potential adaptation options for paved and gravel roads. For paved roads, the
adaptations for temperature focus on changing the design mix as well as changing the design of the
seals to protect the road from further damage. For precipitation, the adaptations include both
increasing the base depth that is the default adaptation in IPSS, and expanding the width of the road
to allow for greater drainage. This is the second adaptation applied as precipitation levels increase
across multiple thresholds. Flooding adaptations are focused on culvert design changes.
Gravel roads do not have a temperature adaptation process as temperature increases do not affect
these roads. However, precipitation increases require increases in base layer thickness to enable
greater carrying-capacity and drainage. However, there is an option to upgrade to a paved road
where this may be appropriate. In this project, upgrading to paved is not an automatic adaptation as
gravel road projects are focused on upgrading in near-term timeframes. Flooding adaptations also
focus on culvert design as seen in paved roads.
The results of the analysis suggest that strengthening measures may become cost-effective for roads
by 2050 under higher temperature increases.



2.5.5 Constraints & uncertainty
Results for roads and buildings were based on generalized probabilistic models of maintenance costs
for construction standards based on international experience, and on the assumption that
maintenance needs are always met. The models were based on the actual infrastructure stocks in
Moldova, but would also need to be ‘ground-truthed’ against the construction standards and
maintenance practices in actual use. The models indicate that a switch to higher construction
standards for paved roads could possibly be beneficial in the medium term, but more detailed work
is needed to define specific standards and climate triggers.




                                                                                               - 44 -
    Table 2.22. Adaptation measures for roads
Road       Climate
type       stressor            Effect              Reactive Measures             Proactive Adaptation measure
Paved   Temperature Increased temperature Additional sealing required Construct dense seals (e.g., Sand Seal,
roads               leads to accelerated on a more frequent basis Otta Seal, Chip Seal). These are
                    aging of binder       due to faster degradation subject to local practices
                                          of road quality
                       Increased temperature                                  Adoption of base asphalt binders with
                                               Additional          patching
                       leads to rutting (of                                   higher softening points (including
                                               required each year to fill
                       asphalt), and bleeding                                 polymer modification) for surface
                                               cracks    resulting    from
                       and flushing (of seals)                                seals and asphalt. Local mix may be
                                               pavement weakening
                                                                              available in addition to standard mix
        Precipitation Increased precipitation   Increase      patching to Add wider paved shoulders                 to
                      leads to increased        address cracking from improve surface drainage.
                      average        moisture   surface failure
                      content in subgrade       Fill subbase where erosion    Increase base strength (thickness
                      layers and reduced        has occurred due to water     and/or quality) to increase protection
                      load-carrying capacity    infiltration. Follow with     of subgrade layers. Should increase an
                                                additional patching           additional 10 cm – 15 cm.
        Flooding      Washouts           and Repair      of       localized   Increase flood design return period by
        (in excess of overtopping of road    washouts            including    increasing the size of culverts (in most
        design flood)                        cleaning culverts, replacing     cases will require raising the road to
                                             culverts, replacing subbase,     allow larger culvert to fit). Increase is
                                             and     replacing      asphalt   done     in    standard      increments
                                             surface                          according to local practice. Generally
                                                                              need to increase one diameter size or
                                                                              approximately 5 cm.
Unpaved Temperature                                          Not applicable
roads
        Precipitation Increased precipitation   Regrade road localized to Increase gravel wearing course
                      leads to increased        precipitation, fill subbase thickness to increase cover and
                      average        moisture   and reapply gravel top protect subgrade layers. Generally
                      content in subgrade       layer.                      increase by 10 cm - 15 cm to handle
                      layers, and reduced                                   increase in moisture
                      load-carrying capacity                                  Upgrade road to paved.
        Flooding      Washouts           and Same as for paved except         Increase flood design return period by
        (in excess of overtopping of road    application of gravel top        increasing the size of culverts (in most
        design flood)                        layer      rather       than     cases will require raising the road to
                                             application of asphalt layer.    allow the culvert to fit underneath).



    2.6 Health

    2.6.1 Overview
    Moldova’s health outcomes are moderately better than expected for its level of economic
    development, but not as good as expected for its level of health expenditure (around USD360 per


                                                                                                           - 45 -
capita per year). Over the last 20 years, while good progress has been made in reducing death rates
in younger age groups, mortality in adult males has increased. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
have become the major burden of mortality and illness for the population. High blood pressure
(hypertension) and smoking are among the leading NCD risks. Around 50 percent of Moldovan adults
have high blood pressure. Adult smoking prevalence is 43 percent, compared to the regional average
of 31 percent, and half of youth smokers started before they were 10 years old. The NCD burden is
associated with a significant annual welfare and economic cost of around USD440 million.

Despite repeated changes in political leadership over the last decade, health has remained a priority
of the Moldovan Government. There has been a series of significant reforms to modernize the
health sector. A key development was the introduction of national health insurance in 2004 and the
establishment of the National Health Insurance Company. Approximately 80 percent of the
population is currently covered by health insurance. Primary care has been strengthened through
the creation of family medicine. Family medicine providers are paid on a capitation basis to provide
primary care for a defined population and to act as gate keepers to specialist care. Citizens have free
access to selected primary care services regardless of insurance status.


2.6.2 Climate impacts & current cost of inaction
The transmission and effects of a variety of diseases can be exacerbated by climatic conditions. High
and low temperatures impose physiological stress; the abundance of most disease vectors is
influenced by climatic conditions; and extreme weather events contribute a range of acute threats
to physical and mental health and wellbeing. In an attempt to quantify the current costs of climate-
related health risks, this study focused on heat-related mortality and food-borne disease, namely
salmonellosis, but this is far from a comprehensive accounting of climate-related health costs.
For extreme heat, the impact on mortality of the heatwave in 2007 was estimated by Corobov et al.
(2013). They concluded that 142 additional deaths were caused, and treated it as a 1-in-100 year
event. Overcenco et al. (2015) estimated there were 488 additional deaths from the same heat
event. We estimate the cost of a death based on EU estimates of the value of a statistical life (VSL) in
Moldova of USD240,000. Using these estimates gives an annual expected cost of USD777,070 (range
USD354,139 to USD1.2 million).
There were 1,886 reported cases of salmonellosis in Moldova in 2014. The literature suggests a 1%
to 5% reporting rate – implying that between 37,720 and 188,600 cases actually occurred. The
PESETA project suggests that, in the EU, 35% of cases are climate-related and that the cost per case
is between €3,500 to €7,000 (in 2009 prices). Adjusting these figures for inflation and relative PPP
GDP per capita between Moldova and the EU, this gives a current value per case in Moldova of
USD542 to USD1,085 (2015 prices), and current estimates of annual costs of salmonellosis between
USD7.16mn and USD53.91mn.

Thus, the total expected current annual cost of these two climate-related health effects is estimated
to be around USD20 million (range USD7.5 million to USD55.1 million).



2.6.3 Future costs of inaction
Climate change in Moldova is expected to have a number of health impacts. Heat stress and related
mortality may increase in the summers; cold stress-related mortality may decrease due to warmer
winters; vector-borne diseases may increase as the potential ranges of different vectors change; and
water- and foodborne disease is likely to increase due to temperature change and increased
incidence of extreme events, particularly flooding. A strategy for adaptation to climate change in the


                                                                                                  - 46 -
health sector in Moldova exists, which assessed climate risks and benefits to health in different
regions of Moldova. A summary is given in Table 2.23.
Table 2.23: Summary of climate-health risks in Moldova
                    Degree of risk/benefit                   North      Centre      South     Chisinau
Risks        Increasing number of deaths from heat            Low      Medium       High        High
             waves
             Increasing number of deaths from air          Medium Medium          Medium        High
             pollution
             Changes in plants leading to increased        Medium Medium          Medium        High
             allergies
             Emergence of high risk of drought and water      Low      Medium       High        Low
             scarcity
             Increased frequency and intensity of floods   Medium        High       High       Low
             Increased incidence of water- and food-       Medium        High       High      Medium
             borne disease
Benefits     Reduced duration of the heating season and      High      Medium        Low      Medium
             fuel consumption in winter
             Reduced mortality caused by cold
Source: Republic of Moldova (2015a)



Corobov et al. (2013) found that, with air temperature below optimal values (mean 22 degrees C),
each degree of warming was accompanied by a 1.4% decrease in mortality, while with temperature
above a mean temperature of 22 degrees C, each degree of warming led to a 2.8% increase in
mortality. Taking into account income and population changes, we can estimate the future costs of
heat and future benefits of reductions in cold mortality in the 2050s. Table 2.24 shows average
results across three SSP scenarios (SSP1, SSP3, and SSP5). On balance in this time period, the
benefits outweigh the costs (i.e., the decrease in winter mortality exceeds the increase in summer
mortality), but this does not include extreme events. Assuming that the frequency of extreme
heatwaves will increase from 1 in 100 to 1 in 75 by 2050, and adjusting for the inflated value of
statistical life and population decline, the expected cost of mortality from extreme events would be
around USD4.6 million per annum (range 1.5 – 8.3 million).
Table 2.24: Expected annual costs of Heatwaves and Benefits of Warmer Winters by 2050, based on VSL
(USDMn.)
Scenario            A2                A1B      B1
Mean                -19.3             -3.1     -26.7
Lower Bound         -13.5             -2.1     -18.6
Upper Bound         -25.2             -4.0     -34.8

Salmonellosis
To estimate the impact of climate change on salmonellosis, an additional 6% of climate-related cases
is assumed per degree Celsius increase in daily average temperature. Costs per case and overall
population at risk were adjusted in accordance with the three SSP scenarios (SSP1, SSP3, and SSP5)
and for the two reporting rates. Under the conservative 5% report rate assumption, the costs of
climate-related salmonellosis will rise from USD7.2 million to USD10.8 million at the current time to
between USD14.2 million to USD22.0 million in the 2020s and between USD36.5 million to USD56.8
million in the 2050s.



                                                                                                 - 47 -
- 48 -
Table 2.25: Costs of climate-related salmonellosis under different climate scenarios and reporting rates
USDmn.
                        Current                  2050s
                                      A2         A1B     B1
1% Reporting Rate
Low Value               35.8          182.5      188.5   177.8
High Value              53.9          274.8      283.8   267.7
5% Reporting Rate
Low Value               7.2           36.5       37.7    35.6
High Value              10.8          55.0       56.8    53.5




                               Production & costs in Health, US$m
               0
                                  Present                                  2050
              -20

              -40

              -60

              -80

             -100

             -120

             -140

                         Production                      Unrealized production
                         Defensive expenditure           Avoidable defensive expenditure
                         Damage & losses


Figure 2.14: Climate-related annual costs in the health sector for the present and 2050. Damage & losses (i.e.
costs of climate-related diseases) increase markedly from 2015 to 2050.
Total expected annual costs of climate-related impacts on health (damages & losses) are therefore
estimate to rise to around USD118 million (range 39 – 324 million) by 2050. Figure 2.14 summarizes
the current and future costs of inaction in the health sector. The annual expected cost of climate
change by 2050 is equal to that portion of the increase in expected losses due to increased incidence
of disease (as opposed to inflation in the costs of individual cases), or roughly USD60 million.



2.6.4 Adaptation investments
A variety of adaptation strategies for health have been suggested to increase awareness and
preparedness, particularly for heat stress and related diseases (see UNDP HDR 2009). Following on
from the analysis above, this study focuses on three main measures:
     Heat early warning systems


                                                                                                       - 49 -
     Public Health campaigns for Salmonellosis
     Strengthening of general emergency response systems
General strengthening of health care systems would also be expected to improve the management
of climate-related health burdens. However, the proportion of the overall health burden that is
directly related to climate is relatively small, and therefore the climate aspect will make little
difference to the economic assessment of healthcare development in Moldova as a whole.
Heat warning systems
To respond to extreme heat risks, heat-health warning systems (HHWS) have been proposed in a
number of countries. A recent study for European Union countries suggested that heat-health
warning systems have very favorable benefit-cost ratios, from 710 to 2210 across different member
states (BASE, 2016). The costs and benefits of a HHWS in Moldova were assessed under the
following assumptions:
     The costs of HHWS are similar to those estimated in other European countries. This includes
        costs of USD550 for the fixed cost of maintenance of the system and variable costs of
        USD3,712 per heat day.
     Costs of running a Heatline: USD1,000/day during the week, USD3,000/day during week end.
     Cost of Emergency Medical service: USD4,000/day.
     Future heatwaves last on average 45 days (as in 2007) and have the same expected
        mortality as 2007, but increase in frequency from 1 in 100 years to 1 in 75 years by 2050.
     A HHWS would reduce mortality by 68% on average (Fouillet et al. 2008).
We take a low value of 142 deaths per 1:100 year event based on Corobov et al., and a high value of
482 deaths for such an event based on Overcenco et al.
We use the estimated value of a statistical life (VSL) adjusted for future increases in GDP per capita
under the average of the three SSPs (SSP1, SSP3, and SSP5) to estimate the value of reductions in
mortality.
Table 2.26 shows the derived expected benefit-cost ratios (BCRs) based on either a high or low
estimate of expected mortality for a typical event, with future VSL averaged over the three SSP
scenarios. All estimates greatly exceed 1. The expected annual cost of installing and running such a
system is estimated at USD4,728 currently, and USD6,120 in the 2020s and 2050s. Given the high
benefit-cost ratios from current investment in a heat-health warning system, this is a recommended
action.
Table 2.26: Benefit-Cost Ratio for Heat-Health Warning in Moldova
                                                              Timing of investment
Estimated extreme heat death assumption in base case          Current 2020s     2050s
Low (Based on Corobov et al. mortality estimate)              49.5     71.5     228.1
High (Based on Overcenco et al. mortality)                    170.3    245.6    783.8

Public health campaigns for Salmonellosis
For salmonellosis, the costs of a public health campaign are estimated based on UK values of
USD0.03 per person per annum, applied to the population size of Moldova. This gives present costs
of a campaign of USD108,901 and future costs of USD70,890 in the 2050s (falling with mean
population size decrease under the SSP1, SSP3, and SSP5 scenarios). The effectiveness of public
health campaigns is a matter of some debate. We assume a 1% effectiveness rate—i.e., only 1 in 100

                                                                                                - 50 -
cases is reduced through such campaigns. We also consider only the most conservative estimate of
incidence of salmonellosis—i.e., that there is a 5% reporting rate. The Benefit-Cost ratios derived
from these data are shown in Table 2.27. The BCR is shown to range between 1.88 and 2.82 if
enacted currently, rising to 13.20 to 20.14 if enacted in the 2050s. Given the high ratios from current
investment in public health campaigns, this is a recommended action.
Table 2.27: Benefit-Cost Ratio for Public Health Campaigns against salmonellosis in Moldova
Value per case Avoided       Current               2020s                      2050s
                                          A2       A1B     B1       A2      A1B2      B1
Low Value (USD542)           1.88         3.60     3.64    3.63     13.20 13.37       13.05
High Value (USD1,042)        2.83         5.42     5.48    5.47     19.87 20.14       19.65

Strengthening emergency response
The Civil Protection Directorate in Moldova has prioritized future investment needs for emergency
and disaster response as follows:
       Improving training:
           o This would involve the construction of a Training Centre aimed at fire and rescue
               personnel in both the public and private sector;
           o A training curriculum to enhance the capacity of Moldova for emergency prevention
               and preparedness.
       Operationalisation of Emergency Command Centres (ECC) in North and South:
           o At present there is one ECC in the country located in central Chisinau. This is a
               modern well-run facility, but there is no back-up facility in other locations;
           o Further ECCs would provide better support for routine and non-routine tactical
               operations;
           o A technical feasibility study already exists for these investments.
       Improving emergency response:
           o This includes investment in equipment to increase the geographic range of
               emergency response and to modernize emergency services. Some equipment is
               outdated, while the country also needs to upgrade facilities; new snow rescue
               vehicles and more electricity and heat generators would help.

The estimated investment needs are USD11 million. Benefits are not well characterized, but based
on the experience under an existing World Bank disaster risk management project, we estimated
that an expected amount of around USD15 million in current annual losses (and rising with GDP as
per the SSPs) is potentially avoidable through strengthening of emergency response systems, and
that between 15% to 25% of this can be saved through the identified investments. Overall, BCRs are
estimated between 2.09 and 4.10, even without factoring in the likely increase in extreme events
over time.
Table 2.28: Benefit Cost Ratios for proposed emergency response investments
                            Medium
           Low benefit      benefit          High benefit
SSP1               2.38                 3.17           3.97
SSP3               2.09                 2.79           3.49
SSP5               2.46                 3.28           4.10




                                                                                                 - 51 -
Table 2.6.9 gives a summary of investments including ratings for uncertainties, impacts on poverty
and impacts on gender.

Table 2.29: Summary of Potential Investments for Health
Description     Period for        Amount in       BCR       Uncertainty     Impact    Impact on gender    Overall
on              implementation    USD (Mn.)                 of Benefits     on                            Priority
investment                                                                  poverty
Heat Health     Capital           Up to 0.42      Current
Warning         investment 1      for a year      :
                                                            High –          Medium    Medium –            High
System          year, ongoing O   with a
                                                  3.1 to    valuation of              women
                and M             heatwave,
                                                  170.3     statistical               disproportionatel
                                  0.0005
                                                            life based on             y care for those
                                  otherwise       2050:
                                                            value                     affected
                                                  9.9 to    transfer
                                                  921.1
Public Health   Ongoing O and     Current cost:   Current                                                 Medium
Campaigns       M                 0.1 per         :
                                                            Medium –        Medium    Medium - –
                                  annum
                                                  1.88 to   actual                    women
                                                  2.83      number of                 disproportionatel
                                                            salmonella                y care for those
                                  2050:
                                                            cases                     affected but men
                                  0.05 to 0.9     2050:     unknown,                  worse affected
                                  per annum                 this assumes
                                                  7.16 to   1 in 20 cases
                                                  27.3      reported


Improving       Four year         11.0            2.09 to   Medium–         Medium    Medium              High
emergency       investment        investment      4.1       uncertainty     – some
response        period assumed                              over true       jobs
                                                            benefits, but   created
                                  PVC                       may be
                                  including O               higher under
                                  and M                     climate
                                                            change
                                  14.1




2.6.5 Constraints & uncertainty

In the health sector, key sources of uncertainty are:

        Valuation of mortality risk. Both the actual numbers of deaths attributable to extreme heat
         (different studies provide considerably different figures), and the economic valuation of
         those deaths (based on adapting figures from European studies) are uncertain.
        Reporting rates for food borne diseases are also very hard to estimate without systematic
         surveys.
        The actual relationship between these health impacts and climate variables, is still poorly
         understood.
        Figures used in the BCR calculations only indicative, but tended to be conservative and the
         very favorable returns indicated suggest that there is considerable margin for error.
        A variety of additional climate-related health impacts are probable. Rising temperatures are
         expected to exacerbate the impacts of air pollution, and further work is also needed to


                                                                                                             - 52 -
consider the impacts of extreme events on psychological wellbeing and the increased risks of
vector borne disease. None of these were included in the quantitative analysis.




                                                                                      - 53 -
3 Cross-sector results
3.1 Costs of inaction
Table 3.1 summarizes the analysis of the costs of inaction and costs of climate change across each of
the sectors analysed, and figure 3.1 summarize the expected annual costs of inaction at the present
time and in 2050, respectively.

                            Present annual costs of inaction, US$m
  400

  300

  200

  100

    0
           Forestry     Agriculture     Water         Energy            Health      Roads        Buildings
 -100

                                             Production    Protection



Figure 3.1: Comparison of present (above) and 2050 (below) annual costs of inaction across assessed sectors
(both presented in 2015 dollars). Costs of inaction related to potential gains from enhancing climate-
dependent production are represented as positive values (blue). Costs of inaction related to potential savings
from reducing harmful effects of climate and the costs of protecting against them are represented as negative
values (orange). The total cost of inaction in each sector is the sum of the magnitudes of both potential gains
and savings (i.e. the combined height of the orange and blue bars). The confidence limits represent the range
of values obtained from the climate, price, and shared socioeconomic pathways (SSP) scenarios used in the
analysis. They do not encompass all sources of uncertainty.

                       Future annual costs of inaction in 2050, US$m
  600

  400

  200

    0
           Forestry     Agriculture     Water         Energy            Health      Roads        Buildings
 -200

 -400

                                             Production    Protection


At present, costs of inaction are dominated by unrealized production potentials in the sectors that
depend on climate for their output. The largest opportunity cost is in agriculture, where production
could probably increase by a couple of hundred million USD per year if the sector were managed
more similarly to neighboring countries. There is also an unrealized production potential of over
USD100 million per year in the energy sector through increased exploitation of climate-dependent
renewables, although there are questions over the extent to which these are viable. Production



                                                                                                         - 54 -
potentials in the forestry and water sectors, from forest restoration and improving the provision of
WSS services respectively, are smaller, but still significant.




                                                                                              - 55 -
Table 3.1: Summary of results for costs of inaction
Sector        Key components of costs of inaction                 Valuation methods                   Annual costs in 2015 dollars, USDm     Uncertainty
                                                                                                      Cost       of Cost        of Cost of rating29
                                                                                                      inaction,       inaction,      climate
                                                                                                      2015            2050           change,
                                                                                                                                     2050
Forestry      Production of forest products and ecosystem         Recent estimates of the total                                               Potential value
              services is climate-dependent and could be          economic value of Moldova’s                                                  of ecosystem
              enhanced through restoration and                    forests were extrapolated to                                                    services
              reforestation with native species. Forests are      estimate the benefits of an ideal
              also negatively impacted by climate-related         forest management scenario                                                         CC impacts
              pests and from drying and fire, but damage is       based on national forestry
              relatively small in comparison to unrealized        targets.                                               48.4
                                                                                                          40.2                           12        Socio economic
              potential production.                               Literature estimates of climate                    [47.4 – 50.4]
              In future, forestry production will decrease        impacts on the productivity of                                                  scenario impacts
              and damages increase, but unrealized                individual tree species and on
              potential production increases slightly because     pests and drought were used to
              the benefits of restoring (more resilient) native   estimate future values under                                                      Pest and fire
              species increase with climate change.               business-as-usual or improved                                                        losses
                                                                  management.
Agriculture Moldova’s agricultural yields are low                 Yield data for key agricultural                                                   Production
            compared to neighboring countries,                    products from Moldova and              283.4           584.8                       potential
            representing unrealized climate-dependent             comparable countries were used        [177.6 –        [465.3 –        700
            production. Agriculture is also impacted by a         to estimate unrealized                 389.2]          703.1]                   CC yield impacts
            range of climate-related extreme events,              production.




29
  Uncertainty ratings reflect the significance of different types of uncertainty in the estimation of cost of inaction for each sector. Red = high uncertainty,
amber = medium uncertainty, and green= low uncertainty.




                                                                                                                                                         - 56 -
         particularly drought and floods.                 Crop-specific models of the                                             Socio economic
         Future climate is expected to further reduce     impacts of climate change,                                             scenario impacts
         the yields of many key crops, as well as         (Europe-wide) price changes for
         intensifying damage from extreme weather         agricultural commodities and
         events.                                          estimates of the increase in                                            Extreme event
                                                          frequency of extreme events                                                 losses
                                                          were used to forecast future
                                                          impacts.
Water    Deficits in overall water supply and unmet       A hydrological model was used to                                       Climate change
         demand for domestic water supply and             predict current and future overall                                         impact
         sanitation services represent unrealized         availability of water resources.
         potential climate-dependent production. A        Water values were largely based                                        Socio economic
         recent assessment of the economic impact of      on current market prices and                                              scenarios
         flooding provided an estimate of damage and      therefore likely to underestimate
         losses in the water sector.                      the full value of future deficits.                                       Damage and
                                                                                                               403.1
         There is little shortage of overall water                                                                                  losses of
                                                                                                  94.1        [347.1 –     205
         resources at present, but modelling of future                                                                               flooding
                                                                                                               713.1]
         climate impacts and demand predicts a
         significant future shortfall without WRM                                                                                  Valuation of
         investments. Flood damage is also predicted to                                                                            water losses
         grow significantly over coming decades.
                                                                                                                                  Valuation of
                                                                                                                                 benefits of WSS
                                                                                                                                    services
Energy   Unrealized production occurs due to the          Unrealized production was
         potential for power generation from climate-     valued at both domestic                                                Value of energy
         dependent renewables (i.e. wind and              generation and import prices, but
         hydropower) that is not currently being          no changes in energy prices were        153.4         159.2
                                                                                                                           6      Economicallly
         exploited, as well as reductions in hydro and    modelled.                            [105 – 195]   [105 – 212]
         thermal power generation due to constraints      Potential savings (avoidable                                                viable
         on water resources. Significant impacts of       defensive expenditures) from                                             hydropower
                                                                                                                                    potential




                                                                                                                                       - 57 -
             (non-flood) extreme climate events on energy       improved energy efficiency of
             infrastructure were too rare to infer expected     buildings was not assessed.                                                 Climate
             annual costs.                                                                                                                 scenarios
             Future climate change is expected to have
             little impacts on the former, and limited
             impacts on the latter. No appreciable increase                                                                              Extreme events
             in energy demand was forecast with future                                                                                  – not considered
             climate, as increasing summer cooling costs
             are at least offset by decreasing winter heating                                                                             Changes in
             costs.                                                                                                                     energy demand
                                                                                                                                           in future
Roads and Maintenance costs in the face climate-related         Maintenance costs under current
Buildings deterioration of roads and buildings                  vs more climate resilient
          represents a defensive expenditure. In the            construction specifications were
          case of buildings, upgrading roof specifications      modelled.                                                                    IPSS
                                                                                                                      1.5
          is expected to result in reduced costs,                                                      3.3                       35      engineering-
                                                                                                                  [0.4 – 2.1]
          representing an avoidable defensive                                                                                           based approach
          expenditure.
          Maintenance costs are expected increase with
          climate change for both roads and buildings.
Health    Losses in the health sector stem from a range         Values of mortality and                                                 Socioeconomic
          of diseases whose severity and transmission           salmonella costs were adapted                                             scenarios
          are influenced by climate.                            from European studies. Future                                             Values of
          Increases are predicted in the costs of               disease trends were projected                       118.1                mortality risk
                                                                                                        20
          mortality and disease burden associated with          from a number of local and                         [39.2 –       60        Climate
                                                                                                   [7.5 – 55.1]
          heatwaves and food-borne diseases. Increased          regional studies.                                  327.3]                 scenarios
          mortality from generally higher summer
                                                                                                                                        Climate-health
          temperatures is expected to be offset by
                                                                                                                                           linkages
          reduced winter mortality, however.
                                                                                                                    1315
                                                                                                      594.5
                                             Total                                                                 [1,009-      1,018
                                                                                                   [431.8-779.4
                                                                                                                   2,013]
                                  Total as percentage of GDP                                          6.5%          3.4%         2.6


                                                                                                                                              - 58 -
[4.7-8.5]   [2.6 – 5.2]




                          - 59 -
Current opportunity costs of failing to protect against the negative impacts of climate are also
substantial, amounting to more than USD100 million per annum in total, mostly due to the damages
caused by flooding and a variety of weather impacts on agriculture, as well as the cost of climate-
related health impacts. Costs of inaction in infrastructure (not including flood damage) are relatively
negligible.
By 2050, the pattern of production-related costs of inaction is fairly similar. Estimates of unrealized
production in forestry, agriculture and energy are not very different from the present, it is only in
the water sector that the unrealized potential increases dramatically, as future water constraints are
expected to intensify and limit industrial and irrigation uses.
In contrast, the costs of inaction in protecting against negative climate impacts show strong
increases across the board, and are expected to total at least USD600 million per annum by 2050.
The growth in expected damage and losses exceeds the GDP-linked growth in assets at risk,
particularly in agriculture and health, as unfavourable climate events are expected to become more
frequent.
The expected direct costs of climate change are also substantial, reaching around USD1 billion per
annum by 2050. The distribution of direct costs of climate change across the sectors is similar to the
pattern the costs of inaction on protection, except that the costs to the agriculture sector are even
more dominant, accounting for around 70% of the total. At an expected direct cost of USD35 million
per year, the direct costs on climate change on roads and buildings is also significant. This figure
reflects an increase in maintenance costs predicted under the IPSS model, but is not reflected in the
opportunity costs of inaction because the increased expenditure is unavoidable.
Both the present and future costs of inaction, and the direct costs of climate change by 2050 are
significant in relation to overall GDP. The present total cost of inaction on climate adaptation is
equivalent to 6.5% of GDP. Despite the total cost of inaction more than doubling by 2050 in real
terms, this represents a lower fraction of total GDP at 3.4%. The direct costs of climate represent
2.6% of GDP by 2050. However, this reduction in the relative costs as a proportion of GDP is
predicated on optimistic predictions of GDP growth (equivalent to 4.2% sustained growth in real
terms over 35 years). More modest growth would lead to an increase in the relative costs of inaction
and climate change.



3.2 Adaptation investments
The analysis of individual sectors in Section 2 provides details on potential investments in each
sector. Table 3.2 and figure 3.2 summarize recommended investments that would exploit the
climate adaptation opportunities represented by the costs of inaction. The investments are
prioritized on several criteria, including: the benefit-cost ratio (BCR) or internal rate of return (IRR)
(when available) and the confidence in those estimates; the size of the potential investment and
returns; and qualitative assessment of impacts on gender and poverty. Overall, the biggest
challenges and investment opportunities are in agriculture (and a range of related landscape
restoration activities) and in water-related infrastructure (including supply networks, irrigation, flood
control, and multi-purpose water storage. The two areas overlap through irrigation. The ideal size
and timing of water storage investments requires more analysis, and the institutional capacity to
effectively manage a variety of water investments would also need to be strengthened. In addition,
there are modest investment opportunities in emergency warning and response systems that could
have significant benefits for public health and safety.




                                                                                                   - 60 -
Table 3.2: High Priority Investments - in the near to mid-term

Sector             Description on investment                          Period for        Amount in      Indicative             Uncertainty      Impact on     Impact
                                                                      capital           USD (Mn.)      economic return        of benefits      poverty       on
                                                                                                                    30                  31
                                                                      investment                       (BCR or IRR)           and costs                      gender
Agriculture:       Rehabilitate/Modernize Centralized Irrigation      2017 to 2040      975.0          IRR: 8% to 15%         Medium           Medium         Medium
Water              Systems
Management         Rehabilitation/Modernization of Drainage           2017 to 2026      120.0          IRR: 8% to 15%         Medium           Medium         Medium
                   infrastructure in irrigated areas
                   Institutional Reforms/Capacity Building            2017 to 2024      140.0          n/a                    Medium           High            High
Forestry           Ecological reconstruction of forests               2020 to 2029      91.3           IRR: 3% to 14%         Medium           High            High
                   Ecological reconstruction of forest belts          2020 to 2029      4.9            IRR: 4% to 15%         Medium           High            High
                                                                                            32
Health             Heat Health Warning System                         2017+             0.4            Current BCR: 3.1       High             Medium         Medium
                                                                                                       to 170
                                                                                                       2050 BCR: 9.9 to
                                                                                                       920
Water              Improving Municipal and Industrial Water           2017+             2.8-5.5        BCR: 61 to 70          Low              Medium         Medium
Supply             System Efficiency by 10% Reduction in
                   Losses
                   Water Storage in Lower Nistru (100MCM)             2030+?            18.4           BCR: 2.6 to 6.4        Low              Medium        Medium
                   Water Storage in Reut (1MCM)                       2020              0.3            BCR: 20 to 59          Low              Low           Medium
Flood              Structural Measures                                2020-2040         360.8          BCR: 2.1               Medium           Unknown       Unknown
Prevention         Non-Structural Measures                            2020-2040         136.6          BCR: 5.6               Medium           Unknown       Unknown
WSS                Rehabilitation of existing and construction of     2020-2040         409            BCR: 2.5-3.2           Medium           High          Medium
                   new WSS infrastructures                                              [350-439]
Disaster           Improved training facilities                       2020              11             BCR: 2.1 to 4.1        Medium           Medium         Medium
Response           Creation of Emergency Command Centres in


30
  In several cases, the benefit-cost analysis relied on values in the literature. Therefore the analysis could not be fully standardized and in some cases the results are
reported as benefit-cost ratios, and in others as internal rates of return.
31
  Ratings are given here for the significance of uncertainty of benefits for each investment. Red = high uncertainty, amber = medium uncertainty, and green= low
uncertainty. A discussion of the basis of these ratings for each sector is given in the section “Uncertainty in the Analysis and Critical Knowledge Gaps” of this Executive
Summary.
32
     Costs incurred in years of a heatwave.



                                                                                                                                                                    - 61 -
Sector       Description on investment                   Period for   Amount in   Indicative        Uncertainty    Impact on   Impact
                                                         capital      USD (Mn.)   economic return   of benefits    poverty     on
                                                                                               30             31
                                                         investment               (BCR or IRR)      and costs                  gender
Management   North and South
             Improving emergency response capabilities




                                                                                                                                    - 62 -
                                                                                                                                               Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    viability



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Economic




                                                                                                                     Not viable
                                                                                                                                                                                         Medium
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Water Storage in Retu
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (1MCM)



                                                                                                                                            Heat health warning systems




                                                                                                                             Low (<$5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Improving M and I water
                                                                                                              Ecological reconstruction of shelterbelts                                                  system efficiency by 10%




                                                                                                                                          Water Storage in Lower
                                                                                                                                                                            Improved Disaster
                                                                                                                                          Nistru (100MCM)
                                                                                                                                                                            Response Management




                                                                                                          Ecological reconstruction of forests




                                                                                                                                            Rehabilitation/modernization of drainage infrastructure in
         Figure 3.2 Comparison of priority projects: Economic viability compared to value of investment                                     irrigation systems


                                                                                                                                                                            Non-sructural flood
                                                                                                                                                                            measures
                                                                                                                    High




                                                                                                                                            Structural flood measures
                                                                                                                  (>$100m)




                                                                                                                                            Rehabilitation/modernization of centralized irrigation
                                                                                                                                            systems
                                                                                                                   Value of
                                                                                                                 investment




- 63 -
Ratings of economic viability are based on the following:

       High viability – indicated by a BCR above 5 or an IRR above 20%;
       Medium viability – indicated by a BCR between 2 and 5 or an IRR between 10% and 20%;
       Low viability – indicated by a BCR between 1 and 2 or an IRR between 6 and 10%
       Not viable – indicated by a BCR below 1 or an IRR below 6% – the rationale is that this would indicate that costs outweigh benefits under both
        measures since the IRR would be below a low discount rate usually applied in a country such as Moldova




                                                                                                                                                - 64 -
Priorities consist of:

       Agriculture: The largest costs from inaction and future climate change occur in the
        agriculture sector. Key investments related to expanding irrigation, i.e., rehabilitation and
        modernization of centralized irrigation systems and of drainage infrastructure in irrigated
        areas, will make a major contribution to increasing current productivity and to mitigating
        future climate impacts. These investments are expected to have good rates of return as long
        as they can be combined with successful institutional capacity-building for management of
        irrigation systems. Other options include: small-scale on-farm irrigation systems; soil
        management; climate risk management technologies (e.g., anti-hail nets); and the potential
        for changes in crop mix towards perennial crops (i.e., grapes and fruit trees) which will be
        more resilient to climate change.
       Forests: Ecological rehabilitation and expansion of forests and forest belts are expected to
        have high returns on suitable land, and to have a high poverty and gender impact due to the
        range of products and services they provide to rural communities. Restoration of degraded
        forests and pasturelands are also linked to agricultural productivity, as they provide
        hydrological regulation as well as protection from wind and snowdrifts.
       Health: Although there is uncertainty around the scale of climate-related health impacts, the
        establishment of early warning systems for heatwaves is likely to enjoy a high benefit-cost
        ratio and significantly improve public health.
       Water: Improvement in municipal supply systems to reduce losses, and building a small-
        scale storage reservoir on the lower Nistru, present immediate, modest investment
        opportunities to improve water supply with strong returns. In the medium-term, larger-scale
        storage infrastructure on the Reut and lower Nistru are likely to be needed, but the ideal
        timing and scale of these investments requires further analysis. Rehabilitation of existing and
        construction of new water supply and sanitation infrastructure would provide valuable
        services to rural communities, although their financial viability is less certain.
       Flood Control: A substantial set of structural and non-structural measures for flood control is
        expected to provide significant economic returns from the reduction of damages and loss,
        according to the recent work of EIB (2016).
       Disaster risk management: A set of modest investments are expected to provide key gains
        for public safety and substantial economic returns, i.e., improvements to emergency
        prevention and preparedness, including training facilities, new Emergency Command
        Centers in the North and South, and improving emergency response capabilities.


In addition to identifying shorter-term investment priorities, a potential investment pathway was
prepared to illustrate how total identified investment needs might be spread over the period to
2050 (see Table 3.3 and Figure 3.3). The figures are for five-year intervals, from 2020-2024, to 2045-
2050, and averaged over different climate scenarios. Total investment is highest (close to USD280
million per annum on average) in the first 10 years when much of the priority investment needs
(amounting to USD1.85 billion, or about 29% of total investment) are delivered. During this period,
investment would be equivalent to a couple of percent of total GDP—a large amount, but smaller
than the predicted annual costs of inaction. In subsequent years, the investments decline to around
USD100 million per annum in the second decade and to less than USD50 million per annum on
average in the third decade. The relative value of these investments as a percentage of GDP fall
significantly beyond the first decade, given the assumption of sustained, strong GDP growth.




                                                                                                 - 65 -
Table 3.3: Investment & Other Expenditures to Address the Cost of Inaction (USD Mn.)

                               2020-         2025-       2030- 2035-        2040-      2045-
Sector                          2024          2029        2034 2039          2044       2049
Forestry                        81.2          55.6        84.3  85.3         74.4         0.0
Agriculture                  1,005.8         979.8       242.0 163.0         0.00         0.0
Water WSS                       44.0          44.0        41.0  41.0         38.5       38.5
Water Deficit                   41.5            1.5         1.5  1.5           1.5        0.0
Energy                         117.5         117.5          0.0  0.0           0.0        0.0
Health                            0.1           0.1         0.1  0.1           0.1        0.1
Roads                             4.5         11.0        11.2   6.7           4.9        4.2
Buildings                       18.7          17.2        14.4  15.8         15.5       19.1
DRM - Flood Control             99.0         131.4       134.7 136.2        142.4      128.7
Total                        1,412.2       1,358.1       529.3 449.8        277.3      190.6
Annual Inv. as % of
GDP                            3.1%          2.3%         0.7%     0.5%      0.3%      0.2%


Figure 3.3: Investment Needs by Sector, by time period (USDm)


     1500

     1000

      500

         0




             Forestry          Agriculture            Water WSS
             Water Deficit     Energy                 Health
             Roads             Buildings              DRM - Flood Control




3.3 Uncertainty and further work
This study aims to establish an analytical framework that can be repeated as models and data
improve. The results are not intended to be definitive, and identifying key knowledge gaps (i.e.,
those that have the greatest impact on the conclusions) is a valuable output of the work.
Figure 3.1, Summary of Results for Costs of Inaction, does not represent the full range of uncertainty
around the assessment of the costs of inaction. The “confidence intervals” around the results only
represent the range of values obtained from the limited set of price, emissions, and SSP scenarios
used in each analysis. In most sectors there are significant limitations in physical models that relate
the expected values of impacts to climate variables. Once any projection more than a few years into
the future is involved, such limitations are amplified by fundamental uncertainty around socio-
economic processes, i.e., future populations, technologies, and prices, which typically exceed the
uncertainty within climate and physical models.



                                                                                                 - 66 -
Relying on available data, rather than developing all estimates from first principles, also precluded a
fully standardized approach to the cost-benefit analysis of investment options. Figure 3.2,
Comparison of Priority Projects: Economic Viability Compared to Value of Investment, attempts to
provide a sense of the relative scale and economic returns from each investment, but a more
rigorous approach would have allowed a marginal adaptation cost curve to be plotted, analogous to
the marginal abatement cost curves developed for analysis of climate mitigation options.
Nevertheless, the broad patterns observed in terms of the relative magnitudes of the costs of
inaction and investment returns are likely to be generally robust for the present and near future. The
most consequential knowledge gaps, and therefore priorities for future studies, are summarized, in
approximate order of importance, as follows:
    1. The analysis of the energy sector suffers from fundamental uncertainty over the scale of
       viable power generation potential from climate-dependent renewables, and from lack of
       data on potential cost savings related to thermal energy efficiency of buildings (which would
       qualify as an avoidable defensive expenditure, given that heating and cooling of living space
       serves to protect from uncomfortable temperatures). This is probably the biggest gap in the
       analysis. Additional work on the energy sector could significantly change the assessment of
       the costs of inaction and investment opportunities in relation to other sectors, although a
       major change in the expected role of future climate change is less likely.
    2. Agriculture potentials have only been approximately characterized, and effects of future
       climate change on agricultural production remain imprecisely known. Given the importance
       of the sector for adaptation, additional work is recommended.
    3. Modelling indicates that future water shortages are likely to occur and that they will have
       major economic impacts, but the optimal scale and timing of investments to address these
       shortages was not reliably determined. Given the importance of expected future impacts on
       water availability, further analysis of hydrological projections, economics of water-related
       services, adaptive management strategies, and climate triggers would be warranted.
    4. Data on damage and losses from extreme weather are generally incomplete. More
       systematic reporting systems, including for impacts of smaller-scale events such as
       hailstorms and frosts, would improve understanding of both the scale of such losses and the
       extent of investment in mitigation that would be justified. It is possible that there is some
       overlap between estimates of disaster losses to the agriculture sector and from flooding in
       general under the water sector, but estimates of agricultural losses are likely to be
       conservative anyway, given the scale of recent droughts in 2007, 2012, and other years.
    5. The analysis for roads and buildings was based on generalized probabilistic models of
       maintenance costs for construction standards based on international experience, and on the
       assumption that maintenance needs are always met. The models were based on surveys of
       infrastructure stocks in Moldova, but would also need to be ‘ground-truthed’ against the
       construction standards and maintenance practices in actual use. The models indicate that a
       switch to higher construction standards for paved roads could possibly be beneficial in the
       medium-term, but more detailed work is needed to define specific standards and climate
       triggers.
    6. There are many uncertainties in the health sector as to the nature, extent, and value of
       climate-related impacts, but total effects are still likely to be relatively small in comparison
       to the overall disease burden in the country. General strengthening of health systems is
       probably the most effective approach to address climate-related disease, but is unlikely to


                                                                                                 - 67 -
       be justified on the basis of climate impacts alone. Conversely, the recommendations for
       small, directed investments in information campaigns and early warning systems are likely to
       be robust due to their low cost.
    7. In the forestry sector, there is a lot of uncertainty over the long-term ecological effects of
       climate change (i.e., changes in species productivities, distributions, incidence of pests &
       disease), but these effects will not result in major economic impacts within the timeframe of
       the analysis in this study (i.e., by 2050).



3.1 Poverty, gender & social dimensions
Despite a sharp decline in poverty in the 2000s, Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in
Europe. The country grew on average by 5 percent annually between 2000 and 2014, much more
rapidly than other countries in the region, with a concurrent fall in poverty rates from around 68 to
11.4 percent. However, disparities among regions inside the country and between genders persist.
Poverty in rural areas is triple that in urban areas, and the rate outside of Chisinau is five times that
within (Davalos et al. 2016). Agriculture is a major source of income for local families and the
economy. In 2014, it represented 14 percent of the total GDP and employs 30 percent of workers.
Almost 80 percent of the poor and 70 percent of lowest 40% of the population by income are
employed in the agricultural sector, many of them underemployed (Mollers et al. 2016). Small family
farms, many operating on a semi-subsistence basis, produce around 71 percent of total agricultural
output.
Much of the current and predicted impacts of climate and climate change are concentrated in rural
areas, precisely where poor populations have limited resources to cope with it. Agricultural
production in Moldova is very sensitive to weather conditions, particularly staple crops, such as
cereals. Yet 98% of Moldovan farms are small holdings of 0.8-10 ha, and there is a lack of access to
rural finance for investments to improve productivity and resilience in the sector.
Recent studies (Popa et al. 2014) reveal the importance of forests to poor rural communities, and
that the lower the household income, the higher the dependence on the forest. Fuelwood, poles and
timber, and a variety of NTFPs (particularly walnuts) comprise the third most important source of
income for villages with access to forest resources (11% of the total income, ranging from 18.2% in
villages with higher forest coverage to 7.3% in villages with lower forest coverage). Nuts, primarily
walnuts, represent the most valuable forest product (53% share in terms of value) as well as the
most frequently collected product (17% in terms of frequency of total collection). Fuelwood is also
the main source of fuel for heating and cooking in rural areas. Officially, the quantity of fuelwood
sold by forest administrators represents only a small portion of total wood consumed for heating,
which suggests a high dependence on illegal sources. The issue of illegal logging brings attention to
the scarcity of the forest resources in Moldova and raises questions of their sustainability.
The rural poor also have less access to household water supply and sanitation services, and other
infrastructure, such as roads, that will be put under increasing pressure by climate change. In total,
75.4% of urban populations have connections to sewerage, compared to 1.6% in rural areas.
Women are also likely to be more vulnerable to unfavorable climate conditions and future climate
change, both because they already have fewer resources at their disposal (UNDP 2009: in 2007 –
2008, women’s wages were on average 70 percent of men’s, up from 64 percent in 2006), and
because they are likely to be disproportionately impacted by climate:
       Many impoverished women are farmers and depend on agriculture and natural resources
        for subsistence and income. Women comprise 36% of agricultural landholders, but only own


                                                                                                   - 68 -
         19% of land. Female-headed farms are a third smaller (0.81 vs 1.2 ha) and receive less
         investment (women own only 12% of existing agricultural machinery).
        There are substantial differences in access to piped water supply for female-led compared to
         male-led households. In rural areas, 55% of female-headed households are connected,
         compared to 75% of male-headed households. (Solidarity Water Europe, 2014). Women are
         most often the users, providers, and managers of water in rural households and are the
         guardians of household hygiene. If a water system breaks down, women will most likely be
         more affected, as they may have to travel further for water or use other means to meet the
         household’s water and sanitation needs. Investment in WSS will contribute both to climate
         change adaptation and to gender equality.
        Although Moldova-specific data are lacking, women are expected to be more severely
         impacted by a number of climate-related health effects (see Table 3.4) below.

Table 3.4: Health impacts of climate change and gender-specific factors
Health impact                                               Gender factors
Temperature-related morbidity and mortality                 In general, women’s mortality is more strongly
                                                            impacted by extreme heat than men’s mortality
                                                            (Röhr et al, 2004)
Extreme events                                              Women more impacted due to taking burden of
                                                            increased care. There can be adverse
                                                            reproductive outcomes following a disaster.
                                                            Other biological differences and social risk
                                                            factors may also impact on differential health
                                                            impacts based on gender (WHO, 2002).
Air pollution-related health effects                        Indoor air pollution exposures may differ by
                                                            gender.
Waterborne and foodborne diseases                           Some studies suggest differential symptoms
                                                            between genders – with women clearing the
                                                            symptoms of salmonella more rapidly than
                                                            men, but with a longer diarrheal phase.
                                                            Treatments may also have a different impact on
                                                            people of different genders (Lonnemark et al,
                                                            2015)
Vector-borne and zoonotic diseases                          Potential impacts on pregnant mothers (e.g.
                                                            Zika).
Exposure to UV                                              Higher mortality rates from malignant
                                                            melanoma in men than women, due to both
                                                            biological and behavioural reasons
Source: Based on WECF (2004)


Broader economic impacts are possible from climate-related effects to agriculture and water
resources. Climate-induced yield losses for key crops could be on the order of 33-52% (compared to
a no-climate change scenario) by 2050, even before accounting for the impact of intensifying
extreme events. This would represent a major blow to the economy, in which agricultural output
accounts for 14% of GDP and 50% of exports, and would give rise to problems of food security,


                                                                                                       - 69 -
which would disproportionately affect the urban poor. In recent years, the prices of food have
risen much more than the prices of services. These changes in food prices are affecting the poor
much more, potentially squeezing out spending on other needs, including health care and
education, that are important for long-term well-being (Davalos et al. 2016).
Economic growth prospects could also be affected by intensifying water deficits if the latter are not
addressed through adaptation measures. Recent estimates suggest that average run-off of surface
water, including to the rivers Prut and Dniester, will decrease on average by 13 percent by 2020
(depending on the modelling scenarios), while peak flows will increase, thus increasing the risks of
floods and droughts. Decreasing annual surface water runoff and reduced groundwater recharge
combined with the ambitious target of national economic development will lead to significant water
scarcity by the 2030s (OECD, 2013). This will likely have a disproportionate impact on water
availability for irrigation, as municipal and industrial use is likely to be prioritized.
Maintenance costs in infrastructure (for roads and buildings) are also projected to increase, and if
these are not met, there will also be an impact on economic growth, particularly from the transport
sector.




                                                                                               - 70 -
4 References

AGRI-2007-G4-06 (2007) Impacts of Climate Change on European Forests and Options for Adaptation
(http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/analysis/external/euro_forests/full_report_en.pdf)
BASE (2016) EU wide Economic Evaluation of Adaptation to Climate Change. Deliverable D6.3 of the
BASE FP7 project.
Bengtsson, J., Hargreaves, R. and Page I. C. (2007) Assessment of the Need to Adapt Buildings in New
Zealand to the Impacts of Climate Change. BRANZ Study Report SR 179. (Available in
http://www.branz.co.nz/cms_show_download.php?id=af3b6b202e83011d176ec5e8f9b58de4ce2ac
882).
Botnari F., Galupa D., Platon I. (2011) State of the Forestry of the Republic of Moldova 2006-2010.
Agency Moldsilva. Chisinau. – 60 pp. (Report prepared under the ENPI FLEG Program).
Ciofu, A., Plamadeala, I., Popa, O., Luchian, S., and A. Ursul (2014) Energy Sector in the Republic of
Moldova. Country Report Moldova. Report prepared for the European Commission FP7 project
ENER2I. Available online from https://ener2i.eu/page/34/attach/0_Moldova_Country_Report.pdf.
Clima East (2013) Sustainable management of pastures and community forests in Moldova’s first
National Park Orhei to demonstrate climate change mitigation and adaptation benefits and
dividends for local communities. UNDP, project document.
Cohen, F., Glachant, M and Söderberg, M. (2016), “Adapting the US Residential Sector to Global
Warming”. Working paper presented in 7th Atlantic Workshop on Energy and Environmental
Economics, A Toxa (Spain), 27-28 June.
Corobov, R. Sheridan, S., Opopol, A. And K. Ebi (2013) Heat-related mortality in Moldova: the
Summer of 2007. International Journal of Climatology 33:2551-2560.
De Cian, E. and I.S. Wing (2016) Global Energy Demand in a Warming Climate. FEEM Working Paper
016.2016. Available online from www.feem.it.
Diana Cheianu-Andrei, Iurie Perevoznic, Angelina Zaporojan-Pîrgari et al. (2015) Men and gender
equality in the Republic of Moldova.Dury M., Hambuckers A., Warnant P., Henrot A., Favre E.,
Ouberdous M., François L. (2011) Responses of European forest ecosystems to 21st century climate:
assessing changes in interannual variability and fire intensity. iForest 4: 82-99 [online: 2011-04-07]
http://www.sisef.it/iforest/show.php?id=572
Edwards, Nigel (2011). Improving the Hospital System in the Republic of Moldova. Policy Paper
Series No. 1 (2011): World Health Organization, 2011.
Emerton, L. (2009) Economic Valuation of Protected Areas: Options for Macedonia. GEF/UNDP PIMS
3728: Strengthening the Ecological, Institutional and Financial sustainability of Macedonia’s
Protected Area System and Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, Skopje
Ernst C., Gullick R., Nixon K. (2004) Conserving forests to protect water. Optflow. American Water
Works Association, Vol 30, no. 5
Eurostat (undated) Mortality and life expectancy statistics. Available online at
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php/Mortality_and_life_expectancy_statistics.
FAO (2010) Forest and CC in Eastern Europe and Central Asia (FAO 2010) (includes Section on
Moldova). http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/k9589e/k9589e.pdf
Frank, S. et al (2014) Global drivers of EU land use, Project Report for Towards Rural Synergies and
Trade-offs between Economic Development and Ecosystem Services.

                                                                                                - 71 -
Galupa D., Ciobanu A., Scobioală M., Stângaci V., Lozan A. (2011) Tăierile ilicite ale vegetaţiei
forestiere în Republica Moldova: Studiu analitic. Chișinău, Agenţia Moldsilva, – 38 p. (Anul
Internaţional al Pădurilor – 2011). Raport pregătit în cadrul Programului ENPI FLEG
Gavrilita P., Druta A. (2010) Moldova. In: Mátyás (ed.), Forests and climate change in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia. Forests and Climate Change Working Paper 8, Food and Agricultural Organization
of the United Nations: 107-125
GD (2008) National strategy on gender equality in the Republic of Moldova 2009-2015.
GD (2014a). Strategia Republicii Moldova de adaptare la schimbarea climei pana in anul 2020.
Governmental Decision nr. 1009/2014, Government of Republic of Moldova
GD (2014b) Programul national de extindere a suprafetelor cu vegetatie forestiera pentru anii 2014-
2018. Governmental Decision nr. 101/2014, Government of Moldova
GD (2015a) Governmental decision regarding the approval of the Strategy for Biodiversity
Conservation of Republic of Moldova for the period 2014-2020. Government of Moldova, Official
Gazette 104-109, Chisinau (in Romanian)
GD (2015b) Strategia de dezvoltare cu emisii reduse a Republicii Moldova, draft, Government of
Moldova
GD (2015c) Strategia de adaptare la schimbarea climei a sectorului forestier din Republica Moldova,
draft, Government of Moldova
Government of the Republic of Moldova (2014) The Republic of Moldova’s Climate Change
Adaptation Strategy by 2020.
Government of the Republic of Moldova (2015) Republic of Moldova’s Intended National
Determined Contribution. INDC submission dated 25.9.2015.
Haasnoot, M., Kwakkel, J., Walker, W., and J. ter Maat (2013) Dynamic adaptive policy pathways: A
method for crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world. Global Environmental Change. Vol
23, Issue 2, pp 485-498.
Hauk, S., Knocke, T., and S. Wittkopf (2014) Economic evaluation of short rotation coppice systems
for energy from biomass – a review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Vol 29, pp435-448.
Hughes et al. 2010. The costs of adaptation to climate change for water infrastructure in OECD
countries, Utilities Policy. 18(3) Pages 142-153.
Hughes, G., P. Chinowsky and K. Strzepek (2010), The costs of adaptation to climate change for
water infrastructure in OECD countries, Utilities Policy, Vol. 18(3).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jup.2010.03.002
ICAS (2016a). Estimations regarding the effects of forest fires, pests and drying phenomena in
Moldavian Forests. Forest Research and Management Planning, Moldsilva, Chisinau, manuscript
ICAS (2016b). Technological maps for afforestation and ecological reconstruction of degraded forest
in different scenarios, Forest Research and Management Planning, Moldsilva, Chisinau, manuscript
IGES (2006) Institute for Global Environmental Strategies for IPCC, Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.shtml#4
IIASA (2015) Report on the crop yield gap, prepared by International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis, Austria for project “Exploring the potential for agricultural and biomass trade in the
Commonwealth of Independent States”.




                                                                                               - 72 -
IRENA (2012) Hydropower. Renewable Energy Technologies:Cost Analysis Series. Volume 1: Power
Sector, IRENA Working Paper Issue 3/5.

JRC (2012) Projected changes in fire danger,
http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/projected-meteorological-forest-fire-danger
Kovats, S., Lloyd, S., Hunt, A. and P. Watkiss (2011) The Impacts and Economic Costs of Climate
Change on Health in Europe. ClimateCost Technical Briefing Note 5: Health. Report prepared as part
of FP7 ClimateCost project. Available at:
http://www.climatecost.cc/images/Policy_Brief_5_Climatecost_Health_Summary_Results_vs_5_dra
ft_final_web.pdf
Lavelle (2009) Climate Change in Europe. 3. Impact on agriculture and forestry: A review, Agron.
Sustain. Dev. 29 (2009) 433–446
Leahu I. (1994) Dendrometrie [Dendrometry]. Didactica si pedagogica Publishing House, Bucuresti,
374 pp, (in Romanian)
Leichenko, R., Major, D. C., Johnson, K., Patrick, L., & O’Grady, M. (2011). An Economic Analysis of
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations in New York State. Responding to Climate Change in New
York State: The ClimAID Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1244, 501-649.
Lilia Ţăranu, Igor Bercu, Dumitru Deveatîi (2012), Regional Climate Change Scenarios for the Republic
of Moldova: Future Temperature and Precipitation Projections from Ensembles of 10 Global Climate
Models. NR. 3 (63), IUNIE.
Lindner et al. (2014) Climate change and European forests: What do we know, what are the
uncertainties, and what are the implications for forest management?, Journal of Environmental
Management, 146 (2014) 69e83
Lonnemark, E., Lappas, G., Friman, V., Wold, A.E., Backhaus, E., and I Adlerberth (2015) Effects of
probiotic uptake and gender on nontyphoid Salmonella infection. Journal of Clinical
Gastroenterology, 49(2):116-23.
MA (2005) Millenium Ecosystem Assessment. “Ecosystems and human well-being. Synthesis.”
Washington D.C.: Island Press
Menne, B. & Ebi, K. L. 2006. Climate Change and adaptation strategies for human health, Springer.
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR) (2009) Second National Communication of
the Republic of Moldova Under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR) (2013) Third National Communication of the
Republic of Moldova Under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
Modernization of local public services in the Republic of Moldova, implemented by the Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH on behalf of Federal Ministry for
Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and with support of Romanian Government and
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida). Various reports.
Moldsilva (2013) Informative material regarding Moldsilva Agency activity - qualitative and
quantitative indicators of the forest fund. Moldsilva Agency, Chișinău
Moroz, V., Stratan, A., Ignat, A., & Lucasenco, E. (2015) Country Report: Republic of Moldova, report
for Agricistrade research project by National Institute for Economic Research.
National Communication of the Republic of Moldova under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.



                                                                                               - 73 -
Nedealcov (2014) The Impact of Weather and Climate Risks on Cereal Crops Productivity, PESD, VOL.
8, no. 1, 2014. Institute of Ecology and Geography of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova.
NIER (2015) Country Report: Republic of Moldova, prepared by National Institute for Economic
Research for Agricistrade project.
OECD (2015), Climate Change Risks and Adaptation: Linking Policy and Economic, OECD Publishing,
Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264234611-en
Olonschek, M., Holsten, A., Kropp, J. P. (2011): Heating and cooling energy demand and related
emissions of the German residential building stock under climate change. Energy Policy, 39, 9, 4795-
4806.
Orazio C., Stojnic S., Scojanovic D., Gartzia N., Hayes S. (2009) The influence of Climate Change on
European Forests and the Forest Sector (www.rokfor.eu)
Overcenco, A., Croitoru, C. and N. Opopol (2015) Impactul Temperaturilor Extreme de Înalte Asupra
Sӑnӑtatii. Chapter 4 in Croitoru, C., Overcenco, A., Pantea, V. And N. Opopol (2015) Impactul
Temperaturilor Extreme Ambientale Asupra Sӑnӑtӑtii. Centrul National de Sӑnӑtatii Publica al
Ministerului Sӑnӑtati al Republicii Moldova.
PD. (2001). Parliament Decision nr. 350/2001. Approval of the Sustainable Development Strategy for
the Forest Sector in Republic of Moldova. Monitorul official, Chisinau.
Popa B. (2013) The Economic Value of Ecosystem Services in Republic of Moldova. GEF/UNDP-GEF
project National Biodiversity Planning to Support the implementation of the CBD 2011-2020
Strategic Plan in Republic of Moldova, Chisinau.
Popa B., Zubarev V., Mosnoi E., Lozan A. (2014) Forest dependence based on surveys conducted in
three villages in Moldova. ENPI FLEG Program
http://www.enpi-fleg.org/site/assets/files/1873/fleg_forest_dependency_moldova_en.pdf
Postolache, Gh. (2008) Cu privire la Crearea Carcasei Forestiere. Rev Bot, Nr 1, Vol. 1, Chisinau
Poulter, B., Frank, D.C., Hodson, E.L., Zimmermann, N.E. (2011) Impacts of land cover and climate
data selection on understanding terrestrial carbon dynamics and the CO2 airborne fraction. Biogeo
sciences 8, 1617e1642
Ray, D., Mueller, N., West, P., Foley J. (2013) Yield Trends are Insufficient to Double Global Crop
Production by 2050. PLoS ONE 8(6): e66428.
Röhr, U., Schultz, I, Saltman, G., and E. Steiβ (2004) Klimapolitik und Gender- Eine Sondierung
möglicher Gender Impacts des europäischen Emissionshandelsystems ISOE Discussion Paper 21,
cited in WECF (2004).
SEF – State of Europe’s Forests. (2011) Report jointly prepared by FOREST EUROPE Liaison Unit Oslo,
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
SYRM – Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Moldova. (2014) Anuarul statistic al Republicii
Moldova. Tipografia Centrală, Chișinău
Taranu L. (2014a) An Assessment of Climate Change Impact on the Republic of Moldova’s Agriculture
Sector. A Research Study Complementing the Vulnerability and Adaptation Chapter of the Third
Terente M (2008). Modelarea si analiza digitala a terenului, cu aplicatii in bazinul montan al
Teleajenului (Land Modelling and Digital Analysis, with Applications in the Teleajen River Mountain
Drainage Basin). Universitatea Bucuresti, Facultatea de Geografie, Licence Work
The Republic of Moldova’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy by 2020, approved in 2014.



                                                                                                    - 74 -
Thompson, M., Cooper, I. and Gething, B. (2015). The business case for adapting buildings to climate
change: Niche or mainstream? (Available in https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-
business-case-for-adapting-buildings-to-climate-change).
Transport and Logistics Strategy 2013-2022. Draft Final, December 14, 2012.
TUB (2015) Evaluation of Forest Ecosystem Services (FES) in the Republic of Moldova, Transilvania
University from Brasov, ENPI FLEG Program
Turcanu G., Platon I. (2014) Consideratii practice in evaluarea economic[ complex[ a resurselor
forestiere gestionate de Agentia Moldsilva. Analele ASEM, editia a XII a, nr 1:38-49
Turcanu, G., Domente, S., Buga, M., and E. Richardson (2012) Republic of Moldova: Health Systems
Review. Health Systems in Transition, Vol 14, No 7, pp1-151.
Turner & Townsend (2015) International Construction Market Survey 2015.
UNDP (2009) Climate Change in Moldova: Socio-Economic Impact and Policy Options for Adaptation.
2009-10 Human Development Report. UNDP Moldova, Chisinau. Available online from
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/nhdr_moldova_2009-10_en.pdf.
UNDP (2015) Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan for Forestry Sector of Moldova.
Elaborated in the project “Supporting Moldova’s National Climate Change Adaptation Pla nning
Process”. Draft Governmental decision. Chisinau.
UNEP (2014) Green Economy Scoping Study: Republic of Moldova. Available online from
http://www.unep.org/roe/Portals/139/documents/Green%20Economy%20scoping%20study%20Re
public%20of%20Moldova.pdf.
Watkiss, P. and Hunt, A. (2012). Projection of economic impacts of climate change in sectors of
Europe based on bottom up analysis: human health. Climatic Change, 2012, Volume 112, Number 1,
Pages 101-126. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-011-0342-z
Watkiss, P., Horrocks, L., Pye, S., Searl, A. & Hunt, A. 2009. Impacts of climate change in human
health in Europe. PESETA-Human health study. European Commission: Joint Research Centre.
WECF (2004) Climate Change, Health and Gender. Fact Sheet. Available online from
http://gendercc.net/fileadmin/inhalte/dokumente/5_Gender_Climate/Health/CC_health_en.pdf
WHO (2004), “Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the
Global Level”. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wsh0404.pdf.
WHO (2004), “Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the
Global Level” (http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wsh0404.pdf).
WHO      (2002)     Gender    and     Health   in     Disasters.       Available    online     from
http://apps.who.int/gender/other_health/en/genderdisasters.pdf.
Winter, T.C., J.W. Harvey, O.L. Franke, and W.M. Alley (1998). Groundwater and Surface Water A
Single Resource. USGS Circular 1139.
World Bank (2007) Drought in Moldova
World Bank (2012) Forest Institutional Reform Strategy for Moldova [in Romanian], Chisinau
World Bank (2012) Reducing the Vulnerability of Moldova’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change:
Impact Assessment and Adaptation Options, Agriculture and Rural Development Unit Sustainable
Development Department Europe and Central Asia
World Bank (2012b) Moldova - Agriculture Competitiveness Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/04/16224219/moldova-agriculture-
competitiveness-project WB (2014) Moldova Forest Policy Note, World Bank


                                                                                              - 75 -
World Bank (2016) Moldova Poverty Assessment 2016
Zimmermann, N.E., Reyer, C., Lasch, P., Suckow, F., Poulter, B., Meier, E.S. (2011). Report on
projected species and productivity shifts.
http://motive-project.net/files/DOWNLOAD2/MOTIVE_D24_2011_PIK-WSL_final_small_2.pdf




                                                                                        - 76 -
