                              ACS10004 v2




AGRICULTURE GLOBAL PRACTICE



THE FRUIT OF HER LABOR
PROMOTING GENDER-EQUITABLE
AGRIBUSINESS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA

COFFEE SECTOR

December 2014
THE FRUIT OF HER LABOR
PROMOTING GENDER-EQUITABLE
AGRIBUSINESS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA
COFFEE SECTOR


I. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
The World Bank Group recently completed a study of gender issues in three
agribusiness supply chains in Papua New Guinea (PNG), including coffee.
It found women to be key to ensuring quality in agriculture. Therefore, it
recommends that if PNG wants to export better quality coffee, it needs to
focus on the contribution of women; improving their skills and capacities,
and giving women a greater share of the benefits.

Agriculture accounts for approximately one-third of GDP, and the sector is
dominated by smallholders.
Photos by Conor Ashleigh and World Bank


The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                     2
   The coffee industry in PNG is a major contributor to national income
   and employment. Almost three million people depend directly or
   indirectly on coffee for their livelihoods.

   The industry is made up of about 400,000 households, 680 blocks,
   7 plantations, 17 registered exporters, 59 registered processors and over
   6,000 roadside buyers.

   Productivity is low, with yields on average 30-50 percent of their
   potential, and quality has also been deteriorating. Arabica coffee
   comprises more than 95 percent of production and exports, while
    robusta accounts for less than 5 percent. On a global scale, PNG is a
   modest exporter, ranking 13 among 39 arabica exporters, or about
   1 percent of world market share.


This document summarizes the main findings and recommendations relating
to the coffee sector from the joint World Bank-IFC report The Fruit of Her
Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea.

The Fruit of Her Labor report and sector summaries were prepared by
consultants C. Mark Blackden (mblackden@comcast.net) and Maxie
Makambo Dominic (makambo020368@gmail.com), under the overall
guidance of Anuja Utz (autz@worldbank.org) and Amy Luinstra
(aluinstra@ifc.org).

For more information visit www.worldbank.org/png.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                       3
II. SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL FINDINGS
The main findings of the analysis are:
   »» Women are key to quality. Women play an important role in time-
      critical and quality-relevant tasks in coffee production, harvesting, and
      processing.
   »» Labor dynamics affect outcomes in the sector. Much labor is
      allocated for “social” purposes, and labor shortages exist, especially at
      critical production/processing times. Labor constraints are especially
      apparent when the gender division of labor is explicitly taken into
      account.
   »» Critical services are lacking. Provision of services, including
      inputs, extension, training, and finance, is limited and poorly targeted.
      Gender-specific tasks and needs are insufficiently integrated into the
      design and delivery of extension and training services.


The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                     4
III. KEY ISSUES IN THE COFFEE SECTOR

A) Quality
Women provide substantial labor in coffee cultivation. More important than
the amount of labor women provide, analysis of the coffee supply chain
indicates that the specific tasks women undertake have a substantial bearing on
the quality of the final product.

Women are directly engaged at critical stages of coffee production and
processing: picking (often strip picking) cherry, pulping, fermenting, and
drying. These are time-critical tasks: they must be undertaken promptly
in relation to harvesting, and for a specific amount of time. These tasks
substantially determine the quality of the coffee delivered to the exporter.

The recent IFC baseline study for the coffee growing areas in the two
Highlands provinces supported by the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture
Project (PPAP) (Murray-Prior 2014) shows men’s and women’s perceptions of
their role in various coffee-related and other tasks (Table 1). Of note is that
women see themselves as having more of a role than men in weeding, picking,
milling, and drying; as being involved in selling (albeit not to the same extent
as men); and as having a role in land clearing. These perceptions also bear out
the disproportionate burden of domestic work that falls on women.



The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                       5
          TABLE 1: PERCEPTIONS OF ROLES IN KEY COFFEE
                 AND DOMESTIC TASKS (PERCENT)
                      Activity                             Men       Women
 Land Clearing                                             78            76
 Planting                                                  73            48
 Weeding                                                   61            77
 Picking                                                   53            83
 Wet Milling                                               48            58
 Drying                                                    49            62
 Selling                                                   82            61
 Domestic Chores                                           25            96
 Source: Murray-Prior 2014.

Three inter-related issues affect women’s ability to contribute to improving the
quality of coffee. These are:
    »» Incentives: The economic incentives for women either to allocate
       sufficient labor to these quality-defining tasks, or, equally importantly,
       to do them well, are low. There is a substantial gap between the work
       done by women in the coffee sector and the benefit they obtain. In fact,
       as one study notes, although average returns to labor were found to be
       higher for coffee than in food production, women persevered with the
       heavy and less rewarding work of planting, harvesting, and carrying
       food crops because the incentives were better. They exercised more
       personal control over production, could intentionally produce a surplus
       over subsistence requirements for sale, and were able to control and
       spend most of cash earned from selling food crops (World Bank n.d.).
    »» Knowledge and Information: Women’s access to the knowledge
       and skills required to carry out these tasks is extremely limited as gaps
       in education, literacy, skills, and participation in extension and training
       activities persist.
       There are important gender differences in access to resources and
       knowledge to carry out coffee operations (Table 2).




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                       6
     »» Socio-Cultural Dynamics: There are important gender-specific
        dynamics at work in PNG society that differentially affect men’s and
        women’s capacity to exercise economic agency. PNG society is largely
        patriarchal, and, even in matrilineal regions, men are seen as household
        heads and primary decision-makers.

       TABLE 2: GENDER DIFFERENCES IN ACCESSING
     KNOWLEDGE IN KEY AREAS OF COFFEE CULTIVATION
                              Item                          Men       Women
 Training in post-harvest processing (percent receiving)     57          11
 Training in coffee nursery (percent receiving)              54           8
 Training in coffee marketing (percent receiving)            56          12
 Rating of usefulness of                                     4.4         3.6
 post-harvest training (5=best)
 Topic information on                                        38           9
 post-harvest processing
 (percent accessing)
 Overall training                                            50        10-15
 (percent receiving)
 Source: Murray-Prior 2014.



B) Labor
Labor issues have far-reaching implications for the performance of the sector.
Of particular importance are gender differences in labor allocation and in
rewards to labor, and the ways in which social and economic factors intersect
in determining labor use.
    »» The economic potential of the coffee sector is poorly
       understood by smallholder farmers. Because coffee earnings are
       seasonal, farmers see coffee as a “mechanism to facilitate livelihoods,”
       and not as an enterprise seeking maximum output and return (in some
       instances leading smallholders to replace coffee with fresh produce).




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                       7
   If you can give a community an opportunity to be part of what is
   happening, they become very innovative. People need to see that there is
   opportunity.
   −Theresa Arek, Director, Amruqa.
     »» Much labor is allocated for social purposes. Social factors and
        obligations, including church and community work, are at least as im-
        portant as economic ones in determining labor use, whether for coffee
        cultivation or other economic activities. Consequently, relationships
        along the supply chain can be seen to have at least as much to do with
        clan and culture as with product characteristics and market dynamics.

              TABLE 3: LABOR ALLOCATION BY TASK AND SEX,
                       1993 (HOURS/WORKER/DAY)
                            Task                           Male      Female
         Food                                              1.21        4.31
         Coffee                                            0.67        0.96
         Household                                         0.41        2.69
         Total                                             2.29        7.96
         Source: Overfield 1998.
     »» Farmers experience labor shortages: Households do not have
        enough labor to do all the things they need to do, or to do the things at
        the right time and in the right way.

Data from the 1990s indicate that the division of labor is unequal: women
work nearly 3.5 times as much as men, especially when household work is
included, on which women spend 6.5 times as much time as men do. Even in
the coffee sector, where there is the greatest parity in labor allocation, women
still allocate nearly half as much time again as men do (Table 3). Moreover,
it is specifically during the “flush” period from April to August, when coffee
is harvested, that the female labor constraint is most apparent (Overfield
1998:55).




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                       8
C) Services
Provision of services – including inputs, extension, training/capacity-building
and finance – is limited and poorly targeted, and gender-specific tasks and
needs are insufficiently integrated into the design and delivery of extension
and training services. In addition to the limited reach and focus of extension
services, other key services are often not available to smallholders. Input supply
is weak and inconsistent. There is limited access to financial services, and
important gender-specific barriers persist, as women tend not to own the land,
fixed assets, or other resources that are needed to meet collateral requirements.

Certification schemes pursue a range of social and environmental
sustainability goals. For the most part, gender issues are not especially
prominent in certification schemes, though opportunities exist to promote
more gender-responsive schemes. The PPAP baseline survey indicates that 13
percent of households claim to have any knowledge of certification (2 percent
have “strong” knowledge). Around 8 percent reported having certification for
their coffee, and of these, half expressed little or no interest in continuing.
Half of the households surveyed were not interested in paying for certification,
a finding which suggests, according to the baseline survey, that the benefits of
certification are not sufficient to justify paying for it.

Beyond these sector issues, broader systemic issues persist in PNG and affect
sector performance. In addition to the well-documented issues of poor or
non-existent infrastructure, especially transport and communications,
PNG suffers from pervasive insecurity and violence, including domestic
violence, which disproportionately affect women and their ability to
operate as economic agents in the sector. Lack of information, knowledge,
communications and services (including education and health), more generally,
is a further systemic barrier to gender-equitable agribusiness.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                      9
IV. PRINCIPAL COMMENDATIONS FOR
STAKEHOLDERS IN THE SECTOR
All stakeholders have a role to play in improving outcomes for women in the
sector. Key actions identified include:
     »» Incentives: Improve the capacity of women to benefit directly
        from the income earned in the coffee sector by facilitating direct
        payment systems, by aggregating production through cooperatives,
        and by supporting training and sensitization efforts (including through
        personal viability−PV−training) aimed at shifting cultural norms
        relating to women’s economic contribution.
     »» Knowledge: Improve quality through better training in production
        and processing techniques. Re-focus extension and training messages
        toward the quality-enhancing tasks for which women are responsible.
        Adopt a specific target (30-40 percent) for female participation.
        Consider establishing quality protocols at each step of the supply
        chain, outlining the critical steps (and who does them) involved in
        maximizing quality. Ensure that these protocols are integrated into
        extension and training packages. Analyze labor dynamics in the
        sector, through commissioning time use surveys and research on the
        gender division of labor for key tasks, including domestic work and
        returns to labor.
     »» Certification: It is estimated that around 5 percent of PNG coffee
        exports are “specialty” coffees, and this is an important entry point
        in the sector. It is critical to examine the extent to which certification
        schemes in the coffee sector (Rainforest Alliance, 4C, UTZ, Fair
        Trade, Organic) include gender equality provisions in capturing
        “social” co-benefits, how these provisions are being implemented,
        and how compliance is monitored.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                       10
References


Murray-Prior, Roy, 2014. IFC Agribusiness PNG: Monpi Coffee Exports and Monpi Cocoa
Exports Baseline Study, Draft Final Report, Prepared for International Finance Corporation,
AgriBiz RD&E Services, (mimeo).
Murray-Prior, Roy, and Anna Padarath, 2013. Evaluation of the Structure and Performance
of the CIC Extension Service, Report prepared for the PNG Coffee Industry Corporation and
the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project Coffee Component, Final Report, [Port
Moresby], August.
Overfield, Duncan, 1998. “An Investigation of the Household Economy: Coffee Production
and Gender Relations in Papua New Guinea,” Journal of Development Studies 38 (5) 52-70.
World Bank, n.d. Gender Issues in Smallholder Cocoa and Coffee Production, Productive
Partnerships in Agriculture Project (mimeo).
The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable Agribusiness Development in Papua
New Guinea, World Bank Group, Port Moresby and Sydney, 2014.




The Fruit of Her Labor: Promoting Gender-Equitable
Agribusiness in Papua New Guinea - Coffee Sector Summary                                11
