  Report No: ACS10221



  World
  Improving the Performance of
  Community-Managed Revolving Loan Funds
  Through Mobile Technology


  September 24, 2014




  GGODR
  OTHER




Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                             Implementation Completion Report
          Improving the Performance of Community-managed Revolving Loan Funds
                           Through Mobile Technology (P149180)


Innovation Rationale

One of poverty reduction programs in Indonesia (PNPM Urban) includes productive microloan for
poor households through community-managed revolving loan funds (RLF). As of May 2014, in the
World Bank funded project area, there are around 6,500 urban-wards with Financial Management
Unit called Unit Pengelola Keuangan (UPK) operating Revolving Loan Fund (RLF), providing
services to more than 445,000 borrower groups (Kelompok Swadaya Masyarakat - KSM), with an
estimated outreach of more than 2.2 million individual borrowers.

The RLF activity faces the following challenges:
 Inadequate capacity of UPK in management of funds leading to poor performance of the RLF
   portfolio as indicated by high balance of non-performing loans and inadequate accounting and
   financial reporting
 Lack of accountability and transparency leading to some cases of misuse of fund
 UPK staff do not have regular communication with KSM groups that contributes to low
   commitment savings and low awareness among KSM members about group liability
 High turnover of UPK staff due to administrative burden and low incentive

UPK staffs spend inordinate amounts of time for a lot of tasks, such as copying information stored in
paper records and collecting loan repayments, rather than on more value-added tasks such as signing
up new clients, providing training on RLF scheme, promote savings, and disseminate information on
the RLF program to the communities.

The challenges faced by RLF activity above were captured during implementation support review.
This is supported by information in PNPM Urban database, there were about 60% of UPKs have
non-performing loan in excess of 20% of their portfolio in August 2013. In a report prepared by
Micro-Credit Ratings International Limited, “PNPM Mandiri: Consolidated Assessment of UPK
RLF in Indonesia”, it is stated that the motivation of UPK staff is low due to heavy workload and
little incentives. The report also advises that UPK needs capacity building, especially in dealing with
non-performing loans.

Aims

Using funds provided by the World Bank through FY 14 Innovation Challenge, a pilot project was
implemented to improve performance of the RLF activity in the piloted cities. The intention was to
improve UPKs’ management, transparency, and accountability, by (i) introducing basic computer
skills at UPKs, (ii), using FrontlineSMS application to help UPK communicate with KSMs, and (iii)
using a bookkeeping application software to help UPK administration.

The original idea was to use combination of FrontlineSMS and mobile money services to assist
UPKs in performing their tasks related to RLF monitoring and banking transactions. FrontlineSMS,
a free source application, enables users to manage and receive mobile payments, support automated
confirmation messages and client queries on loan/account balances, facilitate reminders on overdue
payments, and keep track on banking transactions. Mobile money services will make it possible for
borrower groups to repay installments using mobile phone without requiring a bank account and
internet connection. To complement the system, a bookkeeping application would be developed in
formats similar to that of current paper-based bookkeeping.

Government support

The Bank has been providing assistance for more than a decade to the Government of Indonesia
(GOI) for PNPM Urban. The Implementing Agency, Ministry of Public Works, is aware of
weaknesses noted in implementation support mission reports and project audit reports. Therefore,
they are very supportive with this pilot project to help community groups in their administration.
Pilot cities/districts were decided based on several criteria agreed in consultation with the
Government prior to implementation.

The Government also wanted to capture the knowledge within the project through capacity building
for the PNPM project consultants in pilot area, an idea fully supported by the Bank. This created the
opportunity to continue with possible replication in other project area with Government’s own
resources, once the pilot was successful.

Early Lessons in Implementation

The implementation started late in April 2014, due to difficulties in findings an individual consultant
who could develop the system. After recruiting IT and Training consultants, the Bank team started
by introducing the concept to PNPM project team at provincial and city/district level of pilot areas.
This was followed by meetings with representatives of community groups to get their feedback as
ultimate user of the product. The team also met with commercial bank to assess further about mobile
money services. Based on the discussion and feedback from the field, the team decided to make
some changes with the design.

The proposal basically consists of two main components: (1) using FrontlineSMS and linked with
community groups banking transactions, and (2) developing bookkeeping application for community
groups. It was expected that the bookkeeping application would be linked to the banking transactions
generated from FrontlineSMS application, hence the bank transaction data will be fed directly to the
bookkeeping application. After first visit to the pilot areas and dialogs with community groups and
commercial bank, we realized that it was difficult to implement the first component due to the
following reasons:
(a)    existing SMS banking service that allowed borrower groups (KSM) transfer to community
       groups account for loan repayments without KSM having bank account in that particular
       commercial bank required UPK to open bank account in that commercial bank – therefore
       limiting involvement of commercial banks.
(b)    The commercial bank described above only has cooperation with one cellular service
       provider, therefore limiting cellular service providers. It did not seem to be practical to ask
       the community to change their cellular service providers and banks, especially when
       considering to scaling up the innovation throughout the country. From market share
       percentage, this could mean that up to 60% of communities need to switch provider.
(c)    Many KSM members were very traditional and objected to the idea of having bank
       transactions without paper trail. Through this innovation, it was proposed to help UPK in
       collecting loan repayment from KSMs. Agents deployed by commercial bank were expected
       to act as fund collectors in remote areas and then deposit the amount to the nearest bank
       branch (e.g. at sub-district level). Afterwards, KSM group could have checked their balance
       through their cellphone and transferred the loan repayment to UPK account using SMS
       banking, where UPK would have received the information through FrontlineSMS application
       in their computers. Although all transactions were expected to be recorded by the bank and
       UPK, KSM members would only have text messages as proof of transfer.
(d)    The Bank team could not assure that KSM group would continue to have cellphones.
       Community groups advised that sometimes members sold their phones when they needed
       money for other urgent needs.

Therefore the first component was revised where the FrontlineSMS would only be used for UPK to
send loan information to KSM groups, such as repayments dates, amount due, etc. The Bank team is
still working on the possibility to use FrontlineSMS for KSM groups where they can check their loan
balance by sending text message to UPK database and receive automatic response from the database.

Progress so far
Two areas located in East Java were selected for piloting, i.e. Blitar area (covering city and district)
and Sidoarjo district. Those areas were selected based on the following criteria:
      Areas with moderate RLF performance history
      UPK familiarity with and easy access to computer, and
      Support from the local governments.
The pilot has delivered Training of Trainers for 42 PNPM Urban project consultants and community
facilitators, and user training for 80 UPK staff on using bookkeeping and FrontlineSMS application.
Training of Trainers was held in Surabaya on June 4 - 7, 2014. This was followed by Training of
Users for UPK from Blitar city and district on June 9 - 11, 2014, and UPK from Sidoarjo district on
June 11 - 13, 2014. As the bookkeeping application was not completed yet, the trainings were
conducted using “dummy” application. Interface and data flows were ready but data could not be
stored. Nevertheless, the project consultants and UPK staff were very enthusiastic and looked
forward to the full product.

While the bookkeeping application is still in development stage, the three pilot trainings that have
been held in East Java served as a try out and provided great insights into the actual use of the
software. Much constructive feedbacks have been received for improvement and further
development of the software. The training will be followed-up with rolling out the bookkeeping and
FrontlineSMS applications at urban-ward level after the application is completed.

The following training modules were specially developed and used for this pilot project:
      Trainer’s Guide: UPK Bookkeeping Software and FrontlineSMS
      User Manual: Computer for Beginners
      User Manual: UPK Bookkeeping Software
      User Manual: FrontlineSMS


With its highly technical content, training on UPK bookkeeping software and FrontlineSMS featured
a lot of simulation exercises, where participants practiced directly on their computers and simulated
through a set of scenarios to ensure good comprehension of the topics. “User Manual: Computer for
Beginners” was developed later as the team found many UPK staff were not familiar with
computers.

Disbursement

Total expenditure as of June 30, 2014 was USD 54,683 or represents 55% of allocated fund. Many
factors contributed for low disbursement, as follow:
-       Undisbursed consulting services cost, which represents 22% of allocated fund, due to the
        following: (a) individual consultants hired only worked for 65 days instead of 90 days
        planned due to delay in hiring, and (b) cost saving since the Bank team are utilizing from
       available resources from existing project (PNPM Urban project consultants) for some of the
       activities, e.g. selection of pilot areas, facilitating with local governments, and training for
       UPK staff.
-      As the application was not fully running before the close of the project, end line survey and
       the dissemination workshop activities were not carried out. This category represents 16% of
       total allocated fund.
-      Undisbursed/lower travel costs, which represent 5% of allocated fund, due to the following
       reasons: (a) budget estimated was for three cities/districts in different provinces, the pilot was
       only done in two cities in the same province (East Java), and (b) User Training was done
       within the same week and in cities nearby, hence reduced airfares.
-      Lower costs for goods procured (GSM modem devices) as one area for piloting was
       cancelled (from three to two cities/districts) due to the Government’s request. There was also
       cost efficiency since the goods were procured in bulk. This represents 2% of allocated fund.

Next Step

The bookkeeping application is still in development stage. The IT consultant is still working on the
data storage codes for bookkeeping, financial report and KSM database. It will be followed by link
the application with Frontline SMS for communication purposes. It is expected to be completed by
October 2014.

After full product is completed, the team will start with full deployment in 40 UPK that have been
trained. Support will be provided to UPK by PNPM Project consultant to ensure integrity and
accuracy of the data. This will be followed by data validation by PNPM project consultants before
full migration of bookkeeping.

The main goal of the innovation is to improve performance of the RLF activity in the piloted cities
by improving its management, transparency, and accountability. Progress towards this goal will be
measured by lowering the percentage of non-performing loans in UPK, and timelines in financial
records and reporting. Since the pilot project is closed, this will be monitored with support of the
TTL of PNPM Urban and the Government through PNPM Urban project monitoring system. This
can be done through existing mechanism of assessment of community groups’ financial management
performance indicators reported on monthly basis by communities’ facilitators.

This will be followed by handing over the application to the Government for possible replication in
other areas. The project consultants trained through TOT have expressed their willingness in
assisting with trainings to user in other locations.

Scaling Up

The idea of using mobile technology and software application can be adopted anywhere for similar
projects (micro credit with CDD-type of project). It offers simplification of sharing information that
contributes to project monitoring and bookkeeping process that will help community groups with
limited accounting skills.

Even without having fully running application, the Government, the project consultants and UPK
involved for piloting are very keen on the idea as they see this innovation helping them with some of
their issues. The application is designed by individual consultant made from scratch using local
language, hence is easier to operate for UPK. The application interface is familiar to UPK as it is
very similar to manual forms. Rather than manually writing in 14 separate books and reporting
forms, UPK only needs to do one time input per transaction that will generate those different books
and reports by using this application.

Lessons Learned

The pilot benefited from Government’s full support. PNPM Urban project consultants that already
trained will be able to extend the knowledge to the communities. Although the grant is closed, the
innovation continues to receive their support. The Bank team also benefited with full support from
the TTL and task team of PNPM Urban who facilitated the initial dialog with the Government.

In terms of designing the application, the team struggled with the timing. Two months is a very short
period to develop an IT application from scratch and conduct full cycle of testing to ensure the
application is running well. Lack of experience in developing IT product is also main contributor of
this problem. At the later stage, the team realized it would be better to separate tasks between
application design and system programmer. The IT consultant took some time to understand the flow
of bookkeeping before translated them to system codes. If we separated the work of designing the
application and building the system, these tasks could have been done simultaneously and completed
sooner.

Introducing IT product to communities is another challenge. The team needed to change the project
design to adapt with their needs. It is important to ensure that they will use the product. Listening to
clients is the key. In the past, accounting software was introduced but they were not interested as it
was difficult to operate, the application was not in local language, and it used accounting terms
which they do not understand.

To ensure the transfer knowledge has been done in a sustainable way, it is important to design
trainings where the participants can demonstrate that they have the capability to mentor and assist
others beyond the project time. The modules need to be completed with troubleshooting to ensure
they would be able to resolve any issues when operating the application.
