Report No: ACS10444



Republic of Honduras
Strategy and Action Program for WSS in Small
Towns in Honduras
Water and Sanitation Service Provision in Small Town in Honduras


June 2016




GWASL
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN




                                                      i
June 2016




        ii
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-
8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                               iii
Table of Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms                                                                        v

Executive Summary                                                                                 1

1.     Purpose and Methodology                                                                    7
     1.1 Overview of the Technical Assistance                                                     7
     1.2 Overview of the Methodology                                                              8

2.    Country and Sector Background                                                              11

3.     Assessment of WSS Service Provision in Small towns                                        13
     2.1 Urbanization and Small Towns in Honduras                                                13
     2.2 Legal and Institutional Framework                                                       15
     2.3 WSS Service Provision Models                                                            17
     2.4 Institutionalization of Citizen Participation at Small Town WSS Service Providers       23
     2.5 Status of WSS Provision in Small Towns                                                  23
     2.6 Investment in WSS Provision for Small Towns                                             28
     2.7 Institutional Capacity at Small Town WSS Providers                                      29

4.     Mancomunidades—Joint Service Provision and Pooled Support Services                        31
     4.1 Joint Service Provision—Aguas del Valle                                                 33
     4.2 Pooled Support Services—Mancomunidad Güisayote                                          38
     4.3 Takeaways from Experiences with Mancomunidades                                          39

5.     Capacity Building for Small Town WSS Service Provision                                    40
     5.1 On-the-Job Training for Small Town Providers                                            40
     5.2 Formal Training for Local TA Providers for Small Towns                                  44

6.     Policy Guidance for WSS Service Provision                                                 44
     6.1 Strategic Guidelines for SANAA Technical Assistance in Small Towns                      44
     6.2 Increased Visibility of Small Towns in Sector Planning Instruments                      46

7.     Outcomes, Lessons Learned, and Future Engagement                                          48
     7.1 Overview of TA Outcomes                                                                 48
     7.2 Development Financing Informed and Leveraged                                            49
     7.3 Knowledge Creation—Broadening the Knowledge Base to optimize technical and financial
     resources                                                                                   49
     7.4 Government and Donor Policy and Strategy Informed                                       50
     7.5 Strengthened Client Capacity—Importance of Strengthening Ongoing Technical Assistance   52

References                                                                                       59




                                                                                                 iv
 Abbreviations and Acronyms
AECID      Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo (Spanish Agency for
           International Development Cooperation)
AMASM      Asociación de Municipios para Agua Saneamiento y Medio Ambiente (Association of
           Municipalities for Water, Sanitation, and the Environment)
AMHON      Asociación de Municipios de Honduras (Honduran Association of Municipalities)
CENET      Centro Nacional de Educación para el Trabajo (National Center for Labor Training)
COMAS      Comité Municipal de Agua y Saneamiento (Municipal Water and Sanitation Committee)
CONASA     Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (National Water and Sanitation Council)
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
CRI        Climate Risk Index
CWB        Junta de Agua Comunitaria (Community Water Board)
ERSAPS     Ente Regulador de los Servicios de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (National Water and
           Sanitation Service Regulator)
FOCARD     Foro Centroamericano y República Dominicana de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (Central
           American and Dominican Republic Forum for Drinking Water and Sanitation)
FONASAN    Fondo Nacional Agua y Saneamiento (National Water and Sanitation Fund)
ICT        information and communications technology
JAPOE      Junta de Agua de la Comunidad de Jesus de Otoro (Jesus de Otoro Community Water Board)
MAMUCA     Mancomunidad de Municipios del Corredor Atlántico (Association of Municipalities of the
           Atlantic Corridor)
MANOF      Mancomunidad de Municipios del Norte de Francisco Morazán (Association of Municipalities
           of Northern Francisco Morazán)
MAPAS      Monitoreo de los Avances de País en Agua Potable y Saneamiento (Monitoring Country
           Progress in Water and Sanitation)
PER        public expenditure review
PIAPS      Plan Integrado de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (Integrated Water and Sanitation Plan)
PLANASA    Plan Nacional de Agua y Saneamiento (National Water and Sanitation Plan)
PROMOSAS   Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project
PIU        project implementing unit
SANAA      Servicio Autónomo Nacional de Acueductos y Alcantarillados National Autonomous Water
           and Sewage Agency
SCD        Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDC        Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
SEFIN      Secretaría de Finanzas (Secretariat of Finance)
SIASAR     Rural Water and Sanitation Information System
SPI        Simple Performance Index
TA         technical assistance
UDASJI     Unidad Descentralizada de Agua y Saneamiento de San Juan (Decentralized Water and
           Sanitation Unit of San Juan)
UNAH       Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras (National Autonomous University of Honduras)
UPI        Universidad Politécnica de Ingeniería de Honduras (Polytechnic Engineering University of
           Honduras)
USCL       Unidad de Supervisio?n y Control Local (Local Control and Supervision Unit)
WOP        water operator partnerships
WSS        water supply and sanitation



                                                                                                  v
Executive Summary
Poor water supply and sanitation (WSS) service provision at the municipal level led to
the concentration of authority under the National Water and Sewerage Service (Servicio
Autónomo Nacional de Acueductos y Alcantarillados, SANAA) in the mid-1900s. Fifty
years hence, the pendulum swung back to the decentralization of WSS services after the
difficulties encountered by a single public entity in developing and managing the WSS
operations of an entire country. Decentralization of public services aims to improve
service quality by vesting decision making power in local authorities with a better
understanding of local realities, and who are more accountable for their performance to
voters.1 This culminated in the passage of 2003 Water and Sanitation Framework Law,
which decentralizes WSS service provision in Honduras. The law delegates WSS service
provision authority to municipalities, who in turn establish the service provision model to
use within their jurisdiction. As of mid-2016, 13 WSS systems have yet to be transferred
to municipalities on account of lingering questions about employee salaries and local
capacities; these concerns are particularly pronounced in the nine small towns that have
not yet received transfer. At the same time, Honduras is urbanizing and small towns are
growing, especially along the GoH’s identified Development Corridors.2 The government
recognized that establishing sound institutional models while small towns are still small
will help avoid problems of unplanned urban growth that bedevil large cities in Honduras
and across Latin America.

Within this context, the government of Honduras (GoH) requested Bank support to take
stock of water supply and sanitation (WSS) service delivery in small towns and build
institutional capacity to provide sustainable WSS service management in small towns.
Donor bandwidth in the WSS sector in Honduras in recent years has focused on large
metropolitan areas, namely Tegucigalpa, and rural areas. This TA is an initial effort to
strengthen support for, and increase visibility of, WSS service provision in small towns
of 5,000 to 30,000 inhabitants, which total 53 nationwide and account for approximately
40 percent of the country’s rapidly expanding urban population outside of the major cities
of Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula. The GoH seeks to institutionalize effective
management practices in small towns that can grow with the local populations.

Technical assistance for small towns compliments the Bank’s broader water engagement
in Honduras, including the flagship US$40 million Water and Sanitation Sector
Modernization Project (PROMOSAS, P103881), that included support to two small
towns as part of the US$10 Additional Financing set to close in December 2016. The
Bank is also supporting government planning and management capacity through several

1
  Introducing Accountability and Transparency to Water and Sanitation Services in Honduras through
Enhanced User Participation, World Bank Institute, January 2010,
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSOCACCDEMSIDEGOV/Resources/2871813-
1200515311988/4577172-1271445400159/notes01_honduras.pdf.
2
  The “Honduras economic corridors?, defined as settlements (rural and urban) located in a catchment area
of 10 kilometers alongside the primary paved axis of the country, that articulate the “mayor and
intermediate cities? of Honduras. This area is considered of economic importance due to the concentration
of population


                                                                                                            1
complimentary technical assistance activities, including work on sector financial policy,
national water and sanitation plan, basin approaches to sanitation, and climate resilience.
The results of this TA, which leveraged activities across the Bank portfolio in Honduras,
have better positioned small towns to improve WSS service delivery through policy,
planning and financing mechanisms, and visibility that improves access to capital
through, stronger capacities at service providers, and more readily available technical
assistance providers. Similarly, the results of the TA seed the ground for continued
dialogue between the Bank and government of Honduras in the WSS sector following the
closing of PROMOSAS. Much of the learning about small towns also scales laterally to
inform WSS service provision in the peri-urban areas that encircle major cities.

Overview of TA Objectives and Deliverables
The TA set out to achieve four objectives: (i) inform development financing to improve
WSS service in small towns; (ii) inform government policy and strategy through the
national sector policy instruments; (iii) strengthen capacity of small town WSS service
providers; and (iv) deepen and disseminate knowledge around WSS service provision in
small towns.

The TA deliverables are structured around three pillars. The first pillar supported
knowledge creation through (a) the preparation of an assessment of WSS service
provision in small towns, and (b) the documentation of the mancomunidad joint service
provider model. The second pillar supported capacity building for (a) small town service
provider staff and (b) local technical assistance providers. The third pillar informed
government policy for the provision of technical assistance for small town WSS
providers and increased the visibility of small towns for the government and donors alike.
This package of activities was intended to better position small towns to improve WSS
service provision going forward.

Pillar 1: Knowledge Creation
The first deliverable of the TA was an assessment of the unique set of service provision
challenges in small towns. The TA conducted a thorough desk review of the dispersed
data sources and limited existing studies on WSS service provision in small towns and a
series of field visits to bring together an assessment of the status of WSS services for the
first time. The TA documented that WSS coverage remains limited in small towns—only
79 percent of residents have access to improved sources of drinking water. Moreover,
those families that do have drinking water service cannot count on potable water to flow
from the tap, as continuity averages just 11 hours/day, with some towns going days at a
time with no water. Sector authorities indicate that few small town providers chlorinate
water, though water quality data is not widely or systematically gathered. Some 20 small
towns lack sewage networks, and of those that do have sewerage systems, only 13 route
that wastewater to a treatment plant before discharge, leading to concerns about human
health and the deterioration of water resources. Through the process of analyzing existing
data, the TA highlighted numerous areas to strengthen data collection by national
authorities to improve decision making by national authorities. According to data
gathered under the TA, the average tenure of an employee at a small town WSS provider
is 2.6 years and this short tenure contributes to limited capacity at service providers.


                                                                                          2
Despite the capacity constraints, insufficient financing for infrastructure remains a
minding constraint in many small towns. In sum, the TA made an important contribution
by documenting key service provision challenges and avenues by which small towns in
Honduras can improve the coverage and quality of drinking water and sanitation service
delivery.

The second deliverable under the knowledge creation pillar of the TA responded to a
request from the GoH to analyze the applicability of the mancomunidad model—a legally
constituted association of municipalities—in the WSS sector. Mancomunidades have
generated positive results in other sectors in Honduras and across Central America and
has the potential to help small municipalities and small town providers overcome
constraints associated with lack of capacity and economies of scale. The Bank, through
the US$30 million Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project (PROMOSAS),
provided technical assistance for the formation of the Aguas del Valle mancomunidad,
the first joint WSS service provider in Honduras. The TA analyzed the process and
documented lessons learned from the first year of operations.

Aguas del Valle was legally established as a joint WSS service provider in September
2013 that merged the existing providers from the small towns of San Manuel and
Pimienta with the higher capacity provider in Villanueva. Active participation from
mayors, particularly in community engagement, was critical to build necessary political
support for the process, as was technical assistance financed by PROMOSAS starting in
2011. The joint service provider’s management staff is based in Villanueva and supports
field offices in San Manuel and Pimienta; WSS systems in the respective municipalities
remain physically independent. The TA found that the impact of the formation of the
joint service provider on service delivery is inconclusive at this early stage. Since the
establishment Aguas del Valle, the number of paying costumers has increased by 13
percent. Coverage has improved marginally from 96 percent in 2012 to 98 percent in
2014. Continuity across the three municipalities has not improved and remains below 8
hours/day. Data on water quality remain unavailable. At the same time, the process of
formally establishing the joint service provider occupied a significant amount of staff
energy that could have gone to other tasks, and administrative challenges remain in areas
spanning cost recovery, nonrevenue water, and late payments.

Another application of the mancomunidad legal framework documented under the TA is
in the provision of shared support services for WSS providers. The Güisayote
mancomunidad, linking five municipalities in the Department of Ocotopeque, pools
resources to provide technical assistance to independent WSS service providers. In this
case, support services have been particularly useful in watershed management, and the
municipalities have not found it necessary to establish a joint service provider. Indeed,
WSS system infrastructure in one of the member municipalities, La Labor, is operated
concurrently by two independent service providers under a longstanding, informal
agreement. Pooled support services under the framework of a mancomunidad appear to
be an effective approach to make technical knowhow more accessible to small
communities.




                                                                                       3
The analytical work carried out under the TA found that the mancomunidad model, with
its different applications, shows promise as one alternative to enhance service provision
in small urban areas. Expanded markets could potentially encourage private participation,
which is absent in small towns in Honduras today. Nevertheless, the multiyear process of
forming the Aguas del Valle joint service provider, and political capital required on the
part of local leaders, occupied staff bandwidth though has not yet markedly improved
service delivery. Shared infrastructure would create stronger incentives for regional
collaboration through mancomunidades, though it is not clear that such opportunities
exist today in small towns in Honduras. In the near to medium term, the pooled support
service model employed by the Güisayote mancomunidad appears to offer more tangible
benefits than the formation of a joint service provider in the Honduran context.

Pillar 2: Capacity Building
The second stream of activities carried out under the TA designed and implemented
training courses for (a) the staff of small town service providers and (b) local technical
assistance providers. As a result of these courses, Honduras is on firmer ground to offer
the ongoing support that small town WSS providers will need in the years to come.

Recognizing the unique challenges facing small towns and the demand for capacity
building and on-call support emanating from providers in those areas, the National Water
and Sanitation Service Regulator (Ente Regulador de los Servicios de Agua Potable y
Saneamiento, ERSAPS) and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)
developed a 10 module training curriculum for managers and employees of small town
WSS providers. Under the TA, the Bank partnered with SDC and the National Center for
Labor Training (CENET) to scale up this initiative, and in doing so deepened the
longstanding relationship in the water sector in Central America. Training in water-
specific topics is supplemented by capacity building in business management with the
goal of helping service providers think like a financial sustainable business, including
cost recovery. The expanded curriculum was tested with 21 small town service providers
in October 2015.

To bring the availability of TA and on-call support for small town or peri-urban WSS
services to national scale, Honduras needs to increase the number of individuals who
have formal training in the provision of such TA. To this end, the TA supported a
partnership with the Engineering Polytechnic University of Honduras (UPI) to develop
and finance a diploma program for local WSS service technicians. The first cohort of 18
technicians received their diplomas in December 2015. The process of designing and
implementing the courses built consolidated, local training capacity at CENET and UPI,
and the curricula are replicable and scalable.

Pillar 3: Government Policy Support
The TA supported government policy and enhanced opportunities and visibility of small
towns on two levels: (a) delivery of strategic guidelines for SANAA’s provision of
technical assistance to small towns and (b) leverage complimentary Bank supported
activities to increase the visibility of small towns in the national sector dialogue, policy,
planning, and financing instruments. Finally, the TA identified the successful


                                                                                           4
implementation of the Municipal Civil Service Law as a priority for the WSS sector and
an area for potential Bank support going forward.

First, the TA supported development of Strategic Guidelines for SANAA Technical
Assistance in Small Town to guide the transition of agency from the national WSS utility
to its new role as the government’s primary TA entity, as envisioned and approved in the
2003 Water Framework Law. The guidelines build on the assessment of WSS service
provision carried out under the knowledge creation pillar of this TA and the courses
carried out as part of the capacity building pillar to target the unique needs of service
providers in those areas. The guidelines address prioritization of support, development of
operational instruments, and specific themes such as WSS infrastructure in schools and
environmental sustainability, among other areas. SANAA has established a working
group to formally incorporate the strategic guidelines into the organization’s work plan
for small towns. Once operationalized, these guidelines will help SANAA strengthen its
role as a trusted partner for small town WSS providers and meet ongoing needs to
capacity building as well as one-off maintenance and repair issues.

Second, activities carried out under the TA have increased the visibility of small towns in
sector policy, planning, and financing instruments. The category of small towns was
formally included in the National Water and Sanitation Sector Policy, approved in March
2013, the National Water and Sanitation Plan (Plan Nacional de Agua Potable y
Saneamiento, PLANASA), approved in 2014, and the National Water Sector Financial
Policy, approved in 2015, that includes formal mechanisms to channel funds to small
towns. Complimentary Bank TAs supported preparation of these three instruments. These
government policy instruments create new avenues to help small towns overcome
financing constraints by explicitly considering small towns in the sector budgeting
process and opening up new financing mechanisms, such as results based contracts to
attract private participation. Likewise, raising the profile of small towns can help them
attract donor attention, which is often concentrated on rural areas and large cities.
Ultimately the inclusions in sector policy instruments and improved visibility of small
towns should allow them to improve service delivery.

Finally, the TA identified high turnover at WSS service providers, often coinciding with
political cycles, as key constraint to effective management. Rotation generates a
continual need for capacity building for new employees. The Honduran Municipal Civil
Service Law, in force since 2014, aims to create a standing corps of civil servants,
including at WSS providers. The law creates an opportunity to provide thorough training
to WSS staff who will then be able to apply and build on what they’re learned over the
course of their careers. The successful implementation of the Municipal Civil Service
Law should therefore be a long-term goal for the WSS sector and the process could
benefit from Bank support going forward.

Lessons Learned
The experience of carrying out the TA yielded important insights that will serve to
improve WSS service provision in small towns going forward. The first key takeaway is
that among the interrelated service provision challenges in Honduras, access to financing


                                                                                         5
for WSS system investments and maintenance remains a binding constraint for small
towns. The GoH, with Bank support, has begun to explore additional avenues for sector
financing, an effort which it will need to continue to meet its goals of universalizing
access to WSS services. Second, improving data collection by national authorities—from
the types of indicators tabulated to the way they are managed—would strengthen decision
making. Donor support can help build capacity to for the GoH to sustainably collect
needed data. Finally, short tenures of WSS service provider staff, coupled with low levels
of formal education in small towns, ensure that government and donor-provided technical
assistance will remain crucial for years to come. The GoH is now better positioned to
provide this needed TA in small towns, and the donor community will continue to play a
vital role in convening and financing these activities.

Fostering Continued Country Engagement
Capacity building delivered under this TA has supported the implementation of the one
water-related Bank investment operation in Honduras, PROMOSAS, and supports sector
dialogue going forward. An additional financing for PROMOSAS was approved in 2013
to extend some US$2 million infrastructure investments to two small providers that
benefited from managerial training under the TA. These two small towns have approved
a new tariff structure that encourages the sustainability of the PROMOSAS investments.
Nevertheless, a further nine small town systems await transfer from SANAA to
municipalities. A follow-on operation to PROMOSAS that specifically targets the
remaining small towns could help assuage concerns related to financial liabilities and
institutional capacity that hold back the decentralization process. Indeed, the TA found
that access to capital for investments is a binding constraint to improving WSS service
delivery in small towns, regardless of management and operational capacities. Fiscal
space remains tight and a request for a new operation in the WSS sector is not expected
in 2016, though the replicable results and strategic guidelines for support for small towns
developed under this TA outline avenues for continued engagement with the country’s
WSS sector institutions that could lead to a new investment operation in the future.

Conclusion
In summary, the TA created knowledge, strengthened capacity, and informed government
and donor policy vis-à-vis WSS service provision small towns in Honduras. Small town
WSS service providers have management and operational tools to improve service
delivery, and local institutions have developed the capacity to provide this training as
needed. The government has a clearer picture of the state of WSS services in small
towns and applicability of the mancomunidad model, specifically targeted policy actions
toward small towns, and is working to systematically improve its provision of technical
assistance. Taken together, these actions have better positioned small towns and the GoH
to expand and improve the quality and sustainability of the services they provide to
communities. Nevertheless, the findings of the TA reiterated that access to finance for
infrastructure investments, maintenance, and rehabilitation remains a binding constraint
to the provision of sustainable WSS services in small towns.




                                                                                         6
Output Report: Water and Sanitation Service Provision
in Small Towns in Honduras—Overview, Capacity
Constraints, and a Path Forward (P132283)
   1. Purpose and Methodology
   1.1 Overview of the Technical Assistance
The purpose of this technical assistance (TA) was to support the government of Honduras
(GoH) in assessing water supply and sanitation (WSS) service delivery in small towns
using available official data, build institutional capacity to provide sustainable WSS
service management in small towns, and increase visibility of small towns in sector
planning instruments. It responds to a request from the government and sector authorities,
including the National Water and Sanitation Council (Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable
y Saneamiento, CONASA), National Autonomous Water and Sewerage Agency
(Servicio Autónomo Nacional de Acueductos y Alcantarillados, SANAA), and the
National Water and Sanitation Service Regulator (Ente Regulador de los Servicios de
Agua Potable y Saneamiento, ERSAPS).

The TA delivered a package of activities intended to better position small towns to
improve WSS service provision. These activities are structured along three pillars, the
findings of which are summarized in this report. Pillar 1 created knowledge and delivered
(a) an assessment of WSS service provision in small towns, and (b) the documentation of
the mancomunidad joint service provider model. Pillar 2 strengthened capacity by
providing training for (a) small town service provider staff and (b) local technical
assistance providers. Pillar 3 informed government policy for the provision of technical
assistance for small town WSS providers and increased the visibility of small towns in
national sector planning instruments.

This report synthesizes the results and experiences of a comprehensive, participatory
process that contributed to strengthening WSS service delivery capacity at small town
providers and analytical capacity at sector institutions. The analytical work involved a
thorough document review of the sector’s legal and institutional underpinnings, field
visits with WSS providers and mancomunidades to collect data, as well as consultation
with national experts within and outside government. In partnership with the Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and based on the findings of its
analytical work and experience in training for small towns, a capacity-building
curriculum was developed and implemented at 21 small town WSS service providers.
The findings from the analytical work were also used in the preparation of guidelines for
a national strategy for intervention in the WSS sector in small towns. The sum of these
activities has strengthened the sector knowledge base, boosted managerial capacity at
small town providers, and informed policy to increase the visibility of small towns in the
national sector dialogue—taken together, small towns are better positioned to improve
WSS service delivery as a result of the TA. Moreover, the lone Bank investment
operation in the WSS sector in Honduras, the Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization



                                                                                        7
Project, PROMOSAS, will close in December 2016 and the TA has seeded the ground for
future engagement that could help lead to new Bank operations in the country.

   1.2 Overview of the Methodology
The methodology applied during this TA consisted of three key phases: (i) stock taking
and assessment, (ii) stakeholder consultation, and (iii) design and implementation of
further TA (Figure 1).

                              Figure 1 – Phases of the TA




The first phase of the TA entailed the gathering and preparation of documents with two
different ends: (i) an assessment providing an overview of the state of the water and
sanitation services delivered in the 53 small towns in Honduras, and (ii) documentation of
the experience of implementing a joint WSS service provider through the formation of a
mancomunidad that linked two small towns with a larger neighboring WSS provider.
Both documents were based on the existing, but limited, information gathered by
ERSAPS.

The second phase consisted of a series of workshops and meetings with central
government and municipal authorities, donors, and nongovernment organizations (NGOs)
to validate key messages from the WSS service provision assessment; provide inputs on
potential objectives of a government intervention strategy in small towns; and define a
training program, informed by the knowledge generated in the assessment, to strengthen
the managerial capacities of small town providers. The Water and Sanitation in




                                                                                        8
Towns/Schools initiative, financed and implemented by the SDC, served as the basis for
the training program piloted under this TA.3

The third phase consisted of implementing a series of tasks defined in previous phases: (i)
the adaptation of the SDC’s training program for providers of WSS service in small
towns, (ii) the definition of the criteria for the selection of the small towns that were to
benefit from the training programs, and (iii) the preparation of a set of general
recommendations to sector authorities to help establish a strategy for future interventions
in small towns. Consultations with key sector authorities, including ERSAPS, SANAA,
and CONASA, as well as small town and peri-urban WSS providers, enabled the
validation of the analytical work.

This output document was prepared by the Bank team to summarize the results and
lessons learned throughout the activities of this TA. Drawing the conclusions presented in
this document required gathering data through desk research combined with a series of
field visits and consultations with sector representatives, consultants, and staff involved
during the project.

This TA built on previous analytical work carried out by the Bank and the government of
Honduras that identified management capacity as a significant bottleneck to expanding
and sustaining WSS service provision. Table 1 offers a summary of findings from key
documents on analytical work in the sector that indicates a need to strengthen the
managerial and technical capacities of urban WSS providers. Analysis conducted of
urban providers nationwide is relevant to inform the discussion of service provision in
small towns. These documents were based on analysis coordinated by sector authorities
in different periods, all of them concluding that, before and after the rollout of the 2003
Water Framework Law, there was and is still an interest in and need for capacity building
and TA at the local level.




3
 For details on the SDC’s Water and Sanitation in Towns/Schools initiative, see
https://www.eda.admin.ch/countries/honduras/es/home/cooperacion/proyectos.html/content/projects/SDC/e
n/2010/7F07761/phase1?oldPagePath=/content/countries/honduras/es/home/internationale-
zusammenarbeit/projekte.html.


                                                                                                    9
  Table 1 – Underpinnings for Boosting the Managerial Capacity of Urban WSS
                                   Providers

 Year        Title                                      Findings
2002    WSS Sectorial     Management is carried out without tracking key indicators such
        Analysis in        as unaccounted-for water, percentage of metered connections,
        Honduras a         and cost of production.
                          Providers do not have manuals for operating various service
                           delivery components.
                          There are serious deficiencies in management capacity in the
                           units responsible for managing systems, mainly those operated
                           by municipalities that have not received training or TA.
                          The administrative structure and the human resources available
                           at the local levels are misaligned with the needs of the services,
                           suggesting external interference in their allocation.
                          The transfer of services to municipalities demands human
                           resources in excess of the current supply.
                          Efforts at institutional strengthening have favored developed
                           municipalities to the detriment of underdeveloped
                           municipalities.
2003    Water and         The law recognizes the need to improve the sector institutional
        Sanitation         framework to develop planning tools and regulations, and
        Sector             improve service provision.
        Framework         The objectives of the law include strengthening the governance
        Law b (Sector      of service delivery through appropriate distribution of the roles,
        Reform)            competencies, and responsibilities of stakeholders.

2006    Strategic Plan    Human resources are inadequate, unskilled and often acting
        for the            empirically.
        Modernization     Physical and financial planning is lacking, especially at the
        of the WSS         municipal level.
        Services in       Operators are still not consolidated entities; the majority have
        Honduras c         been created since the approval of the WSS Framework Law in
                           2003.
                          There is a lack of regulatory instruments and good practice
                           manuals that promote improvement in service provision.




                                                                                                10
2011     The State of         In the 68 diagnoses performed           Institutional Capacity to
         Water and             on urban providers, key                  Operate a WSS System
         Sanitation            weaknesses in small towns were           Analyzed       Scorecard
         Services in           found to be the availability of          Variables       Results
         Small Towns d         skilled human resources with           Operational
                               the capacity for strategic             Capacity
                               planning, investment                   Managerial
                               programming, internal control,         Capacity
                               enforcement actions (through           Technical
                               COMAS and USCL), and                   Capacity
                               citizen participation.                 Financial
                              On the basis of the analysis, the      Capacity
                               small towns received a score of        Governance
                               “Low Institutional Capacity.?

    a.   WSS Collaborative Group, 2012, “WSS Sectorial Analysis in Honduras,? chapters 2 -4.
    b.   Decree No. 118-2003, published October 8, 2003, Preamble and article 2, subsection 5.
         http://www.ersaps.hn/documentos/normativa/1%20Ley%20Marco%20de%20Agua%20y%20Sane
         amiento.pdf.
    c.   “Strategic Plan for the Modernization of the WSS Services in Honduras,? chapter 4.1.
         www.ersaps.hn/documentos/interes/PEMAPS.pdf.
    d.   Based on the conclusions of the 4th Consultancy Report on the state of water and sanitation
         services in small towns (2011), David Carías. WSP Honduras.


    2. Country and Sector Background
Honduras is a lower middle-income country with a per capita gross national income of
about US$2,291 that faces many development challenges.4 In 2013, 64.5 percent of its
8.1 million inhabitants lived in poverty and 42.6 percent lived in extreme poverty.
Although these poverty rates are high (the second highest in Latin America), they reflect
a decrease in poverty since 2012. Some 58 percent of rural residents live in extreme
poverty.5 In 2013, extreme poverty rates were almost three times higher in rural areas
than in the capital of Tegucigalpa. Over the past decade, reductions in extreme poverty
have been observed, mainly in rural areas. Poverty and extreme poverty have increased
slightly in urban areas, contributing to an observed increase in poverty rates.6

Nearly half of the population is rural, 80 percent of which live in hillside areas, where
subsistence agriculture predominates. Agriculture plays an important role in the
economy, accounting for 58 percent of exports, 14 percent of gross domestic product
(GDP), and 35 percent of employment. 7 The country is also marked by exposure to
natural disasters. Honduras ranks as the country most affected by extreme climate events


4
  Data from World Bank Open Data, available at data.worldbank.org.
5
  Línea de Pobreza, 2014, Instituto Nacional de Estadística,
http://www.ine.gob.hn/index.php/component/content/article?id=91.
6
  World Bank, 2015, “Honduras Economic DNA.?
7
  Central Bank of Honduras, Exports, http://www.bch.hn/exportaciones.php; World Bank, World
Development Indicators; World Bank, Open Data, Agriculture, value added (share of GDP),
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.AGR.TOTL.ZS, and Employment in agriculture (share of total
employment) http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS.


                                                                                                    11
in the world,8 which represents a major challenge for development. Between 1993 and
2012, annual economic losses due to climate events were equivalent to 2.84 percent of
GDP.9 In 1998, Hurricane Mitch impacted 90 percent of Honduras, caused 5,700 deaths,
displaced nearly half a million people, and resulted in estimated economic losses
equivalent to 81 percent of GDP.10

Public service provision remains poor—almost 1 million people lack access to running
water and 1.4 million nationwide lack access to improved sanitation services. 11 In
Tegucigalpa alone, approximately 298,000 poor residents in highly vulnerable peri-urban
areas receive poor WSS services or are simply not connected.12 Rural households have
particularly low access to important services such as improved sanitation, health care, and
electricity, leading to poor health outcomes and missed school days.13 The lack of access
to basic services largely correlates with living in rural areas, parental education, and
family per capita income. The World Bank is supporting improved access to WSS
services in Honduras through TA and the PROMOSAS investment operation (see Box 1
for more details). The 53 small towns in Honduras—officially defined as urban
settlements of 5,000 to 30,000 residents—share service provision challenges with both
rural areas and the peri-urban areas surrounding major cities.

      Box 1 – Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project, PROMOSAS
Since 2007, the government of Honduras has been implementing the US$30 million
World Bank–financed WSS Sector Modernization Project, (PROMOSAS, P103881, Cr
4335-HO). PROMOSAS supports the operationalization of the 2003 Water Framework
Law. The main objectives of PROMOSAS are (i) to improve the sustainability,
efficiency, and reliability of WSS services in eligible municipalities; and (ii) to improve
the performance of national WSS sector institutions in the exercise of their roles in
accordance with the WSS Sector Framework Law.

PROMOSAS provides financial and technical support to municipalities, decentralized
service providers, and national sector institutions (ERSAPS, CONASA, and SANAA).
8
  The Global Climate Risk Index (CRI) developed by Germanwatch analyzes the quantified impacts of
extreme weather events (for example, meteorological events such as tropical storms; hydrological events
such as storm surges, floods, and landslides; and climatological events such as droughts) —in terms of
fatalities as well as economic losses—on the basis of data from the Munich Re NatCatSERVICE (Global
Climate Risk Index, 2014); Sonke Kreft and David Eckstein, 2013, “Who Suffers Most from Extreme
Weather Events? Weather-Related Loss Events in 2012 and 1993 to 2012,? Briefing Paper, Germanwatch.
9
  Compared with other Central American countries, Honduras has suffered the highest average annual
economic losses due to weather-related disasters as a percentage of GDP from 1990 to 2012: Honduras
(2.84%), Nicaragua (1.89%), El Salvador (0.91%), Guatemala (0.62%), Panama (0.05%), and Costa Rica
(0.02%). (Global Climate Risk Index 2013, compiled by S. Harmeling and D. Eckstein for Germanwatch).
10
   ECLAC, 1998, “Honduras: Assessment of the damage caused by Hurricane Mitch.?
11
   UNICEF/WHO, “Honduras: estimates on the use of water sources and sanitation facilities (1980 -2015),?
http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/Honduras.xls.
12
   Estimates presented by the national water and sanitation provider (SANAA) for 2015.
13
   Hernandez Ore, Marco Antonio; Sousa, Liliana Do Couto; Lopez, J. Humberto. 2016. Honduras -
Unlocking economic potential for greater opportunities – systematic country diagnostic. Washington, D.C.
World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/02/25894168/honduras-unlocking-
economic-potential-greater-opportunities-systematic-country-diagnostic-vol-2.


                                                                                                      12
The Project supports the decentralization of water systems from SANAA to 11
municipalities, grouped into nine utilities. These utilities include an association of
municipalities (mancomunidad), where two small towns and one midsize provider
combine efforts to deliver services.

The Bank approved a US$10 million additional financing for PROMOSAS in 2013 to
increase the number of municipalities supported by the program. The Small Towns TA
was formally a standalone activity, though it influenced the decision to include small
urban providers in the PROMOSAS additional financing that benefited through TA-
supported knowledge and capacity building. Some US$2 million has been allocated to
infrastructure investments at small utilities in San Pedro de Tutule and Teupasentí, both
of which benefited from capacity building under the TA. Knowledge generated through
the Project and the Small Towns TA will continue to inform the decentralization process
following the close of PROMOSAS in December 2016, and WSS sector authorities have
expressed interest in a follow-on operation that would explicitly target the remaining 13
centralized providers, of which nine are small towns.

     3. Assessment of WSS Service Provision in Small towns
The first pillar of the TA encompasses knowledge creation. The first of two deliverables
under this pillar was the preparation of an assessment of WSS service provision in small
towns. The assessment was based on existing sector data as reported to the regulatory
authority, ERSAPS; field visits; and consultations with sector officials. The assessment
outlines water and sanitation service provision in small towns in Honduras, including
coverage, quality, and sustainability, as well as the types of service provision models
currently used throughout the country, and conducts a preliminary appraisal of the
available data. A summary of the assessment is presented below.

     2.1 Urbanization and Small Towns in Honduras
Although Honduras became a majority urban country in 2008, it remains one of the least
urbanized countries in Latin America, with some 54 percent of the population living in
cities. 14 Urbanization is expected to continue and could reach 70 percent by 2040.
Coupled with population growth, it could double the number of people living in urban
areas, presenting a host of challenges—from land use planning to public service
provision—for cities large and small.15

Some 46 percent of the urban population is concentrated in the country’s two largest
cities, Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula, and another 25 percent live in the country’s 16
intermediate cities. The 53 largely agriculture-dependent small towns in Honduras
account for 14 percent of the urban population.16 This amounts to 41 percent of the urban
14
   World Bank, World Development Indicators, Urban Population,
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country=HND&series=&period=.
15
   Honduras, Country Vision 2010–2038 and National Plan 2010–2022.
16
   Municipalities with a population between 2,000 and 5,000 are considered urban by the national statistics
institute and often face similar challenges in service provision to those faced by small towns. This analysis
uses the threshold of 5,000 inhabitants, to align with the categories established in the government’s Country


                                                                                                          13
population of the country’s economic corridor outside Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula,
as indicated in Figure 2.17 Preliminary data from the 2013 Census indicate that there may
be an increase in the number of small towns from 53 to 73—37 percent—suggesting that
rapid urbanization will strain public services in this group. In light of this growth, the
GoH sees an opportunity in small towns to institutionalize effective practices at WSS
service providers that serve increasingly large segments of the population. In addition,
Figure 3 shows that small towns have the highest concentrations of indigenous
populations, offering an opportunity to target assistance toward a traditionally vulnerable
population. As detailed in this document, small towns have markedly lower levels of
WSS service coverage than other urban areas. Effective interventions that strengthen
capacity and improve management practices in those areas that help bring services up to
the level found in larger urban areas can have important impacts on poverty and shared
prosperity.

                      Figure 2 – Location of Small Towns in Honduras




                 Source: Cuéllar 2013.




Vision 2010–2038 and National Plan 2010–2022. The knowledge generated through this TA can inform
service provision in areas that fall below the cutoff for small towns. Indeed, many urban areas between
2,000 and 5,000 people will grow above the 5,000-person threshold in the near to medium term.
17
   Trends in urban population growth provided by the National Institute of Statistics (2010).


                                                                                                          14
         Figure 3 – Indigenous Population as a Percentage of Total Population


            Major Cities



      Intermediate Cities



              Rural Area



           Small Towns


                            0%   3%    5%      8%      10%     13%     15%     18%      20%



     2.2 Legal and Institutional Framework
Poor WSS service quality at the municipal level led to calls in the mid-1900s for the
concentration of authority for service provision under a technically competent national
entity with the technical and human resources to deliver quality services. To this end,
SANAA was chartered in 1961 with a mandate to develop and operate water and
sanitation infrastructure throughout Honduras. WSS infrastructure expanded under
SANAA, but concerns emerged about the quality and sustainability of those systems and
the management models put in place to run them. By the mid-1990s, following more than
three decades of centralized service provision, nearly half of Hondurans still lacked
access to improved sanitation services and a quarter lacked access to drinking water.18
Demand emerged for stronger local input and control over service provision in
recognition of the complexities SANAA faced as a single public entity charged with
running the WSS systems of the entire country. Indeed, many local communities had
already begun to take steps to shore up aging systems and expand infrastructure to cover
families and business not reached by the SANAA network. Several changes in the
country’s legal framework would seek to strengthen local control over water services.

The National Water and Sanitation Framework Law, passed in 2003, calls for the
decentralization of WSS service provision.19 This process entails transferring ownership
and control of WSS systems that have been built and run by SANAA to municipalities.
As of mid-2016, 13 WSS systems remain to be transferred, nine of which are in small
towns. The key sticking points include salary liabilities and weak institutional capacity at
municipalities. SANAA will take on the role of national TA provider for decentralized
municipal providers. Decentralization of WSS systems is intended to improve service
delivery by promoting accountability—local providers, in theory, are more attuned to
18
   WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water and Sanitation, 2015 update,
http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/Honduras.xls.
19
   Decree No. 118-2003, published October 8, 2003.


                                                                                              15
local conditions and more likely to be held accountable for their performance by the
voting public. 20 The transfer also creates fiscal space for the central government by
shifting staffing costs from SANAA to municipal providers. Under the law,
municipalities are tasked with establishing a service provision model for their jurisdiction
in accordance with the following principles:

        Decentralized management model with a commercial focus that is technically and
         administratively autonomous
        Promotion of transparency, accountability, and citizen participation
        Tariffs that reflect real costs in order to promote financial sustainability
        Promotion of education on good sanitation practices and integrated water
         resources management, in addition to developing sanitation facilities at schools
        Services that are subject to regulation, monitoring, and citizen accountability

The water sector in Honduras comprises multiple actors with interlocking roles, as
illustrated in Figure 4. The 2003 Water Framework Law establishes roles and
responsibilities. The Secretariat of Health sets standards for the quality of drinking water
and wastewater effluent, while the Secretariat of Natural Resources sets policy for the
management of the country’s water resources. The National Water and Sanitation
Council, CONASA, acts as an interlocutor between the various agencies involved in the
WSS sector in Honduras, and supports sector planning and strategy. The National Water
and Sanitation Service Regulator, ERSAPS, oversees compliance on the part of WSS
service providers with national legislation and regulations, largely through the collection
and dissemination of data from service providers. SANAA is transitioning away from its
legacy role as the centralized provider of WSS services to become a provider of TA for
decentralized municipal WSS service providers. Municipalities are responsible for
ensuring WSS service delivery through (i) community water boards (CWBs), (ii) direct
municipal provision, (iii) legally constituted municipal companies, or (iv) a concession
agreement. Associations of municipalities known as mancomunidades, described in detail
below, can supplement municipal capacity in the provision of WSS services.21




20
   World Bank Institute, January 2010, “Introducing Accountability and Transparency to Water and
Sanitation Services in Honduras through Enhanced User Participation,?
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSOCACCDEMSIDEGOV/Resources/2871813-
1200515311988/4577172-1271445400159/notes01_honduras.pdf.
21
   Law and Regulations for Municipal Governments (La ley de municipalidades y su reglamento),
http://amhon.hn/files/pdfs/Ley%20De%20Municipalidades%20y%20Su%20Reglamento.pdf.


                                                                                                   16
               Figure 4 – Honduras WSS Sector Institutional Context




   2.3 WSS Service Provision Models
A patchwork of national, municipal, and community providers deliver WSS service in
small towns. The Water Framework Law establishes five distinct service models in small
towns:

   (i) SANAA. WSS systems that are centrally built, owned, and operated by SANAA
         and have not yet been transferred to municipalities.
   (ii) Autonomous Municipal Company. Legally constituted, autonomous public entities
         charged with WSS service provision. Autonomous municipal companies may
         receive funding from the municipal government; however, the Framework Law
         envisions that these companies should possess the authority to make personnel,
         technical, and administrative decisions based on merit and with an eye toward
         operating as a sustainable business. There is limited evidence as to the
         effectiveness of these arrangements in practice, though discussions with sector
         authorities indicate that establishing a company has led to incremental
         improvements in autonomy.
   (iii) Direct municipal provision. A unit or department charged (for instance, a
         department of public works) with WSS service provision under the control of the
         elected mayor. Employees are appointed by the mayor and often change with the


                                                                                     17
          electoral cycle. According to a recent Bank study, direct municipal providers
          often suffer from a lack of qualified personnel, as well as insufficient and
          politically driven budgets.22
     (iv) Community water boards (CWBs). Autonomous community-led provision of
          WSS services. The model is based on the experience of water boards that serve
          rural and peri-urban areas. Neighbors elect officers for the CWB from the local
          community. Under the law, as regulated by ERSAPS, CWB members hold
          office—president, manager, treasurer, supervisor (fiscal in Spanish)—for up to
          two years, at which time community assemblies are held to elect new officers or
          return existing officers to their posts.
     (v) Association of Municipalities, or Mancomunidades. Under Honduran law,
          municipalities can choose to form associations of municipalities
          (mancomunidades) to address common challenges. A mancomunidad is a legally
          constituted association of municipalities that seeks a specific, designated objective
          or benefit, including leveraging economies of scale or pooling resources to
          provide common TA.

Community-based models predominate in smaller municipalities, while SANAA is more
active in the management of larger WSS systems. Midsized small towns, between 10,000
and 20,000 inhabitants, trend toward direct municipal provision. In some cases, multiple
providers operate within the same city—for instance, seven CWBs complement WSS
primary service by SANAA in the municipality of La Esperanza. Table 2 shows the
distribution of service provision models in urban areas as of 2015.

                  Table 2 – Urban WSS Service Provision Models, 2015
                         Metropolitan        Intermediate                             Municipal
                            Area                 Cities          Small Towns          Population
 SANAA                        1                    3                  4                 77,444
 Concession                   1                    —                   —                       —
 Autonomous                    —                   12                   2                83,693
 Municipal
 Company
 Direct Municipal              —                    1                  33               326,648
 CWB                           —                   —                   14                99,281
        Total                  2                   16                  53
          Source: Moncada Gross 2015.

In all but four small towns the local WSS systems have been transferred from SANAA
(those pending as of February 2016 are La Esperanza-Intibucá, La Paz, La Entrada
Copán, and Copán Ruinas). Of those, some 62 percent are now administered directly by
municipalities, a model which, as described above, often produces poor WSS service. An
additional 14 systems are run by CWBs. CWBs represent a practical solution in both


22
  World Bank, 2013, “A Public Expenditure Review: Decentralization of Water and Sanitation Services
(PER),? http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/08/18903974/public -expenditures-decentralized-
governance-honduras-towards-restoring-fiscal-consolidation.


                                                                                                    18
dispersed and concentrated rural areas,23 though, in its current form, the model requires
modification (detailed below) to be suitable for handling the complexities of service
provision in urban areas. Only two small town systems (in El Paraíso and Nacaome) have
been legally constituted as autonomous municipal companies.

Service Provider Effectiveness by Model
A Water Public Expenditure Review (PER) carried out in 2013 by the Bank concluded
that the overall performance of autonomous service providers such as municipal
companies or water boards is significantly better than that of either the national utility or
nonautonomous municipal providers across cities of all sizes in Honduras. 24 The analysis
built a Simple Performance Index (SPI) for service providers based on five parameters:
(i) employees per 1,000 connections, (ii) level of metering, (iii) service continuity, (iv)
level of disinfection of water, and (v) tariff effectiveness (average tariff over average
cost). As illustrated in Figure 5, specifically for the small towns segment, the systems
managed by SANAA and by mainline municipal departments are mostly rated as poor in
terms of overall SPI,25 in contrast to autonomous municipal companies and water boards,
for which a much lower proportion of systems is rated as poor. This suggests that simply
decentralizing service provision is not enough to improve the quality of service delivered
to customers. A management model that is appropriate for the particular small town,
along with institutional, legal, and financial autonomy, must be in place and aligned with
financial and institutional incentives. In addition, decentralized service providers need
personnel with sufficient technical and managerial skills. This is consistent with the spirit
of the 2003 WSS Framework Law.




23
   According to ERSAPS, rural areas are subdivided in two categories: (i) rural concentrated, comprising
settlements between 2,000 and 5,000 inhabitants, and (ii) rural dispersed, with populations under 2,000.
24
   World Bank, 2013, “A Public Expenditure Review: Decentralization of Water and Sanitation Services
(PER),? http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/08/18903974/public -expenditures-decentralized-
governance-honduras-towards-restoring-fiscal-consolidation.
25
   For each parameter, a score from 1 (worst) to 3 (best) was assigned on the basis of international best
practices. The sum of all scores yielded an overall score called the Simple Performance Index (SPI), with
scores ranging from 5 (worst) to 15 (best), constituting a proxy for overall performance of the utility. For
the purpose of the analyses, the overall score was used to divide the service providers between low,
medium, and good performance utilities. Providers with a total SPI score from 5 to 8 are considered ‘poor,’
9 to 12 are considered ‘medium,’ and 13 to 15 are considered ‘good.’


                                                                                                          19
     Figure 5 – Service Provider Performance by Management Model in Small Towns




         Source: Public Expenditure Review, World Bank.
         Note: The models are ranked by increasing level of autonomy from political influence.


Findings also suggest that municipal companies and water boards in small towns perform
better than those managed by SANAA and municipalities themselves.26 Figure 5 shows
that most small town providers are still steps from reaching sustainable and efficient
service. The small towns managed by CWBs, in the aggregate, provide more sustainable
services than those managed by municipalities, due in large part to their proximity to
customers. SANAA and the municipal companies present the strongest performance in
water treatment, while CWBs face difficulties with disinfection, mainly owing to
capacity and budget constraints.




26
 Results based on a Simple Performance Index (SPI) calculated by the Bank with data collected by
ERSAPS. The SPI was developed combining five parameters (metering, staffing, disinfection, continuity,
and tariff). For each parameter, a score from 1 (worst) to 3 (best) was assigned on the basis of international
good practices. The sum of all scores yielded an overall score, ranging from 5 (worst) to 15 (best). The SPI
was used as a proxy for overall performance of the utilities during the Honduras Water PER in 2013.


                                                                                                            20
       Figure 6 – Performance of Small Towns Based on Quality Parameters




     Source: Bank calculation based on ERSAPS data.

The results of the analysis conducted in the Water PER suggest that the decentralization
process has had some positive impacts on sector performance—municipal companies in
small towns, most of which were created after the decentralization process, perform
better on the whole than SANAA. It should also be highlighted that CWBs and municipal
companies in small towns perform relatively well against other models, though, as
outlined above, many of these providers still leave homes and businesses with
intermittent or no coverage. Despite their shortcomings, the CWB model appears to be
the most effective approach for many small town contexts, particularly those at the lower
end of the population distribution. See Box 2 for a profile of a well-run CWB serving the
municipality of Jesus de Otoro in the department of Intibucá.




                                                                                      21
    Box 2 – Effective Practices in Community WSS Management, the Experience of
                                       JAPOE
Jesus de Otoro Community Water Board (JAPOE)

The municipality of Jesus de Otoro, population 9,970, established a community water
board, JAPOE, in 1995 to revamp a failing local water system. JAPOE today serves as a
reference for effective community management in Honduras and beyond, having
achieved financial sustainability and continuous water service for its customers. The
CWB model was originally established in Honduras in the 1970s to administer rural WSS
systems for communities of fewer than 2,000 residents. Today CWBs cover some 7,000
communities across the country. As rural areas continue to grow into small towns, the
CWB model is likely to remain an important mechanism for participatory local WSS
service provision, though it will need to be adapted to fit more complex urban
environments. JAPOE provides useful lessons in the effective use of the CWB model at
the scale of a small town. Two innovative approaches are particularly instructive:

-    Representative community-management approach. Community assemblies are a
     primary way that CWBs make operational decisions, allowing residents’ voices to
     guide the decision-making process. Nevertheless, this form of direct democracy faces
     limits as communities grow—the logistics of coordinating priorities among hundreds
     or even thousands of users becomes daunting. Facing this challenge, JAPOE decided
     to group users into directorates of 200 connections. A volunteer delegate represents
     each directorate in community assemblies, creating a model that is scalable while
     remaining responsive to citizen input.

-    Professionalization of administrative functions. JAPOE hires personnel to carry out
     management, administrative, and operations and maintenance functions. In doing so,
     JAPOE is able to supplement the voluntary capacity of the community delegates with
     professionals who are able to tend to the day-to-day operation of the WSS system.

As of 2015, JAPOE’s leadership is looking to the future and seeking to head off the
impacts of climate change on their community’s water supply. The CWB is exploring
local approaches to watershed management and is interested in expanding payment for
ecosystem services schemes (for instance, working with small-scale coffee farmers to
protect watersheds).

However, the analysis also suggests that decentralization cannot be seen as the solution to
solve the challenges the sector faces. In fact, the findings suggest that direct municipal
service provision in many cases does not perform as well as municipal companies.
Interestingly, the results shown in Figure 5 also suggest that as the degree of political
influence decreases, service provider performance improves significantly. The analysis
suggests that decentralization of the sector—to autonomous service providers or local
government—should be accompanied by appropriate management models and capacity
building, to realize the benefits of sector reform. The national government further
incentivizes decentralization by offering carrots such as low-cost financing and plans to



                                                                                        22
award prizes through the proposed WSS National Fund for those providers that meet
quality targets (based on ERSAPS data).
   2.4 Institutionalization of Citizen Participation at Small Town WSS Service Providers
Formalizing and institutionalizing small town WSS service providers represents an
important step on the road to improving service quality and complying with the 2003
Water Framework Law. Institutionalization as established in the law can be divided into
the development of three primary components: (i) municipal WSS policies, (ii) legal
charters for service providers, and (iii) citizen participation mechanisms. A municipal
WSS policy should define the type of service provider that will operate within the
jurisdiction and outline what support will be provided by the municipality. Once the
service provider has been defined at the policy level, it should be legally incorporated, in
accordance with the Framework Law. Local citizen participation is a critical part of
decentralized service provision. To that end, the law established two key mechanisms for
the participatory governance of WSS services: (a) the Municipal Water and Sanitation
Committee (Comité Municipal de Agua y Saneamiento, COMAS) and (b) the Local
Control and Supervision Unit (Unidad de Supervisio?n y Control Local, USCL). Both of
these bodies are made up of local residents and have a role in approving key service
provider policies such as the management model and tariffs. Well-functioning COMASs
and USCLs promote improved service quality by offering a direct mechanism for citizen
participation and accountability at decentralized WSS providers.
   2.5 Status of WSS Provision in Small Towns
Assessment Methodology and Data Limitations
The TA sought to take stock of the status of WSS provision in small towns as an input to
developing an intervention strategy. An assessment of WSS service provision in small
towns was prepared on the basis of existing data. This report makes use of the data
collected by the WSS sector regulatory agency, ERSAPS, and in previous World Bank
studies, as well as the limited other analytical work available on the sector. Much of the
data are limited in scope or coverage, and often not up to date. In addition, data from
different sources and studies are not readily comparable because often they have been
prepared using different methodological approaches. The process highlighted the
limitations of the data available in Honduras today and the need to gather more in-depth,
up-to-date data on the WSS sector in order to be better able to target future TA and
investment interventions.

Service Coverage
The collection of fundamental data on WSS service coverage, including coverage at the
municipal level, is incomplete. The national census, last published in 2000, disaggregates
rural and urban WSS coverage data but does not publish data at the municipality level.
Preliminary data from the 2013 census adopts the same methodology. Available data at
the municipal level is tabulated by ERSAPS on the basis of the data reported to it by local
service providers. Individual WSS service providers are required to report the number of
connections and number of homes within their service area; population-level data are not
tabulated. (ERSAPS does not have the authority to sanction providers that do not submit
timely or accurate data.) As such, reliable measures of WSS coverage in small towns are
not available.


                                                                                         23
In the absence of reliable data for communities, the ERSAPS tabulations of household
coverage can serve as a stopgap metric for WSS coverage. This dataset includes only
homes within a service provider’s coverage area; thus it is not known whether other
buildings are served by individual solutions or lack service altogether. Table 3 presents a
summary of ERSAPS data as provided by service providers; coverage levels in each of
the 53 small towns appear in annex 4.27 These data show that only 2 of the 53 small town
providers offer universal access to improved drinking water, and that more than one in
five homes in small towns lack access. Regarding sanitation, ERSAPS requires providers
to supply data on sewer network coverage, though it does not collect data for on-site or
individual sanitation solutions, such as latrines and septic systems. The available data
indicate that no provider offers universal sewer network coverage. Sector officials
indicate that the vast majority of such homes that are not connected to the sewer network
have on-site solutions, though further field research would be needed to obtain a better
overview of the sanitation situation. Larger municipalities within the bracket of small
towns fare worse than smaller settlements in terms of water coverage, and only slightly
better in sanitation coverage.

            Table 3 – Household-Level WSS Service Coverage, Small Towns

                                         Water Coverage            Sewerage Coverage
             Population Size
                                              (%)                        (%)
          5,000 to 15,000                      84                         23
          15,000 to 30,000                     73                         30
          Total Small Towns                    79                         27
        Source: ERSAPS data, cited in Cuellar 2013.

National data can serve as a check on data supplied by service providers, though
available data do not permit meaningful comparisons between small towns and other
urban or rural settlements owing to differences in the methodologies applied. Table 4
summarizes water and sanitation coverage in urban and rural areas and at the national
level, based on survey data compiled by the UNICEF/WHO Joint Monitoring
Programme.28 The ERSAPS estimate, at the service provider level, of 79 percent water
coverage lags the Joint Monitoring Programme estimates for rural and urban piped water
measures of 84 and 97 percent, respectively. Sanitation coverage is tabulated at the
national level as “access to improved sanitation,? whereas service providers report only
on sewer network coverage. This leaves a methodological gap that does not permit useful
comparisons. This lack of reliable, comparable data points to the need for future
analytical work to accurately quantify WSS service coverage levels in small towns.
Moreover, looking beyond misgivings about the data, it is clear that much work remains


27
   Ramón Cuéllar, 2013, “Abastecimiento de agua y saneamiento en pequeñas localidades urbanas de
Honduras Características, Potencialidades y Elementos Estratégicos,? study prepared under the TA for the
World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program. Data for small towns reflect the data reported by providers to
ERSAPS and do not cover all independent or informal providers serving small towns.
28
   UNICEF/WHO, “Honduras: estimates on the use of water sources and sanitation facilities (1980–2015),?
http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/Honduras.xls.


                                                                                                       24
to bring small town WSS service to the national level and ultimately to universalize
coverage in line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

                          Table 4 – WSS Service Coverage, National Level

                                              Piped Water              Improved Sanitation
               Coverage Area                  Coverage (%)               Coverage (%)
             Rural                                 84                          78
             Urban                                 97                          87
             National                              91                          83
             Source: Joint Monitoring Programme data, 2015 update.


Service Quality—Continuity
Many of the families and businesses that are counted as having WSS service cannot rely
on potable water to flow from the tap on demand. Water supply continuity in small towns
averages just 11 hours per day, and some towns go days with no water service. ERSAPS
tabulates data on water continuity on the basis of reports from service providers and
classifies them into four categories: (i) 20–24 hours per day; (ii) 5–20 hours per day; (iii)
less than 5 hours per day; and (iv) rationed. For the purposes of this report, service of 20
to 24 hours per day is considered continuous. ERSAPS defines “rationed? as less than
continuous service in towns that do not report continuity in any of the other three
categories. The middle category of 5–20 hours is too broad to serve for informed
decisions about intervention. To improve the relevance of monitoring data, it would be
useful to create additional ranges, such as 5–10, 10–15, and 15–20 hours. Based on the
data reported to ERSAPS, just 14 of 53 small towns—the majority of which have fewer
than 15,000 inhabitants—have at least 20 hours of service, while 15 must resort to
rationing water (Table 5).29

                        Table 5 – Water Service Continuity in Small Towns
 Population            20–24
     Size              Hours        5–20 Hours        <5 Hours       Rationed   No Data        Total
   5,000 to
                         12              14               3             9         4             42
    15,000
  15,000 to
    30,000
                          2               3              —              6          -            11

     Total           14 (26%)         17 (32%)         3 (6%)        15 (28%)   4 (8%)          53
Source: Moncada Gross 2015.

Despite discontinuous drinking water services in most small towns, Figure 7 indicates
that some 79 percent of small towns possess drinking water treatment facilities capable of
producing enough water to cover the population’s needs for human consumption.30 The
explanation for the gap between installed capacity and delivered water is that some
systems are off-line or in a state of disrepair that results in reduced water production. The
29
  Ramón Cuellar 2013.
30
  Cuellar (2013) cites ERSAPS data for installed capacity at drinking-water treatment plants. This
calculation is based on an average need of 130 liters of water per person per day and assumed system losses
of 30 percent.


                                                                                                        25
binding constraints are financial resources for replacement parts coupled with
management and operating know-how, rather than installed capacity. No in-depth studies
exist on the number of installed plants that are in working order or what would be
required to repair those that are off-
line.                                     Box 3 – Relevance of On-Call Technical
                                                  Assistance from SANAA
Nevertheless, consultations carried out Maintenance Trouble in the Municipality of
under the TA with small town San Juan
providers indicated that employees of
some providers simply did not know The Decentralized Water and Sanitation
how       to     conduct      preventive Unit of San Juan (UDASJI) is charged with
maintenance or make needed repairs water provision for the municipality’s
on their own (Error! Reference approximately 9,000 residents. During
source not found.). This finding consultations carried out under the TA, the
suggests that training in the operations San Juan drinking water treatment plant was
and maintenance of WSS systems offline because of a clog in the filtration
could empower employees of small system. The UDASJI was awaiting
town providers to make repairs assistance from a SANAA representative to
quickly, without having to resort to get the plant back up and running properly.
outside assistance. For complex In this context, the UDASJI suggested that
challenges     or    those     requiring technical support from SANAA continues to
specialized equipment, on-call TA play a critical role in operations and
from SANAA will continue to be maintenance.
required.

                                               Figure 7 – Drinking Water Treatment Plant Production



                                     700

                                     600
 Installed drinking water capacity




                                     500

                                     400
         (liters/person/day)




                                     300

                                     200

                                     100

                                       0
                                           0         10           20             30             40    50   60
                                                                       Number of Municipalities
                                                          Installed Capacity         Managed Demand

Source: ERSAPS.


                                                                                                                26
Looking upstream from the treatment plant, consultations with small town and peri-urban
providers carried out under the TA indicated generalized concern about the availability of
water resources for use in drinking water system. Drought in western Honduras in 2014 –
2015 has highlighted the urgency of addressing water security. Indeed, several providers
reported facing sporadically dry water intakes in 2015. Despite the concern, data on raw
water availability are not gathered at the municipal or provider levels. It will be important
to begin to incorporate water security metrics in the reporting requirements of small town
providers in order to generate the data needed to confront water scarcity associated with
climate change.

Service Quality—Potability
When water does flow from the tap, in many cases it is not suitable for human
consumption without further treatment. Only 15 small towns (28 percent) have drinking-
water treatment plants. Nationwide, treatment plants regularly require maintenance or
encounter technical issues that local providers do not have the personnel to resolve,
resulting in a further deterioration of drinking water service quality. ERSAPS does not
collect information on the chlorination of drinking water, though anecdotal evidence from
discussions with ERSAPS authorities indicates that many providers do not chlorinate
their water. To target future sector investment effectively, more detailed information on
the type and effectiveness of treatment will be critical.

Sanitation Infrastructure
Many small towns also lack adequate sanitation infrastructure. Only 34 of the 53 small
towns have sewer networks, and just 13 have the infrastructure to route wastewater to a
treatment plant before discharging it to watercourses.31 The sanitation solution adopted
for Honduras’s larger cities has generally been a sewer network. This approach has the
disadvantage of limited coverage, leaving uncovered much of the peri-urban population
or the population with low ability to pay. To fill the gap in areas where sewer networks
are not financially viable, such as small towns, the sector has relied on in situ disposal of
wastewater. Treatment is mostly done through stabilization ponds and, to a lesser extent,
Imhoff tanks. In the operation and maintenance of stabilization ponds, regulation is
lacking and analysis of the treated effluent is not routine. These findings are coherent
with an analysis of the stabilization ponds carried out in 2005, in which maintenance was
rated acceptable for just under half of the ponds in small towns and inadequate for the
just over half. Permanent, full time staff are assigned to 60 percent of these ponds; the
rest are staffed part-time.32

As is the case with drinking-water service, sanitation coverage data report on the
existence of physical infrastructure but not the quality or sustainability of those systems.
Some treatment plants treat only a portion of the wastewater they receive; others are
offline altogether. Data on the quality of water leaving treatment plants is not widely

31
   Luis Moncada Gross, 2015, “Análisis de Situación de Pequeñas Ciudades y Propuesta de Líneas
Estratégicas—Estrategia de Fortalecimiento Gestión Agua Potable y Saneamiento Pequeñas Ciudades en
Honduras,? study prepared under the TA for the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program.
32
   Stewart Oakley, 2005, “Analysis of the Stabilization Ponds of Honduras,? RRASCA, FHIS, and USAID.


                                                                                                  27
gathered. A 2013 study found that, on the whole, 85 percent of wastewater is discharged
to watercourses or directly in urban areas without treatment.33
     2.6 Investment in WSS Provision for Small Towns
International partners contribute up to 76 percent of investment funding for WSS
infrastructure in small communities of 2,000 to 15,000 residents, followed by CWBs at
15 percent, users at 6 percent, and the central government, through SANAA, at 3 percent.
Nationwide, donors finance 53 percent of WSS infrastructure, municipalities contribute
30 percent, and the central government contributes 17 percent. 34 Despite this financial
assistance, a recent Bank study found that the country faces an estimated annual deficit of
US$350 million to reach national WSS targets by 2022.35 Municipalities often lack direct
or reliable access to debt financing that would enable them to maintain and expand WSS
systems. This is due in part to national rules that prohibit municipal governments from
taking on debt that extends beyond their four-year tenure. In many cases, infrastructure
works are only partially completed because of the lack of consistent funding sources.
Although there is a clear need to increase funding for WSS infrastructure, it is important
to define the limits to the capacity of municipalities to execute investments.

Given the magnitude of the financing gap, improved access to finance alone will not be
enough to reach universal WSS service provision. Some 60 percent of small town
providers, according to ERSAPS data, are able to cover their operating costs.
Nevertheless, cost recovery remains a challenge for many. This limits their ability to
finance new investments with their own funds. Similarly, water supplied by existing
infrastructure could be put to better use. Anecdotal evidence from conversations with
sector authorities and small town providers suggests that much work remains to instill a
culture of water in local populations that values the scarce resource and takes steps within
households and business to ensure that it is used efficiently. Waste is a particularly
relevant issue in areas that lack household metering. Demand management that reduces
customer waste would allow providers to improve service coverage and quality using
existing water sources and treatment infrastructure. Finally, there is a tendency to
overdesign urban services, leading to higher capital and maintenance costs, and, in some
cases, overly complex systems that local communities lack the know-how to maintain.
Building infrastructure that is sized to meet current and projected future demand—but not
more—will help keep investment costs in check.

Despite the challenges of poor service coverage and quality outlined above, the bulk of
donor TA and funding—which constitutes the primary source of investment in the WSS
sector in Honduras—goes to intermediate and large cities, or rural areas, which leaves a


33
   Central American and Dominican Republic Forum for Drinking Water and Sanitation (FOCARD), 2013,
“Gestio?n de las Excretas y Aguas Residuales en Centroamérica y República Dominicana—Diagnóstico
Regional,? http://incap.int/index.php/es/publicaciones/doc_view/423 -focard-diagnostico-regional-2013.
34
   Investment figures from Cuellar (2013).
35
   World Bank, “Monitoring Country Progress in Water and Sanitation (MAPAS) Hondu ras Country
Report—2014,? http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/06/11/000350881_201406110845
12/Rendered/PDF/886230WSP0Box30eVersion0009June2014.pdf.


                                                                                                    28
gap in in support for small towns. This is due in part to a perceived lack of capacity at
small town providers to make effective and sustainable use of investments.36
     2.7 Institutional Capacity at Small Town WSS Providers
Sustainable and reliable WSS service in small towns calls for strong capacity at the local
level to sustainably manage institutions and infrastructure. Analytical work, consultations
with sector authorities and small town providers, and data gathered during the preparation
of this TA indicate that many personnel at small town providers do not have the training
they need to carry out their job functions professionally. A 2002 sector analysis identified
serious deficiencies in management capacity in the municipal units responsible for
managing WSS systems, particularly in municipalities that have not received training or
TA.37 ERSAPS prepared a strategic plan in 2006 that sought to address inadequate human
resources at WSS providers.38 A 2011 World Bank study highlighted low capacity as a
significant constraint at small town WSS providers.39 Ongoing Bank dialogue throughout
the WSS sector in Honduras supports the perception that a lack of know-how holds back
service provision.

Structural factors drive low capacity among small town providers, including short tenure
at WSS providers and low levels of formal education among sector personnel in small
towns. The TA gathered data from 36 managerial employees at 30 small town providers
who participated in Bank-supported training activities (detailed below) to better
understand their educational backgrounds and their experience in the WSS sector.40 The
first important factor that emerged was that many employees have little work experience
in the sector. The average tenure of employees in the sample is 2.6 years. As illustrated in
Figure 8, fully a quarter of employees have been on the job for a year or less, offering
little time to get up to speed.




36
   José David Cáceres, 2014, “Mapeo de Actuaciones de las Agencias Miembros de la Mesa de
Cooperantes del Sector de Agua Potable y Saneamiento de Honduras—Peri?odo 2014–2015,? Swiss Agency
for Cooperation and Development.
37
   WSS Collaborative Group, 2012, “WSS Sectorial Analysis in Honduras,? chapters 2–4.
38
   “Strategic Plan for the Modernization of the WSS Services in Honduras,? chapter 4.1.
www.ersaps.hn/documentos/interes/PEMAPS.pdf.
39
   Based on the conclusions of the 4th Consultancy Report on the state of water and sanitation services in
small towns, David Carías, 2011, WSP Honduras.
40
   Data were provided by CENET based on biographical information provided during registration for WSS
training programs. This survey is not intended as a rigorous analysis of human resources at small town
providers but as a snapshot of the individuals who administer WSS systems in those areas. This report
refers to staff at municipal units and enterprises, as well as officers at CWBs, as employees, though many
are in fact volunteers.


                                                                                                       29
                        Figure 8 – Tenure at WSS Service Provider

                      12

                      10

                        8
          Number of
                    6
          employees
                        4

                        2

                        0
                              Less than 1         1 to 2.9        3 to 5.9   6 or more
                                                    Years of experience

          Source: Author’s calculations, data provided by CENET.

National sector authorities suggest that much of this turnover stems from political
appointments made during the four-year municipal electoral cycle. The national
Municipal Civil Service Law (Ley de Carrera Administrativa Municipal), passed in 2010
and in force since September 2014. The law seeks to create a standing civil service within
each of the country’s 298 municipal governments—including those of small towns—
composed of professionals who remain in their positions through electoral cycles. 41 The
law entered into force in September 2014 and creates an important opportunity to
strengthen WSS service provision in small towns, as employees at both autonomous and
direct municipal providers should spend more time in their positions. Longer tenures both
justify and underscore the need for an integrated capacity-building program. This
legislation could curb turnover at WSS authorities, though, as of 2016, it has yet to be
consolidated in practice. Operationalization of the Municipal Civil Service Law should be
a long-term goal for the sector.

According to ERSAPS, small towns still lack adequate numbers of employees per 1,000
connections; the benchmark in Central America is 6 employees per 1,000 connections.42
Looking beyond these indicators, Figure 9 shows that only 11 percent of employees
assisted under this TA hold a university degree in a field related to WSS (such as civil
engineering), half completed high school, and 16 percent completed only primary school.
Just one employee in the ERSAPS data has benefited from formal technical education in
WSS service provision.

This low level of formal education in general, and WSS training in particular, holds back
the professionalization of the sector and will not be remedied in the short term. Training


41
   Ley de Carrera Administrativa Municipal, Decree 74/2010,
http://www.tsc.gob.hn/leyes/Ley%20de%20la%20Carrera%20Administrativa%20Municipal.pdf.
42
   MAPAS Regional Synthesis, WSP, World Bank Group (2014).


                                                                                         30
and on-call TA can play important roles in empowering employees to perform well in
their jobs.

  Figure 9 - Level of Formal Education, Employees of Small Town WSS Providers


              Other University Degrees

     University Degree Related to WSS

          Technical Education in WSS

   Highest Level of         High School
       Formal
     Education
                      Primary Education

                                   None

                                          0           5        10       15        20   25
                                                            Number of Employees
       Source: Author’s calculations, data provided by CENET.

Human resources in CWBs, which provide WSS service to 14 small towns and virtually
all of peri-urban Tegucigalpa, present a particularly troubling picture. Officers at CWBs
are volunteers from the community who are elected through a community assembly to
posts including president and treasurer. By law, community assemblies are held every
two years to select new officers or renew the terms of incumbents.

Official data are not tabulated, but according to national sector authorities, approximately
half of the sitting officers return, sometimes in other positions (for example, a CWB
president becomes treasurer). Term limits seek to prevent the capture of WSS service
provision by vested individual or group interests that usurp the needs of the broader
community. Nevertheless, two-year rotations ensure that CWBs are staffed by residents
who have little experience in the provision of WSS services. Compounding the
difficulties presented by short terms in office, officers seldom have training in
management or engineering, and indeed have little formal education. Unofficial estimates
from the Honduran Association of Community Water Boards suggest that the average
officer at a peri-urban CWB has completed between six and eight years of schooling;
estimates for remote small towns are three to four years.
   4. Mancomunidades—Joint Service Provision and Pooled Support
      Services
The second deliverable of the knowledge creation pillar of TA was the systematization of
the Aguas del Valle Mancomunidad experience. A mancomunidad is a formal legal
mechanism that facilitates collaboration between municipalities. The GoH is interested in
exploring the usefulness of the mancomunidad model to support WSS service provision,
by linking small towns and intermediate cities with larger, geographically proximate


                                                                                            31
WSS providers, based on success in other sectors in Honduras and Central America.
Based on government interest, the Bank carried out an assessment as part of the TA of
the formation and initial results of the Aguas del Valle Mancomunidad, which was the
first such entity established to focus on the WSS sector in Honduras.

Overview of the Macomunidad Model
Honduras has 298 municipalities, most of which have small populations: 132 have fewer
than 10,000 inhabitants and only 13 exceed 100,000 residents. To overcome constraints
associated with small size, many municipalities have chosen to form associations of
municipalities, or mancomunidades, to address common challenges. Under the 1990 Law
of Municipalities and associated regulations, a mancomunidad is a legally constituted
association of municipalities that seeks a specific, designated objective or benefit. 43 They
are public entities formed after a two-thirds vote of the town councils (Corporaciones
Municipales) of the participating municipalities. As of 2015, Honduras had 44
functioning mancomunidades, and an additional 11 had been formed but did not yet
provide services.44 In the context of WSS service provision, a mancomunidad can range
from the creation of a joint service provider to leverage economies of scale or shared
infrastructure, to the pooling of resources to provide common TA services to individual
municipalities. As of 2015, one mancomunidad had established a joint WSS service
provider, and at least three others pool resources for TA for the local WSS sector.45 The
mancomunidad model represents a middle ground between centralized and local
responsibility for service provision, and a certain recognition of the capacity and
technical limitations faced by some small, decentralized WSS providers.

Shared interests drive Honduran municipalities’ decisions to form mancomunidades. The
study carried out under this TA, “Aguas del Valle—Modelo Innovador en la Prestacio?n
de Servicios de Agua y Saneamiento con Economi?a de Escala para Medianos y Pequeños
Prestadores,? identified three primary factors that contribute to the formation of
mancomunidades in the WSS sector: (i) common infrastructure; (ii) economies of scale;
and (iii) shared watersheds. 46 Common infrastructure can include drinking-water and
wastewater treatment plants. Economies of scale can be derived from establishing a joint
service provider to cover multiple, geographically close municipalities. Similarly, a
mancomunidad can hire technical experts to provide services to a group of municipalities
or buy materials in bulk to reduce unit costs. Finally, a common—and finite—water
source can create a strong incentive for stakeholders to coordinate water use across
municipal boundaries.

43
   La ley de municipalidades y su reglamento,
http://amhon.hn/files/pdfs/Ley%20De%20Municipalidades%20y%20Su%20Reglamento.pdf.
44
   Honduras Association of Municipalities, “Listado de mancomunidades,?
http://amhon.hn/j1/images/demo/doc/Mancomunidades_Honduras_2015_2.pdf.
45
   Other active mancomunidades that pool technical resources include Güisayote, MAMUCA
(Mancomunidad de Municipios del Corredor Atlántico), and Mancomunidad de Municipios del Norte de
Francisco Morazan (MANOF). A report form the December 2015 National Mancomunidades Forum offers
further detail: http://www.observatoriodescentralizacion.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/MEMORIA-
FORO-NACIONAL-DE-MANCOMUNIDADES-2014.pdf.
46
   Martha Lizeth Galo Osorto, 2014, “Aguas del Valle—Modelo Innovador en la Prestacio?n de Servicios de
Agua y Saneamiento con Economi?a de Escala para Medianos y Pequeños Prestadores,? World Bank.


                                                                                                     32
     4.1 Joint Service Provision—Aguas del Valle
The adjacent municipalities of Villanueva, San Manuel, Pimienta, and Potrerillos,
situated in Cortés Department near San Pedro Sula (Figure 10), face numerous common
challenges in the provision of WSS service. All of the municipalities’ water systems,
which depend on groundwater, offer intermittent service of generally less than 12 hours
per day. Only 8 of 29 neighborhoods in Villanueva are connected to sewerage networks,
4 of 18 in San Manuel, and none in Pimienta (information was not available for
Potrerillos).47 No wastewater is treated before discharge. Villanueva is the largest of the
municipalities in the mancomunidad at 134,196 inhabitants, and is the fastest-growing
municipality in the country owing in part to a dynamic maquila industry. San Manuel has
some 53,009 residents and is also growing rapidly. Pimienta is home to approximately
25,469 residents, some 50 percent of whom commute daily to jobs in Villanueva or San
Manuel. The smallest member of the mancomunidad is Potrerillos, at 4,240 inhabitants.
Faced with similar challenges in adjoining jurisdictions, the four municipalities joined
forces to improve WSS service coverage and quality through the formation of a
mancomunidad called Association of Municipalities for Water, Sanitation, and the
Environment (Asociacio?n de Municipios para Agua Saneamiento y Medio Ambiente ,
AMASM) in May 2011. This is the first—and only, as of mid-2016—mancomunidad
formed specifically to address challenges in the water sector, and one of the few in the
country that brings together small towns and intermediate cities.




47
  Data collected by service providers, as reported by Galo 2014, are tabulated at the neighborhood level
but not disaggregated by household or family.


                                                                                                           33
                     Figure 10 – Map of the Municipalities of AMASM




                      Source: Galo Osorto, 2014.


The four municipalities formally launched the mancomunidad through the signing of a
legal agreement by the respective municipal Secretariats of Finance in early-2009, as
illustrated in Figure 11. Changes in the political environment—including a constitutional
crisis in mid-2009 that led to an abrupt change in the presidency, and turnover in local
government in early-2010—led to delays during the initial launch of the mancomunidad.
The respective mayors ultimately provided crucial leadership during the process,
including community outreach, and today constitute the executive committee that
oversees the operations of the mancomunidad. With AMASM legally established, the
mancomunidad chartered a regional, joint WSS service provider in September 2013 that
merged the individual providers of San Manuel and Pimienta with the larger and more
established municipal provider in Villanueva. This joint service provider operates today
as Aguas del Valle.48 Despite being chartered as one legal entity, the WSS infrastructure
in the respective municipalities remains physically independent. Potrerillos opted out of
the joint service provision model for political reasons and continues to provide services
on its own. ERSAPS approved the service management model, and, after several
iterations, Aguas del Valle was registered with the national Secretariat of the Interior and
Population. Once legally constituted, Aguas del Valle obtained a tax number (Registro
Tributario Nacional, RTN) that allowed it to open a bank account. Aguas del Valle is the
first legally chartered joint service provider in the WSS sector in Honduras and, as it

48
  Aguas del Valle disseminates information and service updates on its Facebook page:
https://www.facebook.com/Aguas-del-Valle-444482738970201/.


                                                                                         34
continues to refine its management model in the years to come, is poised to yield
important lessons for the country.

           Figure 11 – Formation of the Aguas del Valle Joint Service Provider


     June 2009                                     May 2011
                                                                           June 2011
   Municipalities             October 2010             The
                                                                            ERSAPS
  and Ministry of            The Association     Intermunicipal
                                                                        approves the first   September 2013
  Finance sign an            of Municipalities     Water Unit
                                                                         joint provision     Aguas del Valle
    agreement to               of Water and        (Aguas del
                                                                            model in            joint service
   implement the              Sanitation and     Valle) is created
                                                                         Honduras (one        provider begins
  joint provision            the Environment       and the TA
                                                                        midsize provider         operations
     model to be               (AMASM) is           process is
                                                                         and two small
 financed through                 created        initiated by the
                                                                             towns)
    PROMOSAS                                      PROMOSAS




Aguas del Valle has made concrete progress to improve administrative capacity since its
incorporation. The joint service provider is staffed by technical and administrative
personnel in Villanueva, itself the area with the largest number of connections, as shown
in Figure 12. Aguas del Valle staff, including a general manager, administrator, and
commercial manager, support field offices in San Manuela and Pimienta. Staff costs are
covered by tariffs paid by Aguas del Valle’s customers. Since the start of operations in
2013, the mancomunidad has increased the number of paying clients by 13 percent
through the regularization of buildings that were previously connected but not charged
for service (so called clandestinos). Among other utilities that benefited from
PROMOSAS, a roughly comparable group, the increase in paying customers in the same
period was 3 percent. Water supply coverage has improved marginally under the
mancomunidad, going from 96 percent in the year before the joint service provider was
launched to 98 percent in 2014 (Figure 13).49 Data are not available on the quality of
water delivered through the pipes.


      Figure 12 – Distribution of Water Connections in the Mancomunidad, 2014

                                1,794, 8%

                    3,298,
                                                           Villanueva
                     14%
                                                           Pimienta

                                                           San Manuel


                                                 18,309,
                                                  78%


49
  Raw coverage data cited here were collected by ERSAPS and analyzed by the PROMOSAS
implementing unit at the Ministry of Finance.


                                                                                                           35
                                       Source: Ministry of Finance, PIU PROMOSAS.


    Figure 13 – Water Coverage Levels, Mancomunidad Villanueva and PROMOSAS

                         100%


                         80%
                                                                                           Average,
     Share of Coverage




                                                                                           PROMOSAS
                         60%
                                                                                           utilities
                                                                                           Mancomunidad
                                                                                           Villanueva
                         40%


                         20%


                          0%
                                2008     2009    2010     2011     2012     2013    2014
                                                          Years
Source: Ministry of Finance, PIU PROMOSAS.


Since the formation of Aguas del Valle, synergies between the intermediate city
(Villanueva) and the two small towns (Pimienta and San Manuel) are starting to benefit
the small providers, which have seen improvements in coverage, as indicated in Figure
14. This is due in part to actions taken to standardize administrative procedures in the
main and satellite offices of Aguas del Valle, and TA provided through PROMOSAS—
including the preparation of manuals, regulations, diagnostics, and hydrological balances.
With support from the mayors, Aguas del Valle has adjusted rates to better reflect costs,
made debt collection a priority, and implemented a new billing system based on an
updated cadaster. This has resulted in greater revenue per cubic meter of water produced,
as shown in Figure 15.

 Figure 14 – Trend in Number of Water Connections in Mancomunidad Villanueva
                                  Members




                                                                                                          36
     16%

     14%

     12%

     10%
                                                                                                            Midsize City
          8%                                                                                                Villanueva

          6%
                                                                                                            Average of Pimineta
          4%                                                                                                and San Manuel

          2%

          0%
                                      2009    2010      2011      2012     2013       2014
    Source: Ministry of Finance, PIU PROMOSAS


    Figure 15 – Increased Revenue per Unit Volume in PROMOSAS Operators
                        (Mancomunidad and Small Towns)



                                5.0
     Lempiras per cubic meter




                                                                                             3.58                 3.82
                                4.0
                                3.0          1.90                   2.07
                                2.0                                                          2.62
                                                                    1.81                                            3.11
                                1.0          1.84
                                0.0
                                             2011                   2012                   2013                   2014
                                                                             Years
                                             Mancomunidad de Villanueva           Average of other PROMOSAS Operators

    Source: Ministry of Finance, PIU PROMOSAS.


The progress made on administrative indicators has not yet translated to improved service
continuity for Aguas del Valle’s customers. According to data gathered for the
PROMOSAS project, continuity has fallen sharply in Villanueva, as shown in Figure 16,
while having improved only marginally in Pimienta and held steady in San Manuel.
Taken together, Aguas del Valle lags comparable providers. Potablity data is not
available.




                                                                                                                                  37
           Figure 16 – Service Continuity, Mancomunidad Villanueva and PROMOSAS
                                            Operators

                      20                                                    Average,
                      18                                                    PROMOSAS
                      16                                                    Operators
                      14                                                    Municipalidad
      Hours per day




                      12                                                    Villanueva
                      10
                                                                            Municipalidad
                       8
                                                                            Pimienta
                       6
                       4                                                    Municipalidad San
                       2                                                    Manuel
                       0
                           2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                Year
Source: World Bank data collected for the PROMOSAS project.



    4.2 Pooled Support Services—Mancomunidad Güisayote
To contextualize the TA deliverable on the formation of the joint service provider model
of Aguas del Valle, task team also considered the effectiveness of pooled support
services, another application of the mancomunidad model. The mancomunidad of
Güisayote is headquartered in the municipality of La Labor (population 9,516) in
Ocotepeque Department near the Salvadoran and Guatemalan borders. The association
covers the municipalities of La Labor, Dolores Merendon (population 3,741), Fraternidad
(population 4,890), Lucerna (population 5,859), and Sensenti (population 11,426).50 The
permutation of the mancomunidad model applied in Güisayote does not fully unite
municipal water service provision—CWBs continue to operate WSS services
independently. Rather, it pools resources to finance personnel who support municipalities
in the designation and administration of protected areas, such as watersheds. (It is also
active in solid waste disposal and other municipal infrastructure.) Support personnel hired
by the mancomunidad assist municipalities in the technical aspects of the purchase and
reforestation of lands in the surrounding hillsides, specifically in what parcels to acquire
and what species of trees to plant. Pooled support services are an effective way to make
skilled personnel available at an accessible cost.

Interestingly, two separate CWBs supply drinking water and sanitation services to the
municipality of La Labor. The two CWBs split control and operation of the town’s
drinking water and wastewater plants. Under the terms of a long-standing—but
informal—agreement, one CWB operates the plants one month with its own personnel,
and the other CWB operates the plants the next month with its personnel. Local
authorities indicated that this arrangement has functioned reasonably well and that, as a
result, they did not see a need to explore a joint service provision model under a
mancomunidad at this point. This experience suggests that municipalities can benefit

50
     The Mancomunidad Güisayote maintains a website at http://www.mancomunidadguisayote.hn/.


                                                                                                38
from pooled support services financed by a mancomunidad without expending the
resources to charter a joint service provider. Nevertheless, the informal arrangement
sharing the operation of WSS services is fragile in that official roles are not officially
assigned, and a change in leadership could unravel the progress made in La Labor.
     4.3 Takeaways from Experiences with Mancomunidades
The formation of the joint service provider Aguas del Valle represents a pioneering
experience that could be replicated in other parts of the country. However, it is not yet
clear that the benefits of the mancomunidad model in the WSS sector outweigh the costs
of establishing a joint service provider. The multiyear process to establish the
mancomunidad and joint service provider requires managerial and political bandwidth
and distracts from other aspects of strengthening individual providers. In terms of results,
two years after its formation, Aguas del Valle faces many of the same administrative
challenges as the individual providers it brought together, including cost recovery, the
reduction of nonrevenue water, and high rates of late payments. The initial on coverage
and continuity data, as presented above, does not point to the conclusion that the
mancomunidad has improved WSS service delivery. A fuller treatment of the lessons
about the process of forming a mancomunidad and joint service provider have been
documented in the report titled “Aguas del Valle—Modelo Innovador en la Prestacio?n de
Servicios de Agua y Saneamiento con Economi?a de Escala para Medianos y Pequeños
Prestadores,? carried out under this TA.51

Similarly, it is not clear that many opportunities exist for a joint service provision model
to emerge organically in the near-term in Honduras. Analysis carried out under the TA
highlighted that establishing a joint service provider with the aim of improving
economies of scale, in the absence of shared WSS infrastructure, can present high costs
with limited visible benefits in the near term. (Also, as the case of Güisayote illustrates,
shared infrastructure can be operated reasonably effectively without establishing a formal
mancomunidad.) Technical assistance from the Bank’s PROMOSAS project was critical
in the creation of the mancomunidad and of Aguas del Valle as a constituted
supramunicipal service provider that today offers service to multiple municipalities.
Indeed, the ability to access funding through PROMOSAS was the primary driver of the
formation of the mancomunidad, and it is not clear that a mancomunidad would have
formed there, or in a similar context, without it having been a condition of the
PROMOSAS program.

The pooled service provision model employed by the Mancomunidad Güisayote appears
to be a more feasible near-term approach than the joint service provision model to help
small town providers improve specific aspects of WSS service provision (such as
watershed management). Nevertheless, the joint service provision model offers important
opportunities to gain economies of scale and to inject management know-how in small
towns. These benefits could outweigh the initial sunk costs associated with the creation of
the mancomunidad over the long term. This approach has proven effective in other
countries in the region and remains of particular interest in the context of Honduras with

51
 Martha Lizeth Galo Osorto, 2014, “Aguas del Valle—Modelo Innovador en la Prestacio?n de Servicios de
Agua y Saneamiento con Economi?a de Escala para Medianos y Pequeños Prestadores,? World Bank.


                                                                                                   39
298 distinct municipalities. Additionally, the model of joint service provision through a
mancomunidad could prove advantageous for attracting private interest in the operation
of WSS services. Today, national sector authorities state that small towns in Honduras
are generally too small to be of much interest to the private sector, though larger
groupings of municipalities aggregated through a mancomunidad could invite private
participation in the sector.

   5. Capacity Building for Small Town WSS Service Provision
The second pillar of the TA supported capacity building for small town service provider
staff and local technical assistance providers. The government identified lack of capacity,
outlined in Table 1, as a major constraint to sustainable WSS service provision in small
towns, which in turn creates a barrier to investment in those communities. Faced with the
a persistent challenge of low capacity, the GoH requested Bank support to develop and
execute on-the-job training for staff at small town WSS service providers, as well as
training for technical assistance providers as a means to bolster domestic capacity to
provide on-call support to for WSS service providers. The impact of training programs
may not always immediately translate to improved service provision—other binding
constraints exist, including the need for infrastructure investments—though strengthen
capacity establishes a foundation upon which small towns can make incremental
improvements to services offered in the future. This chapter presents an overview of the
capacity building activities supported by the TA.

Honduran WSS sector authorities requested support in developing capacity building that
is specifically tuned to the unique needs and challenges of the municipal entities and
CWBs that provide WSS services in small towns, as well as formal training for personnel
who provide TA and on-call support. Recognizing the demand for capacity building
emanating from providers in those areas, the SDC and ERSAPS developed a 10-module
training curriculum. Four small town service providers completed this course in 2013 and
offered positive feedback on the usefulness and applicability of the materials presented.
The Bank partnered with SDC to scale up this initiative and in doing so deepened the
long-standing relationship between the two institutions in the water sector in Central
America. Development and implementation of the capacity-building program would not
have been possible without the technical and financial assistance offered to ERSAPS by
the SDC; a list of SDC’s specific contributions is available in annex 1. Now that the
training materials have been developed and tested, curricula and trainers can be
reactivated when the government or donors chose to finance further courses.
   5.1 On-the-Job Training for Small Town Providers
Selection Criteria
The Bank, in coordination with the GoH, established selection criteria for participants in
on-the-job training courses. Among the most important criteria that enabled the selection
of small town service providers to participate in the training program were (i) geographic
location: cities that are within 50 kilometers of a large provider or an intermediate city,
that has benefited from PROMOSAS; (ii) providers involved in institutional-
strengthening processes through sector programs (PROMOSAS, PIAPS, SDC’s Water
and Sanitation in Towns/Schools initiative); (iii) those small towns where SANAA is

                                                                                        40
providing service and decentralization is pending; and (iv) small towns that possess basic
infrastructure (water and wastewater treatment plants) with the caveat that the state of the
infrastructure should be such that it does not require major investments for its operation.
The interest and availability of personnel was also taken into account.

Course Material
To scale up the capacity-building program, the Bank hired local consultants to work with
the Secretariat of Economic Development’s National Center for Labor Training (Centro
Nacional de Educación para el Trabajo, CENET52), the government’s official on-the-job
training entity, to update the existing 10 course modules based on initial participant
feedback and develop two additional modules on energy efficiency and on financially and
environmentally sustainable service provision. The resulting 12 modules constitute a 36-
hour training course entitled “Small Town Water and Sanitation Service Management.?
Training in WSS-specific topics—the sector institutional framework, coordinating
operation and maintenance of small town physical infrastructure, tariffs, planning—is
supplemented by capacity building in business management, including accounting and
cost recovery, with the goal of helping service providers think like financially sustainable
businesses. Table 6 presents a complete list of topics covered in the course.53 On the basis
of feedback from the initial round of courses offered by the SDC, the Bank team worked
with CENET to develop a separate, complementary course in business leadership skills
specifically targeted to managers of small town WSS service providers. Both courses
were adopted by CENET as part of its official training topics, making CENET the first
public entity to provide on-the-job training in this field.

 Table 6 – Small Town Water and Sanitation Service Management Course Modules

 Module                                         Content
 1            Legal and Institutional Framework
 2            Regulation of Service Provision and Community Water Boards
 3            Regulation of Tariffs, Addressing User Requests and Complaints
 4            Drinking-Water and Sanitation Systems
 5            Drinking-Water Quality Control
 6            Maintenance of Equipment
 7            Regulation and Tariffs
 8            Administration and Accounting
 9            Management and Results Plans
 10           Information Systems
 11           Energy Efficiency at Small Town Water Utilities
 12           Financially and Environmentally Sustainable WSS Service Provision



52
   CENET is a public agency that offers regular and one-off training programs across a range of sectors to
build the stock of human capital in Honduras. The agency was recently transferred from the Ministry of
Education to the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness to reflect the government’s v iew of labor
training as a driver of economic growth. More information is available at www.cenet.gob.hn.
53
   Full reports for the training courses, prepared by CENET, are available upon request from the WSP
office in Honduras.


                                                                                                         41
The expanded curriculum was field tested with 21 officials from 20 service providers in
April 2015 (a full list of participants is available in annex 2). Local experts, including
                                                 current and former ERSAPS staff, led
  Box 4 – Household Metering to Promote training sessions, which allowed for
                     Equity                      sector specialists with deep knowledge of
 Testimonial: Building a culture of payment the realities of working in Honduras to
 for services through equitable service tailor international best practices to the
 provision                                       country’s      unique      context.     The
                                                 intervention, although not designed to
 The Jesus de Otoro Community Water measure impact rigorously, helped WSS
 Board, JAPOE, built community support service providers in small towns make
 for expanded use of metering through the incremental improvements to their
 lens of equity. As codified in the CWB’s management practices. Providers learned
 charter, all community members have the tools to improve the uptake of
 right to water service, though overuse of micrometering in their communities
 water by some community members can (Error! Reference source not found.),
 result in insufficient supply for covering all update tariff structures to more
 families.                                       accurately reflect the cost of service, and
                                                 take    steps     to    establish    citizen
 To reduce water usage, JAPOE launched a participation entities and legally register
 micrometering program and tariff system service providers, as presented in annex
 based on blocks. For approximately one 4. Successful participants—in this case,
 year after meters were installed, residents all—received a certificate of completion
 received mock invoices showing their during a graduation ceremony held in
 water usage and the cost for that amount of December 2015.
 water, though they were not required to
 pay. After allowing residents time to adjust
 their usage patterns on the basis of the cost Participants were asked to provide
 of water, JAPOE began to send bills based feedback on the quality and usefulness of
 on usage that residents were responsible for the courses for their work. Reactions
 paying. By installing household metering were largely positive, with 20 of 21
 of water usage and gradually rolling out a participants giving a score of “excellent.?
 tariff system based on that usage, residents Participants also offered valuable
 better understood the value of water and feedback that will be incorporated into
 reduced their use of the resource. As a future iterations of the course. Service
 result, sufficient water is available in the providers highlighted the need to
 network to serve all households and thus strengthen training in water resources
 equitably cover the entire community— and watershed management (such as
 including those who live on hillsides.          payment      for     ecosystem      services
models54). This training should be offered by experienced water resources specialists,
possibly from the Ministry of Environment. Similarly, participants emphasized the need
to focus specifically on topics that are relevant for small towns and leave aside those that


54
  Potential payment for ecosystem services models in Honduras include cash transfers from WSS utilities
to coffee farmers located upstream, to reduce production or to fallow fields that are located near streams so
as to improve water quality. A cleaner water source translates to reduced treatment costs.


                                                                                                           42
pertain to larger providers, such as energy efficiency (the majority of small town WSS
systems are gravity-driven and do not use energy-intensive infrastructure such as pumps).

In partnership with ERSAPS and CENET, the Bank piloted a leadership skills course
under this TA for managers as a follow-on to the management training courses. The
training emphasized developing “soft? skills and new approaches to leadership that
include fostering creativity, spurring innovation, focusing on the customer, and managing
change, as outlined in Table 7. This training course was developed on the basis of
participant feedback from the initial SDC program and broader experience in Latin
America that highlighted the importance of client-centered management. The leadership
skills course included a hands-on group exercise to prepare a business plan, enabling
participants to work in teams on a project directly related to their work responsibilities.
Nineteen managers, representing an equal number of WSS service providers, participated
in the 24 hour, in-person course in June 2015. Participants reported that the training
would help them to more effectively lead neighborhood meetings and interact with
municipal authorities such as the mayor.

                Table 7 – Leadership Skills Training Course Modules

                    Module                    Content
                      1       Individual Business Skills
                      2       Leading Change
                      3       Creativity and Innovation
                      4       Ideas to Improve Services
                      5       Client Identification
                      6       Value Propositions
                      7       Cost Structure
                      8       Partners, Resources, and Key Activities
                      9       Client Relationships
                     10       Service Delivery
                     11       Sources of Income

The blend of managerial and leadership training is crucial for managers from small town
providers to be able to put what they learn in the classroom into practice in the field. In
addition to developing capacity at small town service providers, the process of designing
and implementing the course built training capacity at CENET. This marks the first foray
of the national government’s official on-the-job-training entity into training for small
town water providers and signals an important step in the training needed to
professionalize water service provision in those areas. By centralizing training under
CENET, service providers and donors alike can turn to a single entity for trusted
capacity-building services. In addition, now that the training curriculum has been
developed and field tested, the replicable content can be adapted quickly for use with
administrators at CWBs in peri-urban areas, which often have similar administrative
structures and physical infrastructure, and face many similar challenges. Indeed, the
municipality of Tegucigalpa has expressed interest in strengthening the capacity of peri-
urban providers.



                                                                                        43
   5.2 Formal Training for Local TA Providers for Small Towns
To be able to provide on-call support for small town or peri-urban WSS service providers
on a national scale, Honduras needs to increase the number of individuals who have
formal training in the provision of such TA. To this end, the TA supported a partnership
with the Engineering Polytechnic University of Honduras (UPI) to develop and finance a
diploma program for local water and sanitation service technicians. The 15-day, 120-hour
course provides an in-depth treatment of the content, including legal framework and
tariffs, directed at small town providers. It also included additional training in more
advanced topics such as geographic information systems. Table 8 outlines the nine
modules of the course. The first cohort of 19 recently minted WSS technicians from
across the country received their diplomas in December 2015 (a full list of participants is
available in annex 3), increasing in-country capacity to provide TA services to small
town or peri-urban WSS service providers. This replicable course has also generated
experience that UPI, a respected private university, can build upon to offer similar
training programs when funding and interest is available from the government or donors.

              Table 8 – Local Water and Sanitation Service Technicians

 Module          Content
 1               Legal Framework
 2               Information Technology Tools to Support WSS Service Providers
 3               Cadaster of Users, Communication and Outreach
 4               Geographic Information Systems
 5               Invoicing and Billing, Employee Roles, and Salaries
 6               Accounting, Tariff Management
 7               Partnerships with Third-Party Providers
 8               Efficient Water Usage
 9               Management and Results Plans

   6. Policy Guidance for WSS Service Provision
The final pillar of the TA sought to inform government policy for the provision of
technical assistance for small town WSS providers and increase the visibility of small
towns in sector planning instruments for both the GoH and external donors. The TA
informed policy through two formal channels: (i) the preparation of a set of guidelines for
SANAA’s provision of technical assistance for WSS providers in small towns, and (ii)
the inclusion of small towns in sector policy and planning instruments. The downstream
impact of heightened visibility of small towns is expected to be more systematic
provision of technical assistance to small towns coupled with greater access to financing,
which will ultimately improve service delivery. This section describes how the TA
informed GoH policy toward small towns.
   6.1 Strategic Guidelines for SANAA Technical Assistance in Small Towns
SANAA is in the process of transforming from the national water utility to the GoH’s
unified provider of technical assistance for decentralized WSS utilities, in accordance
with the 2003 Water Framework Law. To support the change process at SANAA, the


                                                                                        44
GoH request Bank support in the development of strategic guidelines to orient the
technical assistance SANAA will offer WSS providers in small towns. In response to this
request, the TA supported the preparation of a set of guidelines in close partnership with
SANAA. The iterative process built on the results of the assessment carried out under this
TA and experience from implementing the training courses, combined with lessons
learned from other initiatives in small towns.

The guidelines were generated with the support of CENET, in consultation with key
sector institutions including ERSAPS, SANAA, CONASA, the WSS National Providers
Association (AHPSAS), and the Honduran Association of Municipalities (Asociación de
Municipios de Honduras, AMHON). The guidelines will help SANAA systematically
define its new scope of work and lead the sector reform dialogue to strengthen the
national water and sanitation institutional capacities, move forward in completing the
decentralization process, and better position small town providers to improve WSS
service provision.

The strategic guidelines focus on five objectives, aligned with the challenges outlined
above and government priorities. They include (i) universalize access to WSS services,
(ii) improve the service levels of existing WSS systems, (iii) achieve sustainable
management of WSS services, (iv) operate WSS services within a framework of
sustainable water resources management, and (v) transparently cover operating and
investment costs. Table 9 outlines the proposed strategic guidelines, aligned with the
WSS Sector National Policy and Plan, as well as the expected outputs, suggested to
SANAA authorities, which could frame future schemes in capacity building and TA for
small town providers.

 Table 9 – Strategic Program Guidelines for Intervention in Small Towns to Build
              SANAA’s Capacity-Building and National TA Program

  Suggested Guideline            Expected Outputs in Capacity Building and TA
Developing operational       Consolidate and adapt best-practice manuals
instruments                  Prepare additional learning modules in operations and
                              maintenance
                             Develop and approve technical specifications for small
                              town providers
Creating and                 Design and approve mechanisms to certify TA local
strengthening the             providers
availability of certified    Provide municipalities with templates for terms of
private consultancies for     reference and hiring procedures to ensure the quality of
small towns                   the services hired
Establishing capacity-       Improve managerial skills among small town managers
building and TA              Provide training and assistance to small towns in
subprograms                   management practices
                             Establish knowledge exchange events, both locally and
                              abroad, including water operator partnerships



                                                                                         45
Establishing financial       Design master plans for the development of small-scale
mechanisms for                water and sanitation systems
institutional                Design the methodology to prepare Results-Oriented
strengthening activities      Provider Plans.
                             Assist small town providers in accessing financial
                              mechanisms established in the WSS Financial Policy
Improving school             Implement the School and Healthy House Methodology
infrastructure                (Escuela y Casa Saludable) in small towns

Promoting environmental      Complement the Territorial and Micro Watershed
and sustainable services      Integrated Management Plans (Plan de Ordenamiento y
                              Manejo de la Microcuenca), framed within an
                              interinstitutional collaboration agreement with the
                              Ministries of Agriculture, Forestry and Environment, and
                              AMHON
                             Support small towns in defining a financial model that
                              includes tariffs, the financing environmental protection,
                              and conservation activities to protect local watersheds

Given finite resources, SANAA cannot assist all small towns simultaneously and that
political economy conditions might not enable some municipal providers to participate in
the process of improving their technical and managerial capacities. In this regard, the
strategic guidelines include recommendations in terms of staggering the implementation
of the TA and reform initiatives. The guidelines recommend prioritizing small towns that
already have drinking water and wastewater treatment plants, with the aim of improving
the sustainable management of existing infrastructure. To this end, the strategy identifies
11 small towns, ranging in size from 6,914 to 26,626 inhabitants, for intervention in the
first phase.

A preliminary version of the guidelines was presented to SANAA leadership in January
2016. SANAA has established a working group to develop a plan to formally incorporate
the strategic guidelines into the organization’s work plan for small towns. It is expected
that the guidelines will allow SANAA to work more effectively with small towns to help
improve WSS service provision in the near to medium term. While the one ongoing Bank
investment operation in the WSS sector in Honduras, PROMOSAS, closes in December
2016, the strategic guidelines can serve as a roadmap for to maintain engagement with
the government until prospects for a follow-on operation improve.
   6.2 Increased Visibility of Small Towns in Sector Planning Instruments
The TA strengthen government implementation capacity for the 2003 Water Framework
Law vis-à-vis small towns through support for three complimentary TAs: (i) the
development of a National Water and Sanitation Sector Policy, approved in March 2013;
(ii) the preparation and approval of a Water and Sanitation National Plan (Plan Nacional
de Agua Potable y Saneamiento, PLANASA) in 2014; and (iii) the development of a
National Water Sector Financial Policy in 2015. These three sector planning instruments
explicitly address small towns, as outlined below.

                                                                                        46
The Honduras National Water and Sanitation Sector Policy, approved by CONASA in
March 201355, seeks to guide and orient decision making the in WSS sector through the
year 2038.56 It establishes small towns of 5,000 to 30,000 residents as one of the five
categories of population centers in the context of WSS service provision.57 The inclusion
of a separate category for small towns in the Sector Policy was a crucial first step to
increase the visibility of these communities in ongoing sector planning and strategy
instruments.

The Water and Sanitation National Plan (Plan Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento,
PLANASA), supported by the Bank, is an instrument to implement sector policy over the
long term passed on hydrological basins and population strata, one of which are small
towns. The PLANASA sets a goal of 91 percent potable water coverage and 60 percent
improved sanitation coverage in small towns by 2022. To reach these coverage targets,
the PLANASA calls for US$21.3 million to expand access to drinking water in small
towns, and US$13.9 million to broaden small town sanitation coverage through the year
2018. 58 Inclusion of a line item for small towns in national sector planning is an
important milestone in allocating adequate financing for WSS service provision in these
areas.

The 2015 National Water Sector Financial Policy, developed with Bank support,
operationalized the priorities set for in the PLANASA. It stratifies municipalities by
population size and delineates mechanisms for small towns to access the National Water
and Sanitation Fund (Fondo Nacional Agua y Saneamiento, FONASAN) for investment
capital and the national budget to finance technical assistance. The Financial Policy seeks
to encourage private participation in the WSS sector, including in small towns, by
sanctioning the use of performance-based contracts. The use of ‘green’ funds, specifically
earmarked by donors for climate-relevant activities, to support water resources
management. The Financial Policy also includes a non-reimbursable lump sum prize,
administered by CONASA, to be used for improvements to WSS systems to be awarded
to a small town provider on the basis of progress made.59 The Bank is continuing work in
2016 with the GoH in the development of specific sector financing mechanisms in line
with the Financial Policy. The inclusions of small towns in the National Water Sector
Financial Policy opens new avenues for financing that should gradually allow small
towns to finance the investments needed to improve WSS service provision.

55
   http://es.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/politica_nacional_formato_carta_marzo-2013-
_version_resumida1.pdf
56
   Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (CONASA), March 2013, “Poli?tica Nacional del
Sector Agua Potable y Saneamiento?.
57
   The five categories include: (i) major urban areas of Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula; (ii) intermediate
cities of greater than 30,000 inhabitants; (iii) small towns of 5,000 to 30,000 inhabitants; (iv) small
communities and concentrated rural areas of 250 to 5,000 inhabitants; and (v) dispersed rural areas with
less than 250 inhabitants.
58
   Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (CONASA), “Plan Nacional de Agua Potable y
Saneamiento (PLANASA),? December 2014.
59
   Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (CONASA), “Poli?tica Fi nanciera del Sector Agua
Potable y Saneamiento de Honduras,? November 2015.


                                                                                                             47
    7. Outcomes, Lessons Learned, and Future Engagement
The process of implementing the TA has yielded tangible results and important insights
into WSS service provision in small towns in Honduras that are relevant to inform Bank
operations and other donor activity going forward. This section outlines the key results of
the TA around each outcome level. It then presents lessons that point to new
interventions or approaches identified through carrying out the TA that can help
Honduras rise to the challenge of providing quality, sustainable WSS services for all.
    7.1 Overview of TA Outcomes
Table 10 summarizes the results of the TA across four levels: (i) development finance
informed and leveraged; (ii) knowledge creation; (iii) policy informed; (iv) capacity
building. Taken together, the TA made an important contribution to place small towns on
a firmer footing to continue to improve WSS service provision going forward.

                      Table 10 – TA Outcome Levels and Categories
     Outcome Level                                        Results of the TA
Development financing           PROMOSAS additional financing allocated credit and counterpart
informed  and leveraged          funds for investments in two small towns—San Pedro de Tutule
Donor resources are              and Teupasentí—that benefited from management training under
mobilized to improve             the TA
WSS services in small           SDC-WSP Strategic Alliance informed, which forms part of the
towns                            SDC Regional AGUASAN Program
                                Mancomunidades service provider model documented in the report
                                 “Aguas del Valle—Modelo Innovador en la Prestacio?n de
                                 Servicios de Agua y Saneamiento con Economi?a de Escala para
Knowledge Creation
                                 Medianos y Pequeños Prestadores?
Lessons learned and best
                                La Mancomunidad Aguas del Valle management model replicated
practices regarding WSS
                                 in other parts of the country with the support of the “Cabeza de
services in small towns of
                                 Danto? TA financed by the Spanish Agency for International
Honduras are widely
                                 Development Cooperation
disseminated
                                Exchange events in best practices on management in small towns,
                                 carried among small operators, but also involving intermediate
                                 (medium size) operators
                                Strategic Guidelines for SANAA Technical Assistance in Small
WSS sector policy and            Towns developed in partnership with CONASA and presented to
strategy informed                SANAA
WSS sector policy and           Assessment of WSS Service Provision in Small Towns prepared
national plans informed          and delivered to sector authorities
regarding the proposed          National Water and Sanitation Plan (Plan Nacional de Agua
intervention strategy for        Potable y Saneamiento, PLANASA), approved in 2014 with a
improving WSS services           specific designation for small towns.
in small towns                  National Water Sector Financial Policy, approved in 2015, with
                                 specific policy lines for financing in Small Towns.
Client capacity increased       Curriculum for capacity building at small town WSS providers
Capacity of small town           developed with CENET
service providers to            Curriculum for WSS technicians developed in partnership with
manage WSS services is           private university.


                                                                                               48
strengthened                   Training provided for 21 small town service providers and 19
                                WSS technicians


     7.2 Development Financing Informed and Leveraged
The TA leveraged approximately US$2 million in infrastructure investments from the
PROMOSAS additional financing by improving management capacities at WSS service
providers in the beneficiary small town of San Pedro de Tutule and Teupasentí.
Moreover, the TA has tested capacity building approaches that could inform a follow-on
operation to PROMOSAS aimed at completing the WSS sector decentralization process,
which hinges on the transfer of nine small town WSS systems. Nevertheless, financing
remains a binding constraint to improving WSS service delivery in Honduras.

Investments to Support Universalization of WSS Services in Honduras
The assessments carried out under the TA highlighted wide gaps in WSS service
provision in small towns: 21 percent of residents in small towns do not have access to an
improved drinking water source; 37 percent of small towns providers report offering
service that is rationed for fewer than 5 hours per day; and 35 percent offer service less
than 20 hours per day. Indeed, the Bank’s 2015 Honduras Systematic Country Diagnostic
(SCD) highlights unequal access to WSS services as a key challenge to reducing poverty
and boosting shared prosperity in Honduras.60 Closing the service gap calls for improved
management capacity to make better use of infrastructure and resources; it will also
require additional financial resources to rehabilitate and expand WSS infrastructure.
Properly targeted, increased investment can have a direct impact on poor communities.
The Bank can play an important role in financing the infrastructure investments needed to
universalize access to WSS services in small towns.

Progress made through PROMOSAS with two small towns combined with the results of
this TA, indeed could provide key inputs to the design of a future WBG operation in the
sector. The results of both, lending and the WSP TA activities in small towns, are
already informing the dialog with the central government, who has shown interest to
continue pushing for the decentralization of the remaining systems. As of mid-2016, 13
WSS systems have yet to be decentralized to municipalities, the majority (9) are small
towns.
     7.3 Knowledge Creation—Broadening the Knowledge Base to optimize technical and
         financial resources
The TA made valuable contributions to the sector knowledge base about the use of
management models, provider capacity, and service coverage and quality in small towns
in Honduras. It also highlighted the limitations of existing data a pointed toward areas for
improvement. The knowledge generated then helped inform government policy, as well
as the capacity building pillar of this TA. This new knowledge has informed decision

60
  Hernandez Ore, Marco Antonio; Sousa, Liliana Do Couto; Lopez, J. Humberto. 2016. Honduras –
Unlocking economic potential for greater opportunities – systematic country diagnostic. Washington, D.C.
World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/02/25894168/honduras-unlocking-
economic-potential-greater-opportunities-systematic-country-diagnostic-vol-2.


                                                                                                      49
making—including development of the Sector Financial Policy—and seem likely to
influence investment choices in the short to medium terms. Over the course of client
consultations carried out under the TA, several additional avenues emerged for deepening
knowledge of WSS provision in small towns. The Honduran Association of
Municipalities, AMHON, expressed interest in Bank support to conduct a thorough
diagnostic of the status of the implementation of legal instruments at small town WSS
providers. This would help to target further TA to ensure compliance with the 2003
Water Sector Framework Law. Likewise, a more thorough understanding of the use of
information and communications technology (ICT) solutions on the part of small town
WSS providers would help to target future TA in that area, to improve efficiency and
transparency at service providers.

The TA documented the innovative use of the mancomunidad joint service provision and
pooled support services models, as applied to the provision of WSS services. In coming
years, Aguas del Valle will yield additional insights as the mancomunidad continues to
consolidate WSS service provision, and the Bank should continue to monitor that
process. As water security challenges grow, mancomunidades have made possible the
financing of useful TA to municipalities on collective and participatory management of
shared watersheds.

Strengthen WSS Sector Data Collection and Analysis for Small Towns
The assessment carried out under the TA highlighted shortcomings in the data collected
by national sector authorities and pointed to several key areas where metrics should be
strengthened: (i) improved availability of fundamental metrics such as access to services
or percentage of nonrevenue water; (ii) more precise measurement of key parameters,
such as average hours of continuity as opposed to a large range such as the currently used
5 to 20 hours per day; (iii) new indicators reflecting emerging concerns about climate
change and disaster risk management; (iv) availability of human resource data—
including educational attainment and experience in the water sector—to inform capacity-
building efforts and bring about greater service provision efficiencies; and (v) expanded
data on tariffs, fees, and subsidies to inform tariff design and improve infrastructure
design. These data are needed to improve the targeting of TA and investments, and
should be collected on an ongoing basis as part of the standard reporting documents that
providers supply to ERSAPS. PROMOSAS has extensively supported capacity at
ERSAPS, and follow-on TA activities could maintain a similar institutional modality to
support ERSAPS to collect, compile, and manage data. Moreover, it is worth exploring
potential incentives—both carrots and sticks—to encourage accurate and timely reporting
of key indicators. The Bank could play an important role in providing technical support
to ERSAPS to strengthen data collection through a future TA or investment operation.
Additionally, knowledge sharing through ongoing instruments such as MAPAS, SIASAR
as well as potential TAs like the WASH Poverty Diagnostic, could benefit from more
precise data.
   7.4 Government and Donor Policy and Strategy Informed
The assessment and sector strategy informed the national dialogue, boosting the profile of
underserved small towns. The category of small town was formally included first in the
National Water and Sanitation Sector Policy in 2013 and then in the National Water and

                                                                                       50
Sanitation Plan (Plan Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento, PLANASA), approved
in 2014, both of which were prepared with Bank support. The National Water Sector
Financial Policy, prepared with Bank support and approved in 2015, was designed to
include mechanisms to channel funds to small towns. A set of Strategic Guidelines for
SANAA Technical Assistance in Small Towns has been developed with SANAA to
provide systematic direction for its redefined role as the national provider of technical
support for the WSS sector, and SANAA has established an internal working group to
operationalize the guidelines. The guidelines offer forward-looking linkages to continue
to support dialogue between the Bank and the WSS sector in Honduras.

Increased Visibility of Small Towns to the Government and Donors
Small towns play a central role in the national WSS sector dialogue today due in part to
the analytical work and capacity building carried out under the TA. Increased prominence
in the national development agenda, coupled with effective training for small town
providers that increases their capacity to manage investments, opens the door to donor
activity. The TA has demonstrated the viability of engaging with small towns for other
international partners as well as for government officials. A recent example is that of the
Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation (Agencia Española de
Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo, AECID), which is developing a program in
the mancomunidad of Cabeza de Danto which replicates lessons learned in the formation
of the Aguas del Valle joint service provider. The increased visibility of small towns
should ultimately translate to increased access to funding and training, and in turn to
better WSS service provision for their residents.

Toward the Professionalization of WSS Service Provision
The 2010 passage of the national Municipal Civil Service Law created an important
opportunity to professionalize the provision of WSS service. If the law becomes
consolidated in practice, it should have a meaningful impact on the ability of WSS
providers to attract and retain high-quality staff and managers. This stability will lessen
the need to continually train—and retrain—new employees. The Bank should continue to
support the implementation of the Municipal Civil Service Law as a channel for
operationalizing the training of small town WSS providers and improving service
delivery. The results of further consultation with the government suggest that this could
take the shape of a TA initiative.

Decentralization and Community Participation
The WSS service decentralization process set in motion by the 2003 Water Sector
Framework Law remains a work in progress more than a decade hence. Efforts should
continue to move municipal governments away from direct service provision, which has
performed poorly, and to create autonomous small town providers, which have a better
success rate. A Bank effort could assist the government in developing standard tools,
instruments, and incentives for moving municipal governments in this direction.
Financial incentives from the Bank could be key to this kind of activity.

In terms of participation, municipal provision, including the presence of COMASs and
USCLs, offers a degree of proximity to residents that fosters accountability and improved


                                                                                        51
governance. Nevertheless, challenges in terms of service coverage, quality, and
sustainability remain entrenched. Much of the problem, as detailed above, stems from the
limited technical and administrative capacity at small town providers. In the case of
CWBs, common in small towns and predominant in peri-urban areas, the high turnover of
personnel is a key challenge to effective service provision. CWBs are often led by
volunteers with little experience or training in the provision of WSS services. This
situation points to the need to continue the professionalization of day-to-day WSS service
provision operations, while maintaining direct channels for citizen participation in
guiding the overall direction of services offered in towns. The Honduran experience of
decentralizing WSS service to limited-capacity municipal providers should raise red flags
for countries considering similar reforms, particularly with regard to the role of the
community and the speed and scope of decentralization.

Importance of maintaining flexibility to meet evolving client needs
The approach to informing government policy taken by the TA evolved with changing
government priorities. Over the course of TA implementation, the government placed
increasing importance on the development of complimentary Bank supported TAs
including Water and Sanitation National Plan, PLANASA, in 2014, and the WSS Sector
Financial Policy in 2015. The task team adjusted to the government’s lead by supporting
the explicit incorporation of small towns into these instruments, which have since been
formally approved and will guide government actions in the sector for years to come.
This support built on the assessment of WSS in small towns carried out under the TA and
complimented the small towns intervention strategy that was prepared at the request of
SANAA. These adjustments called for an increase in budget, though delivered stronger
results for the client.
   7.5 Strengthened Client Capacity—Importance of Strengthening Ongoing Technical
       Assistance
WSS providers from 21 small towns have improved knowledge to incrementally improve
management practices through successful participation in the training provided through
the TA. In addition, a cohort of 19 WSS technicians has received training that will enable
them to provide on-call support to small town providers. The training courses supported
by the TA included staff from two small town providers that benefited from the 2013
PROMOSAS additional financing who now have improved operational and management
knowledge to sustainably administer their WSS systems. The TA also consolidated
training for small town providers under CENET, which will enable this public agency to
grow and evolve the curriculum to meet new challenges. CENET now offers
certifications for graduates of its WSS training courses.

Operationalize the Guidelines for Government’s Intervention in Small Towns
The strategic guidelines for intervention in small towns developed under the TA in
collaboration with SANAA offer a road map for capacity-building activities to help WSS
service providers improve service quality and coverage. SANAA, the national entity
charged with providing TA for WSS providers in Honduras, has formed a working group
to put the recommendations into practice. The 2015 SCD identifies poor management
practices at SANAA as a bottleneck to improving WSS service coverage and quality, and



                                                                                       52
points to the need to continued support for the sector.61 The donor community, including
the Bank, would need to play an important role in providing ongoing financial and
technical assistance for these training activities. Indeed, the guidelines provide a series of
entry points for the Bank to maintain engagement with the WSS sector in Honduras while
seeding the ground for new investment operations.

Technical and Support Services to Professionalize Service Delivery in Small Town
Providers.
The experience of the TA emphasized the need to offer ongoing technical and support
services—spanning administration and management models to operations and
maintenance of infrastructure—to complement capacity-building activities for small town
providers. This need is likely to persist at least in the medium term until access to
education becomes broad enough to allow for effective training of water sector
professionals. The government is cognizant of the need and duly charged SANAA with
providing technical and support services for decentralized service providers.
Nevertheless, the donor community will continue to play a key role in financing,
convening, and bringing global knowledge to the training activities for personnel at WSS
providers to supplement the financial and technical resources available from SANAA.

Scale Knowledge Laterally to Strengthen the Municipality of Tegucigalpa’s role as WSS
Provider for peri-urban areas.
Knowledge generated through the TA concerning the capacities, challenges, and demands
for support of small town WSS service providers—CWBs, autonomous municipal
providers, and direct municipal providers—is highly relevant to strengthening WSS
service provision in other types of communities. One of the sticking points in the transfer
of Tegucigalpa’s WSS system from SANAA to the municipality has been the role of the
approximately 350 CWBs that provide service to peri-urban areas surrounding the
capital. Many of these CWBs lack the financial and administrative capacity to take on the
additional responsibilities that come with the municipalization of WSS services. Through
the Honduran Association of Community Water Boards, CWBs have voiced strong
interest in training, which would target CWBs that provide services in some of the
country’s poorest communities. The management training developed and piloted under
the TA is directly relevant and can be replicated for these peri-ruban CWBs. Many small
communities falling below the 5,000-inhabitant threshold for small towns present similar
characteristics—types of WSS systems, management models, growing populations—and
would benefit from the training developed through the TA.

Increased Focus on Water Security
The implementation of training courses for small town WSS providers and subsequent
feedback from participants highlighted the interest of local providers in increased training
to meet emerging water security challenges and operationalize integrated water resources
and watershed management in their communities. However, much of the existing training
material for small town providers, including the curricula developed under this TA, starts
at water intake. There is a need to strengthen curricula in water security and climate
resilience topics tailored to small providers, as well as to develop trainers to offer these
61
     Ibid.


                                                                                           53
new courses. Increasing the focus on water security topics is also in line with country
needs identified in the 2015 SCD and support for the GoH’s National Water Resources
Policy and Strategy targeted by the FY16-20 Country Partnership Framework (CPF).62

Replicability of Training—New Directions for Capacity Building
The experience of developing and implementing a training program for small town WSS
providers identified several potential areas of Bank support that could be implemented
based on country demand. First, high turnover at CWBs creates an ongoing need for
capacity building. Approximately half of the staff at CWBs rotates every two years—
amounting to over 750 people at peri-urban Tegucigalpa’s 350 CWBs alone—which
suggests that a stream of incoming cohorts could benefit from training tailored to their
new roles and personal profiles. To meet this demand for training, the Honduran
Association of Community Water Boards suggested the creation of a standing training
program for CWBs. A permanent program to build capacity at CWBs represents a
plausible medium-term step to improve service delivery by boosting management skills.
Second, the National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH) and the Engineering
Polytechnic University (UPI) have expressed interest in the development of a diploma
program for civil service professionals who will provide TA at small town or peri-urban
WSS providers. This program would bridge management and engineering topics to fill a
gap between one-off, on-the-job training programs and a full-fledged engineering or
management university degree. These two initiatives represent opportunities emerging
from the TA to further institutionalize training for WSS providers in Honduras. Third, to
scale up these training opportunities, it is worth investigating the possibility of creating
an online or virtual learning version of existing curricula.

Evaluation of the results of training activities
Attributing causal effects to capacity building activities is a challenge across sectors,
thought training activities in the WSS sector can begin by looking to how training is
believed to be linked to service provision. Participant satisfaction surveys and the
establishment of solid institutional models are two places to start. The TA incorporated
participant satisfaction surveys as an important first step (20 of 21 participants considered
the on-the-job training course ‘excellent’). The experience of implementing the capacity
building program for WSS providers in small towns under the TA highlighted the
importance of collecting baseline data to begin to quantify the impact of training
provided. In the case of this TA, ex ante and ex post surveys could shed light on the
institutional progress make to align small town providers and CWBs with relevant
legislation (for instance, the creation of requisite community participation mechanisms).
To this end, it could be valuable to partner with the Education Global Practice and
include an education specialist with experience in on-the-job training programs in the
design process.




62
  World Bank. 2015. Honduras - Country partnership framework for the period FY16 - FY20. Washington,
D.C.: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/12/25480989/honduras-
country-partnership-framework-period-fy16-fy20.


                                                                                                 54
Annex 1—Contributions from the Swiss Agency for
Cooperation and Development (SDC) to the Small
Town Water and Sanitation Service Management
Course
No.          Aportes                            Descripción/Caracterización
 1 Manual técnico para la       Provisto por ERSAPS para el diseño e implementación del
    gerencia de AA              curso de Gerencia de AA
10 Módulos del curso de         Versión amigable para desarrollar el curso con perfil de
    gerencia de AA              entrada de participantes de juntas rurales y prestadores de
                                pequeñas localidades
 1   Diseño curricular          Implementar el curso de gerencia de AA
 1   Buenas prácticas           De las USCL-COMAS de las 4PC
 1   Manual de organización y   De las USCL de las 4PC
     funcionamiento
 1   Lecciones aprendidas       Fortalecimiento de los prestadores de las 4PC (Énfasis en
                                procesos que implementan los prestadores de las pequeñas
                                localidades)
 1   Intercambio de             Prestadores de las 4PC
     experiencias




                                                                                              55
Annex 2—WSS Service Indicators
                                                              Cobertura Cobertura POTABILIZACIÓN    PRODUCCIÓN (lps)
 Nº          Ciudad            Departamento       Población                                                                  Continuidad
                                                                Agua       AS       lts/segundo
                                                                                                   Superficial Subterránea
  1   La Esperanza-Intibucá Intibucá                26,500        71%       34%                                               5-20 horas
  2   San Lorenzo             Valle                 25,626        88%       17%           50        1,000.0    s.d             racionado
  3   La Paz                  La Paz                23,669        99%       59%      25, 25 y 25                              5-20 horas
  4   Talanga                 Francisco Morazán     21,356        62%       15%                        10.5           12.4     racionado
  5   Potrerillos             Cortés                20,935        95%        0%                          -           130.0    5-20 horas
  6   La Entrada              Copán                 20,361        74%       19%         100            167.0            -      racionado
  7   El Paraíso              El Paraíso            18,993        86%       86%          50           123.5             -      racionado
  8   Santa Bárbara           Santa Bárbara         18,035        29%       35%          25           132.0             -    20-24 horas
  9   Yoro                    Yoro                  17,360        65%       13%          50            94.6             -    20-24 horas
 10   Nacaome                 Valle                 17,328        83%        9%                     1,000.0             -      racionado
 11   Santa Rita              Yoro                  15,097        71%       10%                         3.0           26.6     racionado
 12   Guaimaca                Francisco Morazán     14,771        72%       11%                        24.1            2.8     racionado
 13   Santa Cruz de Yojoa Cortés                    14,507        39%       13%                                               5-20 horas
 14   Nueva Ocotepeque        Ocotepeque            14,500         0%        0%                                                racionado
 15   Pimienta                Cortés                13,488        61%        0%                          -            25.5     racionado
 16   Trujillo                Colón                 12,995        61%       11%                        53.0                    racionado
 17   San Marcos de Colón Choluteca                 12,958        89%       43%          25                                           s.d.
 18   Sonaguera               Colón                 12,946        85%       55%                                                racionado
 19   El Negrito              Yoro                  12,794        32%        6%                     1,500.0    s.d            5-20 horas
 20   Morazán                 Yoro                  11,830        82%       13%                     1,500.0            9.0      <5 horas
 21   Campamento              Olancho               11,340        90%       26%          25                                   5-20 horas
 22   Marcala                 La Paz                11,244        84%       30%          52            53.2             -      racionado
 23   Sabá                    Colón                 10,432        81%       15%                       537.0            4.0    5-20 horas
 24   San Juan Pueblo         Atlántida             10,033        82%        0%                        39.7             -    20-24 horas
 25   Jesús de Otoro          Intibucá               9,970        92%       18%          30        18,230.0                    racionado
 26   Agua Blanca Sur         Yoro                   8,974       100%        0%                                              20-24 horas
 27   Roatán                  Islas de La Bahía      8,802        42%        4%          15                                     < 5 horas
 28   El Triunfo              Choluteca              8,435        79%        8%                                               5-20 horas
 29   Las Vegas               Santa Bárbara          8,363        93%       31%          50            27.3             -     5-20 horas
 30   Trojes                  El Paraíso             8,146        74%       53%                        38.0             -      racionado
 31   Azacualpa               Santa Bárbara          7,841       100%        0%                        13.0                     12 horas
 32   Urraco Pueblo           Yoro                   7,485        88%        0%                                              20-24 horas
 33   Villa de San Francisco Francisco Morazán       7,483         0%        0%                         6.0                    racionado
 34   San Manuel              Cortés                 7,226        20%       18%                          -            12.5    5-20 horas
 35   El Paraíso              Copán                  7,200        88%       51%          25             29.0            -    20-24 horas
 36   Mezapa                  Atlántida              7,064        48%        0%                                              20-24 horas
 37   Villa de San Antonio    Comayagua              7,051        81%       56%                                               5-20 horas
 38   Copán Ruinas            Copán                  6,914        69%        0%          50             64.0            -     5-20 horas
 39   San Fco de La Paz       Olancho                6,780        97%       16%                                               5-20 horas
 40   Gracias                 Lempira                6,715        48%       33%                                                       s.d
 41   El Pino                 Atlántida              6,500        77%        0%                                               5-20 horas
 42   Monjaras                Choluteca              6,374        83%        0%                                               5-20 horas
 43   Baracoa                 Cortés                 6,168        81%        0%                                              20-24 horas
 44   Florida                 Copán                  6,019        94%       10%                          19                   5-20 horas
 45   Arizona                 Atlántida              5,946        49%        0%                       111.8             -    20-24 horas
 46   Sabana Grande           Francisco Morazán      5,683        56%       24%                         3.2            2.8            s.d
 47   Ojojona                 Francisco Morazán      5,683        75%        0%          5              3.9             -       < 5 horas
 48   San Luis                Santa Bárbara          5,625        68%       37%                        12.0             -    20-24 horas
 49   Santa Ana               Atlántida              5,471        73%        0%                          20                  20-24 horas
 50   Valle de Angeles        Francisco Morazán      5,454        60%        0%                                              20-24 horas
 51   Quimistan               Santa Bárbara          5,415        64%       47%                       569.0            8.0   20-24 horas
 52   El Porvenir             Atlántida              5,036        97%        0%                       151.5             -    20-24 horas
 53   La Masica               Atlántida                            0%        0%                          10
                          Promedio                                74%       27%
Source: ERSAPS, Moncada Gross 2015.




                                                                                                                                       56
Annex 3—Institutional Consolidation at Small Town
WSS Providers
Progress Made in Professionalizing Small Town WSS Service Provision
Small town WSS providers have achieved varying levels of progress in formalizing and
professionalizing service delivery in line with the 2003 Water Sector Framework Law.
Table AS.1 shows the results of an analysis conducted under the TA into the progress
made to formalize and professionalize service provision in the 25 small towns that
participated in the WSS service provider training program that started in October 2014.
The table provides a snapshot of a cross-section of small town WSS service providers and
not a rigorous evaluation of the impact of the training courses provided.63 A green cell
indicates that a policy or program has been adopted or implemented at the respective
WSS service provider; yellow indicates that initial steps have been taken to launch a
policy or program, though it has not yet been consolidated, approved, or implemented;
and a blank cell indicates that no progress has been made in the respective area. The three
primary indicators are arranged in rough chronological order, though they can in fact be
undertaken independently (that is, a provider could consolidate indicator 3 before making
any progress on indicators 1 or 2).

Indicator 1 seeks to capture progress made on codifying municipal policies that
designate a service provider type (for example, autonomous municipal entity or CWB).
Only 10 of the 20 small town providers have begun to draft a municipal WSS policy, and
none have had one approved.

Indicator 2 assesses the formalization of a small town’s service provider in terms of the
existence of a legal charter. (A provider does not need to be designated by a municipal
policy before being formalized.) Six small town providers that participated in the
management training course have been legally constituted.

Indicator 3 is a measure of key citizen participation mechanisms, including Municipal
Water and Sanitation Committees (COMASs) and Local Control and Supervision Units
(USCLs). Over half of the 20 small towns that participated in the management training
have a standing COMAS or are in the process of developing one. USCLs are present or in
development in 17 of the 20. Citizen participation is the most advanced of the indicators
tabulated, in part reflecting long-standing community involvement in WSS service
provision in small towns where SANAA had been absent.




63
  The collection of service providers included here is likely biased toward the generally well-performing,
responsive providers that participated in the training program. Although data are not available, it is
reasonable to expect that these providers have made more steps toward formalization and
professionalization of services than the median small town WSS provider.


                                                                                                         57
   Table A3.1 – Toward Professionalization of Service Provision after Participation in the Small Town Water and Sanitation
                                                Service Management Course



                      Municipality




                                                  Department
                                                                                            Indicator 1             Indicator 2               Indicator 3




                                                                         Partner(s)
                                                                                                                                       3.0 Citizen Participation




                                                                           Other
                                                                                       1.0 Municipal Policies                                Mechanisms
                                                                                         1.1           1.2      2.0 Service Provider      3.1             3.2
                                                                                      Developed    Approved     Legally Constituted    COMAS            USCL
Masaguara
Yamaranguila                                                   CRS/SDC
San Juan                             Intibucá                  CRS/SDC
San Isidro                                                     ERSAPS/SDC
        a
Japoe                                                          ERSAPS/SDC
Trojes                                                         CONASA/SDC
El Paraíso                                                     ERSAPS/SDC
Alauca                                                         ERSAPS /SDC
                                     El Paraíso
Moroceli                                                       ERSAPS
Teupasenti                                                     ERSAPS
Jacaleapa
Tatumbla                                                       ERSAPS/FHIS
                                     Francisco
Guaimaca                                                       ERSAPS/FHIS
                                     Morazán
Tegucigalpa
Villa de San Antonio                                           SANAA
Lamaní                                                         AECI
                                     Comayagua
Ajuterique
San Sebastián
Marcala                                                        ERSAPS-FHIS
                                                               ERSAPS/PROMO
San Pedro de Tutule                  La Paz
                                                               SAS
Cane
Source: World Bank Staff estimates.
a. Japoe did not participate in the management training. It is included here as an example of good practice at a small town CWB.




                                                                                                                                                                   58
References
Cáceres, José David, 2014, “Mapeo de Actuaciones de las Agencias Miembros de la
Mesa de Cooperantes del Sector de Agua Potable y Saneamiento de Honduras—Peri?odo
2014–2015,? Swiss Agency for Cooperation and Development.

Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (CONASA), March 2013, “Política
Nacional del Sector Agua Potable y Saneamiento?,
http://es.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/politica_nacional_formato_carta_marzo-2013-
_version_resumida1.pdf.

Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (CONASA), December 2014, “Plan
Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (PLANASA)?.

Consejo Nacional de Agua Potable y Saneamiento (CONASA), November 2015,
“Poli?tica Financiera del Sector Agua Potable y Saneamiento de Honduras?.

Cuéllar, Ramo?n, 2013, “Abastecimiento de agua y saneamiento en pequeñas localidades
urbanas de Honduras Caracteri?sticas, Potencialidades y Elementos Estratégicos,? study
prepared for the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program.

ECLAC, 1998, “Honduras: Assessment of the damage caused by Hurricane Mitch,?
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/6/15506/l367-1-en.pdf.

Galo Osorto, Martha Lizeth, 2014, “Aguas del Valle—Modelo Innovador en la
Prestacio?n de Servicios de Agua y Saneamiento con Economi?a de Escala para Medianos
y Pequeños Prestadores,? World Bank.

Government of Honduras Decree No. 118-2003, Water Sector Framework Law,
http://www.ersaps.hn/documentos/normativa/1%20Ley%20Marco%20de%20Agua%20y
%20Saneamiento.pdf.

Government of Honduras Decree No. 74-2010, Municipal Civil Service Law,
http://www.tsc.gob.hn/leyes/Ley%20de%20la%20Carrera%20Administrativa%20Munici
pal.pdf.

Hernandez Ore, Marco Antonio; Sousa, Liliana Do Couto; Lopez, J. Humberto. 2016.
Honduras - Unlocking economic potential for greater opportunities – systematic country
diagnostic. Washington, D.C. World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/02/25894168/honduras-unlocking-
economic-potential-greater-opportunities-systematic-country-diagnostic-vol-2.

Honduras Association of Municipalities, “Listado de mancomunidades,?
http://amhon.hn/j1/images/demo/doc/Mancomunidades_Honduras_2015_2.pdf.




                                                                                        59
Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Línea de Pobreza, 2014,
http://www.ine.gob.hn/index.php/component/content/article?id=91.

Law and Regulations for Municipal Governments (La ley de municipalidades y su
reglamento),
http://amhon.hn/files/pdfs/Ley%20De%20Municipalidades%20y%20Su%20Reglamento.
pdf.

Moncada Gross, Luis, 2015, “Análisis de Situacio?n de Pequeñas Ciudades y Propuesta de
Líneas Estratégicas—Estrategia de Fortalecimiento Gestión Agua Potable y Saneamiento
Pequeñas Ciudades en Honduras,? study prepared for the World Bank’s Water and
Sanitation Program.

Oakley, Stewart, 2005, “Analysis of the Stabilization Ponds of Honduras,? RRASCA,
FHIS, and USAID.

“Strategic Plan for the Modernization of the WSS Services in Honduras,? chapter 4.1.,
www.ersaps.hn/documentos/interes/PEMAPS.pdf.

WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water and Sanitation, 2015 update,
“Honduras: estimates on the use of water sources and sanitation facilities (1980-2015),?
http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/Honduras.xls.

World Bank, World Development Indicators, Urban Population,
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country=HND&series=&peri
od=.

World Bank, 2013, “A Public Expenditure Review: Decentralization of Water and
Sanitation Services (PER),?
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/08/18903974/public-expenditures-
decentralized-governance-honduras-towards-restoring-fiscal-consolidation.

World Bank, 2014, “Monitoring Country Progress in Water and Sanitation (MAPAS)
Honduras Country Report—2014,?
http://www.wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/06/
11/000350881_20140611084512/Rendered/PDF/886230WSP0Box30eVersion0009June2
014.pdf.

World Bank, 2015, “Honduras Economic DNA,?
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/06/24636290/honduras-economic-dna-
maintaining-commitment-special-focus-poverty-shared-prosperity.

World Bank, 2015, “Honduras - Country partnership framework for the period FY16 -
FY20,? http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/12/25480989/honduras-country-
partnership-framework-period-fy16-fy20.




                                                                                           60
World Bank Institute, January 2010, “Introducing Accountability and Transparency to
Water and Sanitation Services in Honduras through Enhanced User Participation,?
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSOCACCDEMSIDEGOV/Resources/2871813-
1200515311988/4577172-1271445400159/notes01_honduras.pdf.




                                                                                      61
