    Report No: ACS16592
.




    Republic of Poland
    Social Inclusion in Poland
    Key Challenges and Opportunities for Support

.
    May 2016


.
    GSU03 – GSP03
    EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
.




                          .
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
    World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect
    the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
    does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations,
    and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World
    Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:


    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
    permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
    The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
    portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information
    to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-
    8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
    Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
    pubrights@worldbank.org.
Acknowledgments

This Policy Note was prepared by a team comprising Daniel Owen and Matteo Morgandi (co-team
leaders), Ryszard Malarski, Rob Swinkels and Valerie Morrica, as part of the Poland Social Inclusion
Technical Assistance (P151200). The Warsaw Institute of Economic Studies (WISE) prepared a
background study on the delivery of social inclusion interventions in Poland, based on a qualitative
assessment carried out in 8 gminas. Malgorzata Odlak prepared a background paper on the
institutional architecture of social inclusion services and policies, Dorothee Bueler conducted
background research. We are thankful to the advice and comments provided to the team by peer
reviewers Jaroslaw Hawrysz and Sandor Karaksony, as well as by colleagues Ulrich Hoerning, Sally
Zeijlon, Noel Mueller, and practice managers Nina Bhatt and Andy Mason. We thank the participants
from government and civil society who attended and provided feedback to this note during the
consultation workshops that were held in Warsaw, Zamość and Lublin on May 2016, and to the NGO
Stocznia for the organization of these events.
Contents

Executive Summary................................................................................................................................. 2
I. Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 13
II. Key Trends and Aspects of Social Exclusion in Poland....................................................................... 14
III. Overview of the Institutions in Charge of Addressing Social Exclusion in Poland ............................ 21
IV. Learning from Past Operational Experiences ................................................................................... 26
V. Areas for Potential Intervention at the Policy and Operational Level ............................................... 31
References ............................................................................................................................................ 50
Annexes ................................................................................................................................................ 52
Executive Summary

Poland has seen strong economic growth over the last 25 years, which has translated into
significant welfare gains, although less or even much less in some regions at the bottom of
the distribution. However, per capita income growth for the bottom 40 percent has fallen
behind the growth rate for the entire population. Moreover, in recent years, Poland has
witnessed a moderate increase in the extreme poverty rate, which reached 7 percent in
2014.
Poverty and social exclusion inhibits certain groups from sharing in the dividends of economic
growth. These individuals are faced with barriers that prevent them from taking advantage of
opportunities to improve their well-being and dignity (World Bank 2013b). Social exclusion
undermines their ability and opportunity for individuals to access markets, services, and
spaces and is costly to individuals and to society at large. If unaddressed, social exclusion can
have long-term consequences for human and social capital and social cohesion.
This policy note analyzes the main drivers of social exclusion in Poland and the programs that
are currently in place to address it. It combines the evidence of different analytical activities
conducted by the World Bank in recent years, including both quantitative studies based on
national household surveys and a new qualitative data collection. The latter employed focus
group discussions and interviews with beneficiaries and service and government
representatives in eight gminas—five rural and three mixed urban-rural—to assess the
bottlenecks and constraints that impinge upon the efficient delivery of social inclusion and
activation systems.
Poverty and social exclusion in Poland are primarily associated with the lack of stable
employment and high number of dependents in the household. There is a mutually reinforcing
relationship between job security and social cohesion: jobs of a minimum quality are a key
aspect of socialization and a route to civic participation. In Poland, increases in employment
rates have been the main drivers of income of the bottom 40 percent (World Bank 2014b).
By the same token, poverty rates have remained particularly high for households with
disabled members, single-parent households, and families with more than three children, as
well as for those that depend on farm income. In most cases, these are households with few
members engaged in work, rather than households with low-wage workers.
There are also strong demographic and geographic dimension to social exclusion in Poland.
One of forecast scenario assumes that Poland will be a rapidly aging society, with the median
age set to increase to 40 years in 2040. This implies significant aging-related challenges,
including that of maintaining labor force participation for older workers and preventing old-
age poverty and exclusion. Social exclusion in Poland also has a strong territorial imprint
connected with disparities between regions and local communities. Five of Poland’s 16
regions, located in the eastern part of the country, remain among the 20 poorest regions of
the European Union (EU) (World Bank 2015d). Disparities within each region have been
increasing (typically with large cities faring relatively better) and now rank among the highest
in the EU. Poverty rates in rural areas are more than one and a half times the national
average. In small towns, the better educated are likely to have migrated to cities or abroad,
and those who remain are typically employed in the public sector, working in low
productivity agriculture or unemployed and dependent on social transfers. While
accelerating internal mobility could speed up poverty reduction, for rural gminas,
depopulation, including international migration, represents a key challenge to improving
living standards. Over the last decade, approximately 2.3 million Poles have emigrated in
search of better employment prospects.
The principal causes for social exclusion relate to barriers to entering the labor force. This
includes the cost of and access to transportation to better paying jobs and, for women, the
difficulty in reconciling duties for childcare or care of the elderly with work in a context
where many employers discriminate against mothers (WISE 2015a). A widespread
involuntary withdrawal from the labor force in Poland is a manifestation of these barriers.
According to a recent Bank study, almost half of the 7 million Poles who are able to work but
jobless are fully inactive (World Bank 2015b). Roughly 12 percent of those out of work live in
a household that receives social assistance transfers. The vast majority of the unemployed
reside in rural areas, where access to off-farm jobs is more difficult.
Other dimensions of social exclusion, besides joblessness, relate to identity and social isolation.
Consultations in poor areas of Poland consistently identified the following groups as those at
the highest risk of social exclusion: youth living in remote isolated localities, the isolated
elderly without families, the disabled, the uneducated, alcoholics, and homeless people.
Joblessness is higher among all of these groups but often masks more complex issues.
According to social workers’ opinions (WISE 2015b), social exclusion converges on individuals
with overlapping constraints. What may appear on the surface as an unemployment issue
may conceal complex challenges such as mental health issues or addictions. For these social
groups, discrimination or stigma is a recurrent concern.
Many vulnerable individuals face limited job protection and ominous prospects for stable
employment. Almost half of the workers in the bottom 20 percent have temporary
contracts—double the EU average—while workers from wealthier income quintiles tend to
enjoy more stable employment. Temporary contracts, particularly civil law contracts that
offer (until recently) limited protection against dismissal or in case of sickness, are
particularly widespread among young people and those who are less educated. Qualitative
studies with socially vulnerable workers and the unemployed have highlighted these
contracts as a singular source of abuse and of a feeling of being second-class workers (WISE
2015a). Under these constraints, informal work is often preferred, as it sustains eligibility
status for benefits, including health insurance (when combined with an employment office
registration) and social assistance. Farmers are another vulnerable group in the labor market
and are overrepresented among the in-work poor (Lewandowski 2013). Those with more
than 2 ha of land can neither register as unemployed nor benefit from active labor market
measures.
Social workers report a widespread sense of passivity and ‘helplessness’ among their clients,
leading to ‘chronic’ benefit dependency. Passivity in lagging localities is evident in the area of
entrepreneurship and civic engagement—the ways in which citizens participate in the life of
a community to improve living standards and future prospects that help shape the
community's future. The qualitative research has exposed widespread risk aversion and a
perception that markets and opportunities are severely limited (WISE 2015a).
Current Public Policies to Address Social Exclusion and Poverty
Addressing poverty and social exclusion is both a societal and individual responsibility that
can be facilitated and activated by policy interventions, implemented at multiple levels of
public administration. . Thus, this policy note includes recommendations for a social inclusion
strategy across several domains of public intervention.

                Support labor supply and increase     Protect incomes while incentivizing
                          employability                entry in productive employment


                                             Social Inclusion

                 Develop local capacity to deliver
                                                        Stimulate private job creation in
                  services and execute national
                                                                lagging localities
                             policies


Poland has a range of public policies intended to address short-term poverty and rehabilitate
the poorest individuals and households to become self-sufficient. These are delivered through
Centers for Social Work (CSW) with a system of targeted cash benefits and social work as
well as labor offices and other institutions. Although these services function according to
national legislation specific to each service, implementation is decentralized at the gmina
and powiat levels. Critical service delivery gaps are a result of weaknesses in the design of
employment services, social services, and benefits; limited or overstretched human capacity;
and constraints related to horizontal institutional coordination and vertical accountability
arrangements.
An overburdened social assistance system with limited impact on poverty reduction
The social assistance system to assist the poor is largely cash based. Cash-based social
benefits, at 0.7 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2013, are low in comparison to
average EU spending (at 1.2 percent of GDP according to Eurostat). This also translates to
low generosity of benefit amount per beneficiary relative to the EU average. CSW are in
charge of managing the five core social assistance benefits and roughly 30 additional
supplements that aim to mitigate risks such as child poverty, temporary indigence, and
incapacity to work. Household survey data suggest that the system suffers from significant
coverage gaps: half of the households with children and consumption below the legal
threshold receive family benefits1; less than 20 percent of households living in extreme
poverty access social assistance (World Bank 2015c). Qualitative analysis suggests that some
of the most vulnerable individuals find the process of obtaining social assistance or housing
benefits humiliating. Low take-up may also relate to the fact that benefits are less generous
in Poland than in other EU countries.
Low take-up and low generosity explain why the poverty mitigation effect of noncontributory
transfers in Poland is limited. Simulations suggest that without the principal social assistance
benefits, the relative poverty rate would be only 3 percentage points higher (World Bank
2015c). One of the consequences is that, in spite of the existence of a dedicated means-
tested child allowance and a child tax credit, children continue to face a higher risk of poverty
(22 percent) than the general national average (17 percent) (Eurostat 2013).
The risk of work disincentives resulting from social benefit receipt is low but benefits can
become a rational survival strategy for many families. Minimum-wage jobs tend to pay better
than social assistance. However, the possibility of combining several benefits together,
coupled with the cost of obtaining childcare or the availability of informal jobs can make
reliance on benefits a rational livelihood strategy.
Counselling and outreach by social workers to vulnerable families and individuals is a critical
element of a systematic social inclusion policy, but it remains underdeveloped in Poland. Social
workers and labor office staff in Poland report that administrative duties occupy a majority of
their time, at the expense of client-facing work. Each social benefit and service functions
according to its own centrally determined regulation (Rymsza 2014). Harmonizing

1
 This note was completed before the introduction of the "Family plus 500" and does not take into
account its impact on the number of households receiving benefits, the poverty level, and other
parameters analyzed further
administrative procedures across programs, while consolidating the number of benefits, may
be a first approach to free up caseworkers’ time so that they can focus on priority tasks, such
as proactive outreach to identify and enroll vulnerable households.
Services for integration in the labor market of vulnerable groups
The Labor Offices have revamped their operational tools and procedures, following the 2014
amendment of the Employment Law: this law introduced a new profiling system to segment
customers in three profile categories: (I) who the labor market ready; (II) those ready to
participate in traditional active labor market programs (ALMP) , and (III) those in need of
alternative integration approaches2. The new legislation has increased the range of ALMPs
that can be offered to profile II clients: the menu is sufficiently broad to help the unemployed
address the typical barriers to entering employment (vocational training, telework mobility
and housing subsidies, wage subsidies for uncompetitive groups such as youth and those
aged 50 years and above, childcare subsidies, and higher education incentives).
Expenditure analysis suggests that the per-beneficiary spending on labor measures is
extremely low compared to other EU countries. Funding for labor office operation was even
lower in comparative terms (World Bank, 2015c). Low administrative expenditures result in
limited capacity to manage high customer flows, cater to employers’ needs, and administer
more complex programs. The substance of programs however is heavily skewed toward
wage subsidies and programs for people with disability, with little provision for training and
skills development and almost no expenditure on services to support labor supply, such as
childcare vouchers.
Views by social assistance recipients reflected in the qualitative assessment echo such
concerns. A frequent complaint is the high level of mismatch between the content of training
programs offered by the labor office and the labor market reality. Often, individuals receive
training in vocations that simply are not demanded in the local market, or, alternatively, for
training that they do not have sufficient skills to pursue. Labor market councils at the
regional and provincial level are responsible for defining relevant training priorities, and
further assessment is required to understand what inhibits them from providing better
training provision guidance.
There is room for improvement in the profiling system used in labor offices. Interviews of
labor office clients suggest that computer application based arbitrary assignment often
undermines the profiling system. Being a woman with young children was reported by clients
to be sufficient to be classified as ‘hard to serve’ (profile III). Importantly, profiling has far-
reaching consequences on the level of access to services for clients. Group III clients are

2
    Currently, Government is working on improving the system of profiling or eliminate it completely
outsourced to newly introduced Activation and Integration Programs (AIPs) and in the
meantime, cannot access the active labor market measures that the labor office has at its
disposal. Alternatively, this group can be delegated to social cooperatives, for sheltered
employment. Clients have become more strategic in the way they answer interview
questions, to avoid being profiled in the third group, which is perceived to open fewer
opportunities.
A year after their legal introduction, AIPs have only been partially implemented, leading to a
temporary vacuum of services for those most in need. Even once AIPs are in place, the period
devoted to train clients (2 months) appears to be short, and there is concern that individuals
will not be immediately ready to enter private employment and have scarce recourse to
useful stepping stones to the formal labor market. Second, poviat labor offices fund private
entities or nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to deliver AIPs if CSW is not ready to
participate in the program, which does not incentivize a direct coordination with the CSWs or
adherence to the original social contracts. In this context, only those CSW that are more
entrepreneurial and have the ability to apply for European funds can obtain funding to offer
tailored activation programs. It remains to be seen if the NGOs or private sector will be able
to introduce sufficient innovations.
Alternative institutions that are found to be more promising to activate the most vulnerable
population are Centers for Social Integration (CSIs). These combine employment activation
with social integration activities and organize training together with counselling for
participants. These centers appear to be better equipped to treat the problems of the very
poor, compared to employment services in general. Importantly, the CSIs can then directly
integrate members through social enterprises. Activities range from serving meals to
cultivating food on public land or organizing a repair shop for agricultural machinery.
Coordination across services: An unrealized potential
International experience underscores the importance of coordination across services to
make social interventions more effective, yet coordination is probably one of the most critical
challenges for service delivery in Poland. Framework legislation, institutions, and levels of
implementation (gmina versus powiats) remain very distinct, and there are no clear
accountability lines between levels of government.
The IT platform made available to local governments (Samorządowa Elektroniczna Platforma
Informacyjna [SEPI]) was considered by many officials a promising starting point for
coordination, though its use, which is not mandatory, remains uneven across agencies.
Information sharing about clients continues to be discouraged by concerns with data
protection legislation.
The qualitative study has also revealed that incentives for beneficiaries to enter the labor
market are weak. There is a theoretical possibility of suspending payment of the temporary
social assistance benefit if beneficiaries do not follow up on their personal action plan (social
contract), but it appears that the social contract is not always prepared and sanctions are
rarely used. As a result, cash benefits remain an entitlement, while it appears that labor
offices lack a sufficient quality vacancies to enforce work obligations.
Limited development of program monitoring, evaluation, and accountability
Program inputs are overregulated while there is no focus or data to trace outcomes of social
policy. Currently the CSW need to adhere to rigid rules for service execution, with low
flexibility to decide how best to reach certain outcomes. Cost sharing or aggregation of
services between gminas is not rewarded and funds are not fungible across sectors within
gminas’ budgets. Instead of being monitored and evaluated on results, local executing offices
work within narrow implementation margins of centrally funded programs. This stifles
innovation and increases attention on procedures and away from outcomes. Program
evaluation is virtually absent, and in some areas, even basic reporting of inputs and outputs
to the superior administrative level is lacking. There is a lack of key monitoring indicators that
can shed light on the impact of services provided. For instance, there is currently no central
data on results of psychosocial support offered in CSW—the programs given in CSIs—on care
institutions.
In the case of labor offices, progress has been made in developing a common monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) system to measure gross effectiveness of labor market measures three
months after their completion. A new ranking methodology put in place by the Ministry of
Labor and Social Policy (MoLSP) now provides additional financial resources to labor offices
that score highest on placement rates of their measures and that offer more counselors. This
is an important step forward. However, the current system could offer adverse incentives to
shy away from offering labor market measures to the vulnerable unemployed, in fear that
these clients may affect negatively the average placement rates of their office. Moreover,
the incentive mechanism associated with these indicators remains weak, especially for lower
capacity areas: labor offices, which cannot hope to attain the bonus reserved for top-
performers, receive the same allocation every year.
The role of the third sector
NGOs and church institutions network are important complementary providers of in-kind
social assistance and services in Poland and the sector has grown in size and
professionalization in the last decade. Key challenges that NGOs face include lack of
meaningful inclusion at the planning stage by local authorities and an underdeveloped set of
standards for the provision of services. Many NGOs can bring clear assets, including robust
experience in outreach and communication with clients, innovations in service delivery for
specific groups, ability to adapt to different social priorities, and cost-effectiveness owing to
their ability to include community resources and volunteers.
Social cooperatives represent a nascent resource for labor market integration process of the
poor, as they operate on the local product market but with the focus on employing
vulnerable workers. Social cooperatives are characterized by their objective of providing
socially useful goods or services at the local level on a cost-recovery basis while employing
disadvantaged people as a share of their members. Much institutional support has been
given to their development through the European Social Fund (ESF) and through the creation
of a Social Economy Support Centers by the MoLSP. To date there are approximately 450
social cooperatives operating in Poland, mainly active in the service sector. The main source
of seed financing comes from local labor offices (in the form of start-up grants and subsidy to
social security contributions for 12 months). Beneficiaries and local authorities recognize
social cooperatives as one of the most-effective social inclusion initiatives but cite two main
challenges: obtaining start-up capital is effectively available only through EU funds (not
commercially) but procedures are complex and some minimum income requirements remain
a barrier for the poor. A second challenge is soliciting membership—many of the
unemployed would simply like to work as wage employees.
Growing with Inclusion: A Multisectoral Policy Agenda
I. Strengthening support to promote labor market participation
In the most successful antipoverty social programs, coordinated support materializes in
various forms, including finance, care and health services, counselling, and housing. Their
goal is to address basic needs and enable potentially transformative actions, including
building capacity and skills and stimulating the search for employment. Successful outcomes
are contingent on an articulation of services at the local level, steered according to an
individual or family plan (‘social contract’), for a prolonged period.
The existing monitoring system could be further improved to make labor offices focus more on
the most vulnerable unemployed. For instance, impact indicators of labor market measures
could focus on employment rates at 6 and 12 months from completion of the intervention
and also monitor wage levels; these factors would enhance the cost-benefit analysis of
measures. Second, labor market insertion rates of participants should be compared with
appropriate counterfactual groups of clients having similar levels of labor market
vulnerability that did not receive the same measure. This would incentivize a focus on those
who really need measures to improve employability.
Developing the care sector is a strategic investment for job creation and labor market
participation. In more than one gmina the Bank qualitative study suggests that in spite of low
employment rates, social cooperatives and some firms cannot find workers available to work.
With increased aging in rural areas, professional care would be an important source for
employment, and it would free up people’s time to work. This will require the development
of standards for home-based childcare services or home-based services for the elderly and
start-up capital; the key will be to strike a balance between quality and ease of entry of new
actors.
II. Stronger functional integration of social assistance and labor offices
Social assistance benefits could be consolidated further, and innovative approaches to
strengthen work incentives could be piloted. Simplification of the multiplicity of benefits could
reduce transaction costs and free up social worker’s time to undertake more client-focused
activities, including an active outreach exercise to improve the coverage level of the
programs. Designing and implementing an in-work benefit (as in other OECD countries) to
top-up formal wages could be a potential way to incentivize social assistance beneficiaries to
take formal jobs, even if at minimum wage, without losing some of the benefits. The benefits
could potentially also include a transportation voucher conditional on working.
Some countries with high levels of benefit non-take-up have invested in active outreach
campaigns to identify and enroll eligible beneficiaries. This requires communication tools to
clarify rules and services to which individuals have access. It is also often very important to
‘rebrand’ both employment offices and social centers and train officials in successful
communication approaches.
Many European countries have embarked on functional reorganization (up to full integration)
of employment and social services to achieve stronger coordination, instill a ‘work first’
culture, and reduce the bottlenecks faced by clients when dealing with separate institutions.
Examples range from a full merger of different agencies (Ireland) to strong functional
integration (United Kingdom) or maintenance of separate entities but with clearly defined
processes for joint work on individual cases (Denmark, Sweden, Germany). The 2014 reform
did not resolve many of the practical arrangements that are necessary to reach effective
cooperation between labor and social welfare offices.
Speeding up the adoption of the common IT system to profile clients and conduct case
management could avoid duplication of information collection across offices, potential
gaming of the system by clients, and favor joint strategies by different institutions (health,
social workers, and labor offices). In addition, efforts could be directed at institutionalizing
regular face-to-face coordination meetings at the local level to discuss individual cases, which
remains an ad hoc voluntary practice. The new AIPs for the ‘group III’ clients of labor offices
represent a first attempt to seek this coordination, but in its current design it appears to
bypass the role of the CSW rather than trying to leverage or improve their capacity.
These changes do not need to impose an excessive burden on public finances but suggest a
different logic of spending. Many of the functional improvements proposed in this note
require significant up-front technical work but ultimately will translate in better deployment
and organization of existing resources and institutions. In the medium term, the
administrative budgets of social offices and labor offices should increase, bringing them
closer to the EU average. These resources could be invested in building capacity of staff and
developing platforms for improved coordination. In part, they could be recouped through
larger absorption of EU funds, especially in low-capacity gminas. Ideally, this would be
complemented by a more explicit pact between central and local governments on the
delivery of well-defined outputs and social policy outcomes. Reducing the coverage gap of
benefits for the very poor in the short run also calls for a significant increase in expenditure
on social assistance. Based on the figures of the recent analysis (World Bank 2015c),
quadrupling the number of beneficiaries of last resort social assistance to reach at least 80
percent of the extreme poor (assuming constant targeting precision) would cost an
additional 0.33 percent of GDP. This alone would still maintain Polish spending (current 0.7%
plus this additional 0.33 makes 1.03%) below the EU average (1.2 percent of GDP).
III. Strengthening capacity for local and participatory development planning
The mobilization of community resources is also a key ingredient to combat social exclusion
and isolation. An example is provided by the Social Inclusion Program (SIP) implemented as
part of the Bank-funded Post Accession Rural Support Project between 2006 and 2011. The
SIP established a strong foothold in social inclusion strategic and operational work through
socially inclusive participatory planning, local civil society mobilization, and innovations in
service delivery. Over the duration of the project, 806 new civil society organizations were
formally registered and 1,069 informal social groups established in over 370 gminas. The
program delivered assistance to rural communities and vulnerable groups —especially youth,
the elderly, and disabled families—to directly tackle their isolation. In addition, the program
strengthened the ability of low-capacity areas to design and manage projects funded by the
ESF, with increased absorption rates. Another sign of local social development were the
partnerships that developed between local governments, NGOs, companies, and individuals
in the provision of social services.
IV. Growing with inclusion
Even the best social activation and assistance systems cannot secure inclusive growth by
themselves. Structural policies that matter for social inclusion also include the
macroeconomic environment and on fostering local conditions for job creation. The latter is
particularly important in lagging economic areas. A strategy for job creation for socially
excluded groups at the local level could focus on three areas: (a) further analysis of social
economy approaches and tackling the bottlenecks to its expansion, including through greater
access to financing, technical assistance (TA), and incentives to forge partnerships between
social enterprises and private companies; (b) improving the services available for employers
in the Public Employment Services (PES) and vacancy collection rates; these are important to
capture additional vacancies in the market and redistribute them toward the poor and to
favor mobility; and (c) piloting direct approaches to expand linkages between poor localities
and value chains of regional and national interest (growth poles).
 Fiscal policy is similarly critical. Compared to other EU countries, there is scope for making
personal income tax more progressive. Taxes could be redesigned to incentivize the
participation in the labor force of second earners, whose role is critical for poverty reduction
(more than increasing minimum wages of those who are already employed).
I. Introduction

1.      The objective of this policy note is to develop a set of actionable recommendations for
tackling poverty and social exclusion in Poland based on evidence. Social inclusion captures
both material and social dimensions of human deprivation (see Box 1). Socially excluded
groups and individuals are faced with barriers that prevent them from taking advantage of
opportunities to improve their well-being and dignity and find their ability and opportunity to
access markets, services, and spaces undermined. If unaddressed, social exclusion can have
long-term consequences for human and social capital and social cohesion.
2.      In recent years, the World Bank has deepened its engagement in Poland around issues
of social inclusion, through work on effective labor market and activation policies, social
assistance benefits, and investment financing for local social inclusion initiatives. This note
purports to integrate the outputs of these activities and complement them with insights
from the new analytical work to develop recommendations for the government of Poland for
program choices to enhance the impact of inclusion programs and employment services.
New analytical work included an analysis of the regulatory framework for social policy at the
national level3 and a qualitative assessment and gap analysis of social assistance and
employment service delivery at the municipal and provincial levels, conducted through a
large sample of focus groups and expert interviews.4
3.      This policy note is structured as follows: Section II provides a definition of social
inclusion and describes the country context by key trends and key groups at risk of social
exclusion. Section III provides an overview of the institutional set-up to deliver policies for
social inclusion at the national and local level and presents an assessment of the
achievements and challenges of key policy instruments (employment services, social
benefits, social services, and the work of civil society). Section IV focuses on two recent
operational experiences of relevance to a future operation: an assessment of the execution
of the European Social Fund in Poland against the social and labor agendas and a
presentation of the learning generated through the social inclusion component of the World
Bank Post Accession Rural Support Project. Section V illustrates areas for potential
intervention at the policy and operational level in Poland. Recognizing that social inclusion
outcomes are the result of a complex set of factors on the demand and supply side,
3
  This consisted of a de jure mapping of the institutional set-up, roles, stakeholders, and processes for labor
market activation and social inclusion, as mandated by laws and regulations in Poland. See Odlak (2015).
4
  This consisted of a qualitative assessment in eight municipalities on the availability or absence of relevant
services and shortcomings in their delivery by service providers. In each gmina, a series of in-depth interviews
were held with local authorities, together with focus groups with public employment offices, social service
centers, and other government, NGO officials, and clients of these services.
Background paper, WISE (2015a), is available upon request to the authors.
recommendations include macro-level institutional reforms and changes to local service
delivery for inclusion of vulnerable groups, mobilization and capacity support, strategies for
local employment generation, and monitoring and accountability support.



II. Key Trends and Aspects of Social Exclusion in Poland

4.     The concept of social inclusion captures both material and social dimensions of human
deprivation. The EU adopted a number of statistics to make this concept measurable through
multidimensional indicators of material and social deprivation (described in Box 1).
Box 1. Definitions of Social Inclusion

Social Inclusion is a multidimensional concept that captures both material deprivation and restrictions in the
participation in social and economic life. Two salient definitions for the current operation are the one currently
adopted by the EU and the one distilled in a recent Bank flagship publication on inclusion. These illustrate the
breadth of this concept and relevance for development, as well as the broad implications of pursuing social
inclusion as a process and an outcome.

The EU measures At Risk of Poverty or Social Exclusion (AROPE) as one of its key poverty targets for EU
countries. This measure captures the share of people either at risk of poverty, severely materially deprived, or
living in a household with a very low work intensity.

At risk of poverty rates correspond to the share of people earning below 60 percent of the national median
equalized disposable income, after social transfers. This measure captures an objective level of deprivation but
is also sensitive to inequality. The material deprivation rate is collected in the EU statistics on income and living
conditions (EU-SILC); it expresses the inability to afford some items considered by most people to be desirable
or even necessary to lead an adequate life, such as affording housing, heating, nutritious meals, and owning
basic household appliances. Low work intensity households are those where the sum of months worked by
working-age members in a year is less than 20 percent of the potential number of months that they could have
worked.

A broader definition adopted in World Bank (2015a) defines social exclusion as a process that reduces ability
and opportunity for individuals to markets, services, and spaces due to their identity. These three domains
represent both barriers to, and opportunities for greater inclusion of excluded groups. In this case, the
definition stresses the importance of understanding the causes that lead to exclusion outcomes and singles out
identity as one of the key factors that produce them.

Source: Eurostat and World Bank (2013b).


5.      Poland has seen strong economic growth over the last 25 years, which has translated
into significant welfare gains across the income distribution. However, the country has also
been struggling with making progress in reducing poverty and social exclusion since the 2008–
09 global financial crisis. The global financial crisis brought an economic slowdown to Poland,
which also resulted in a slowdown in poverty reduction. Relative poverty (60% of median
income) increased in 2010–2011 and then reverted to 17 percent, the pre-crisis level, by
2014;5 this rate matched the EU-27 average and was well below the mean poverty rate in
new member states. During the same period, however, extreme poverty levels6 in Poland
grew and remain today slightly above the 2008 level (Figure 1). In 2014, just below 6 percent
of the Polish population lived below the extreme poverty line (40% of median income).
Hence, the crisis had a negative impact on per capita income growth for the bottom 40
percent. Before the crisis, income growth of this group outpaced the growth rate for the
total population. Since 2009, per capita income growth for the bottom 40 percent has fallen
behind the growth rate for the entire population and in 2011, turned negative. The average
per capita income of the bottom 40 stands at 49.6 percent of the overall average for the
entire population (Figure 1, World Bank 2013a).
                                     Figure 1. Relative Poverty Rates in Poland and EU States (40 and 60 percent of median income)
                                          Poland                                                                         Poland
                                          European Union (27 countries)                                                  New Member States (12 countries)
                                          New Member States (12 countries)                                               European Union (27 countries)
                                                                                                                  21.0
                                                                                   % living below 60% of median
                            10.0
    % living below 40% of median




                                   9.0                                                                            20.0
                                                                                                                  19.0
                                   8.0
                                                                                                                  18.0
                                   7.0
                                                                                                                  17.0
                                   6.0
                                                                                                                  16.0
                                   5.0
                                                                                                                  15.0
                                   4.0                                                                            14.0



Source: EUROSTAT 2015, based on national EU-SILC data.

6.      Poverty rates are considerably above average for a number of population groups in
Poland. People without paid work and people living off pensions or disability benefits are at
the highest risk of social exclusion. In 2011, the relative poverty rate for people without paid
work, pensions, or disability benefits was very high at 35 percent. Poverty was also
significantly higher among single-parent families, relatively larger families (with more than 3
children), and farmers and pensioners (Figure 2). One of the forecast shows, that Poland will
be a rapidly aging society, with the median age set to increase from 38.1 years in 2010 to
40.0 years in 2040. While recent reforms, including a significant increase in the retirement


5
  An individual is defined as being at risk of monetary poverty if her/his income is less than 60 percent of the
median income in the country.
6
  Extreme relative poverty line intended as 40 percent of the median income.
age have strengthened the sustainability of the pension system, there remain significant
aging-related challenges, including labor force participation for workers aged 55–64 years
and old age poverty or exclusion (World Bank 2013a).
            Figure 2. Proportion of Households Living Below the National Poverty Line* in 2011,
                                         by Population Group (%)

           40                                                                                35.3
           30
           20
                                            7.2          8.6          9          9.6
           10        4          6.4

            0
                   Total     People in     Single      Married      Farmers   Pensioners    Living on
                 population rural areas    parent    couples with                            'passive
                                          families    3 or more                            sources of
                                                       children                             income'

         Source: Czapinski and Panek 2012; Social Diagnosis 2011.
         Note: * Range of PLN 395-501 (about US$160) per month; lower level for a person in a two-person
         household, and the higher level for a single person household. Passive source of income includes social
         transfers.

7.       The ability of households to enter and remain in employment plays a particularly
critical role in explaining poverty and social exclusion. Poverty reduction has been primarily
driven by increases in labor earnings and holding a job and the general growth in wages have
been the main drivers of income of the bottom 40 percent. Conversely, 36 percent of the
working-age population (20–64 years) in the bottom 20 percent were not in the labor force
in 2010 (World Bank 2013a). Close to a quarter of the population who are below 59 years live
in households with low work intensity (World Bank 2013a).7
8.     The quality of employment also matters. Almost half of the employees in the bottom
20 have temporary contracts, which is more than in any other EU-11 country and double the
EU-28 average while wealthier income quintiles tend to enjoy more stable employment
(Figure 3). Temporary contracts, particularly civil law contracts that offer limited social
protection rights and no protections against dismissal or sickness, are particularly widespread
among young people and those who are less educated. During interviews with socially
vulnerable workers and the unemployed, these contracts have been singled out as a source
of abuse and creating a feeling of being second-class workers.



7
 The Europe 2020 indicator for ‘low work intensity’ defines a household as having low work intensity if the total
number of months its working-age members were employed is less than 20 percent of the months they could
have been employed.
                Figure 3. Share of Employees (ages 20–64 years) with Temporary Contracts




Source: World Bank (2013a), based on EU-SILC data.


9.      The barriers faced by vulnerable individuals to entering into employment are important
underlying drivers of social exclusion in Poland. The principal causes for social exclusion cited
in qualitative analyses relate to barriers to entering the labor force. These barriers could be
grouped into three categories: (a) obstacles to entering the labor market, including in
locations where jobs are available; (b) barriers to employment within the existing stock of
jobs; and (c) lack of sufficient economic incentives and motivation.
10.     Access to affordable childcare as well as long-term care remains a key constraint to
employment for women. Employment rates of women remain significantly lower than the EU
average. In 2014, female labor force participation was 61.1 percent against 74.6 percent for
men (15–64 years). This gap was particularly large during childbearing years even though
more women (43 percent) than men (29 percent) completed tertiary education. Recent
analysis of the 2013 Labor Force Survey data (World Bank 2015c) suggests that early
retirement (for those ages 50 years and above) and family and care responsibilities are the
primary reasons people are not looking for a job. Access to affordable childcare as well as
long-term care remains a key constraint to employment for women.
11.     A second major constraint relates to the spatial concentration of poverty, the distance
from jobs, and limited internal mobility capacity. Poverty and the risks of socioeconomic
marginalization have a significant territorial dimension in Poland. Five of Poland’s 16 regions
remain among the 20 poorest regions of the EU-8 (World Bank 2015e). Disparities within
each region have been on the rise, typically with large cities faring relatively well and rural
areas and small towns falling behind. Poverty rates in rural areas are more than one-and-a-
half times the national average. At the subregional level, an even stronger territorial variation
in poverty becomes visible, dividing Poland into two parts: Central and Eastern Poland, with
the highest levels of risk of poverty, and Western Poland, which is characterized by a much
lower percentage of poor people (Figure 4 and 5). Not surprisingly, spatial distribution of
poverty is correlated with employment outcomes. As Figure 6 and 7 shows, most of those
who are out of work are living in rural areas, with the exception of youth ages 15–29 years,
whose NEET rates (‘not in employment, education, or training’) prevail in urban areas. While
many of these regions also experienced international migration, it is also striking that Poland
ranks as the second lowest with regard to internal mobility in the whole OECD.

Figure 4. At Risk of Poverty Rate at Voivodship Level 2013    Figure 5. At Risk of Poverty at the Subregional Level 2013




                                                             Source: National Statistical Office Poznan Branch, 2013.
Source: National Statistical Office Poznan Branch, 2013.
Figure 6. Percentage of Adults Involuntarily Out of Work at     Figure 7. NEET Rates at the Voivodship Level, with Rural
   the Voivodship Level, with Rural (black) - Urban (red)                  (black) - Urban (red) Distribution
                       Distribution




                                                              Source: World Bank 2015c.
Source: World Bank 2015c.
                                                              Note: NEET: Percentage of youth (15–29 years) not in
Note: Percentage of work-able adults (15–65 years) not in
                                                              employment, education, or training.
employment, as a share of those who would like to work
(employed, unemployed, and discouraged).


12.      Social assistance recipients do not face direct disincentives to enter into work from the
small transfers that they receive, but they can still be disincentivized once other costs are
accounted for, such as childcare or transportation. About 12 percent of those who are out of
work live in a household that receives social assistance transfers (LFS 2013). The analysis of
benefit incentives, according to OECD Tax Benefit modelling (World Bank 2015c), suggests
that in the light of their limited generosity and their design, these benefits do not
disincentive taking a job, even at low wage. Also, many of the jobs that these recipients could
access are currently offered under civil law contracts, which, up to 2016, were subject to
little or no social security contributions. However, entering in formal work may still not be
advantageous for some social assistance beneficiaries that have to face high costs to buy
private care for children or the elderly, those who live at a distance from jobs, and those who
can find jobs in the gray economy. In fact, around 60 percent of beneficiaries of social
assistance report care as the primary reason for not looking for work, a higher rate than that
observed among the general population.
13.    The qualitative local assessment conducted as part of this TA confirms similar findings
to those suggested by the Tax Benefit model. Study respondents claimed that work is often
only available in larger towns and as the wages for their labor are low (cited as PLN 1,300 per
month, equivalent to US$380), the commuting cost can consume up to 25 percent of
monthly wages. For women, taking a paid job implies prohibitive costs for childcare or
kindergarten. Furthermore, securing a job can trigger loss of all social benefits if income is
above the ‘basic income threshold’. Hence, many people in this category prefer to do
unregistered, often seasonal, work that enables them to earn an income and keep their
benefits. While many in this group of ‘inactive’ people are not ready to work, they register as
‘unemployed’ with the labor office for other reasons. These reasons include obtaining health
insurance, which entitles them to free health care, and continuing to receive social benefits
as registering with the labor office is a mandatory requirement.
14.      The implicit tax of moving from inactivity to work could have become more acute since
2016, when contributions obligations on some civil law contracts increased. Since 2016, Civil
Law Contracts by Mandate (Umowa Zlecenie) are subject to the same contribution
requirements as labor contracts at least at minimum wage levels. It is not clear that this extra
cost will be entirely borne by employers, especially those who compete on small profit
margins in labor-intensive sectors (like services). Redesigning the structure of social
assistance benefits to allow for an in-work benefit could be a way to facilitate transition to
employment, especially on the intensive margin of additional worked hours, for the low
skilled, without an excessive fiscal cost (because these benefits would be targeted to specific
populations).
15.     Finally, social exclusion is also portrayed by the poor as closely related with social
isolation and has a strong intergenerational dimension. Consultations in poor areas of Poland
consistently identified that those at the highest risk of social exclusion were individuals who
experienced social isolation, described especially as having weak family or social ties: youth
living in remote isolated localities, the isolated elderly without families, the disabled,
alcoholics, and homeless people. According to social workers’ opinions, social exclusion
converges on individuals with overlapping constraints. For these social groups, discrimination
or stigma is a recurrent complaint. What may appear on the surface as an unemployment
issue may conceal complex challenges such as mental health issues or addictions. In addition,
according to social workers, a majority of new clients who come to the social help system are
children of old clients and report that a passive and demanding attitude is learned at home.
The problem of ‘inherited poverty’ was raised by many observers in all locations, but specific
conditions that influence the situation depend on the gmina. Interviews show that many of
these families need basic help on how to run a household, plan meals, and budgeting.
16.     These with multiple challenges require specific support other than labor market
services. More specialized services are thus necessary for inactive clients to help them move
out of a ‘passive’ attitude, giving an incentive ‘to change their life. While helping families
make good decisions is crucial, according to social workers the cost of delivering this time-
consuming service is underappreciated.

III. Overview of the Institutions in Charge of Addressing Social Exclusion in Poland

17.     Public institutions at all levels of government are involved in promoting social inclusion,
as defined in the Polish Social Policy Strategy 2004 (Ministry of Social Policy 2004). Local
authorities are responsible for social assistance transfers, the establishment of social
integration centers (CIS) or social integration clubs (KIS), and the implementation of labor
activation programs. The majority of local services for social assistance are delivered or
arranged by Social Protection Centers (OPS) maintained by the gmina. The main source of
funds for these services is the state budget, supported by the gmina’s local budget and
projects financed by the ESF. Implementation of labor activation programs is led by a
separate structure of labor offices at the county (powiat) level and funded mainly from the
Labor Fund (based on obligatory contributions from business), the state budget, and
operational programs (OPs) financed by the ESF. The promotion of labor market programs
and social inclusion are supported by Family Support Centers (Powiatowe Centra Pomocy
Rodzinie) at the county (powiat) level, 16 Regional Centers of Social Policy (Regionalne
Ośrodki Polityki Społecznej), and 16 Voivodship Labor Offices and the social assistance
centers (Ośrodki Pomocy Społecznej) at the municipal level.
               Figure 8. Key Institutions for Labor and Social Policy across Government Levels



Source: Authors, based on Odlak (2015).


18.      Lack of coordination at the horizontal and vertical levels is a deficiency that emerged in
the analysis of key institutions. The complex—and often loose—relationship between
government functions at different levels appear to be one of the main challenges to effective
programming, capacity building, and accountability. In addition, national regulations do not
incentivize (or in some cases prevent outright) the necessary collaboration between
institutions. Instead of being monitored and evaluated on results, local executing        Health
                                                                                            agencies
                                                                                            and      NGOs &
(social assistance centers and powiat labor offices) need to work within Education      the narrow Church
implementation margins of centrally funded programs. This stifles innovation and           increases
                                                                                         services
attention on procedures and away from outcomes. Program evaluation is virtually absent,
and in some areas (such as provision of in-kind services), even basic reporting of inputs and
outputs to the superior administrative level is lacking.
19.    Information sharing is hampered by organizational and legal constraints. Findings from
the local assessment point to limited sharing of information among institutions such as labor
offices, social services centers, and NGOs. This, at times, leads to an incorrect diagnosis,
which then results in an individual being subject to the wrong type of support. Better
information sharing would make it possible, for example, for a social services center to assess
a client’s employment history and past activation measures. In five of the study gminas, a
local government electronic platform called Samorządowa Elektroniczna Platforma
Informacyjna (SEPI) has been introduced, which greatly enhances information access for all
institutions. Using the SEPI is not compulsory and some gminas have not adopted it. Privacy
protection rules also appear to be a reason for some officials not using the platform.
Box 2. The SEPI Information Platform

The SEPI, which can be translated as Local Government Electronic Information Platform, was developed in 2006
and is currently offered by Sygnity. Its main advantages, according to the producer, are fast electronic
information sharing; support for decision making by labor offices, social services centers, local government; and
elimination of the costs of using paper documents and attestations. The institutions using the system include
the burmistrz and wojt (municipal and local government office) and selected local government agencies
(including CSW and labor offices). It provides instant access to some information about a specific client. If
required, a user can request specific information from one agency to another, for example, an attestation which
is sent in electronic form and can reduce the client’s workload. Data about a person include basic personal
information, information obtained through an interview, and forms of support that the person used in the labor
office or in the social services center.

Out of eight locations where the qualitative work was conducted, the platform was used in five gminas. Staff
expressed an overall positive opinion about the platform as a useful information exchange tool across agencies.
The main challenge is that using the SEPI is a decision to be taken at the local level, and old-fashioned
institutions may not want to adopt it. The second major challenge is personal data protection—although using
the platform without breaking the law on data protection is possible according to many interviewed, social
workers in some locations consider it as a barrier.

Source: WISE 2015a.

Labor Market Support for Vulnerable Clients


20.     Labor market support is structured mainly at two levels of government. Direct labor
market support programs are managed by the PES at the powiat level, and these conduct the
bulk of labor policy implementation. Regional (Voivodship) offices serve as policy centers for
labor market and social inclusion services but often also provide some special support
program; regional offices also plan and oversee the implementation of ESF funds for labor. In
addition, a number of entities provide additional labor market integration services, including
nonprofit and private entities, associated with churches, schools, and companies. There is no
direct line of accountability between powiat and Voivodship labor offices since each
responds to its own respective local governments.
21.     Spending on labor policies is concentrated on Active Labor Market Programs (ALMPs),
while the PES that manages these programs appears to be less well resourced. A comparative
analysis of the most recent expenditure data (based on EUROSTAT 2012 data) suggests that
Poland spends little on labor market programs compared to other EU countries. With regard
to spending composition, Poland has the second highest share of its labor market programs
budget going to active labor market measures, while funding for the PES core functions is
extremely low (World Bank 2015c). These spending patterns are explained in part by the
extensive access to ESF that Poland still enjoys, in comparison with the modest national
financing of the sector. With such low administrative budgets, labor offices face limitations in
the administration of these programs. For instance, evaluation capacity and budgets were
found to be negligible during recent study visits even in well-run employment offices. The
selection of programs that are financed is also heavily skewed toward wage subsidies and
programs for people with disability, while there is very little provision for training and skills
development and almost no expenditure on services to support labor supply, such as
childcare vouchers.
22.     The PES have a broad coverage, but many beneficiaries are not being served. The large
majority of the active jobseekers in Poland are registered in the PES, which is a remarkable
level of outreach. However, Labor Force Survey’ data reveals that roughly one-third of the
PES registered customers are not looking for work for a variety of reasons, notably because
they only register to access free health insurance—through pressure from social assistance
centers so as to avoid taxing local government budgets with health insurance—thereby
pushing up the caseload of counsellors to unsustainable levels (World Bank 2015c). The
second reason is a weak M&E system that is not devised to effectively guide policymakers´
choices. This exacerbates the extent to which the Ministry of Family, Labor and Social Policy,
which is responsible for the overall policy framework, can actually shape the implementation
of labor market policies since decentralization keeps the relationship between the central
ministry and the offices at arm’s length, at best.
23.      With few exceptions, the PES offices do not have well-established units to engage
with employers through dedicated staff and sets of services that can help forge partnerships;
this limits the PES potential of vacancy collection and effective matching of skills with labor
demand. The low quality of vacancies in turn is said to be responsible for reducing the pool
of highly qualified applicants, thus increasing labor offices’ stigma among employers in a
vicious circle.
24.     Many workers of labor offices complain about the amount of bureaucracy required by
regulations, including health insurance provision for the unemployed. Interviews show that
paperwork is a primary activity of these institutions, and less than 40 percent of labor office
workers perform essential tasks connected to dealing with customers. According to staff, a
key reason lies in the overly complicated regulations and the overlapping series of acts that
are often amended, unclearly formulated, and thus requiring numerous interpretations by
lawyers. In contrast to compliance with law, lack of efficiency is not connected with any
serious consequences. A specific regulation that office staff identified as a large source of
bureaucracy in labor offices is their role in providing contributions to the health insurance
fund on behalf of registered unemployed. Employers also reported that procedures at labor
offices are cumbersome, and some of the existing incentives are actually difficult to take
advantage of.
25.     The qualitative assessment identified a number of practical challenges in implementing
the newly introduced client profiling tool. A centerpiece of the recent reform of the
employment support system (Employment Support Act 2014) relates to the introduction of a
new client profiling model (explained in detail in Annex 1). What is of particular relevance is
that the classification of jobseekers has far-reaching implications on the level and type of
services that they can access. A consistent finding of the qualitative assessments is that, in
the eyes of clients and a number of social workers, the classification of jobseekers in the
three labor market profiles can appear to be overly variable. While this is carried out based
on a computer algorithm, some labor office staff suggested that the tool can lead to
counterintuitive results. As a result, it was reported that the unemployed sometimes
deliberately try to avoid being categorized in profile III, as they fear they will receive limited
job offers if they are placed in that category. Some employment office staff reported
explaining to clients that they should try to avoid being categorized in profile III if they intend
to qualify for labor market activation measures.
26.      In spite of these deficiencies, there are a number of innovative and promising
approaches for the inclusion of the most marginalized population groups. Over the past ten
years, Social Integration Centers (CIS, registered as social economic entities) and Social
Integration Clubs (KIS, registered as NGOs) have developed all over Poland, providing both
skills and incentives for the most marginalized to obtain social and life coping skills, as well as
competencies for job seeking. The establishment of the CIS and KIS is part of the 2005
regulation of the MoLSP, and these institutions tend to be administered by the provincial
governments (powiats). An additional feature of this regulation is the establishment of social
contracts between a social worker and a family or person seeking support (particularly from
the permanent benefit, but not for family benefits); the social contract spells out the mutual
obligations of the two parties. The services that are identified as necessary for the
beneficiaries can then be covered by the CIS or KIS. Beneficiaries of the KIS and CIS include
the long-term unemployed, homeless, disabled, alcoholics, drug addicts, the mentally ill,
former inmates, and refugees.
27.      Social cooperatives are a relatively recent instrument to promote self-employment
among people at risk of social exclusion in Poland, particularly the long-term unemployed and
people with disabilities. The 2003 Social Employment Act and the 2009 Social Cooperatives
Act paved the way for social cooperatives. Social cooperatives act independently of public
authorities, but they are (financially) supported by local governments and national funds.
There are approximately 450 social cooperatives operating in Poland that are mainly active in
the service sector. The main source of initial financing comes from the local labor office,
which provides grants to start-up companies and contributes to pension, disability, and
obligatory health care premiums for a period of 12 months. Beneficiaries and local
authorities recognize social cooperatives as one of the most-effective social inclusion
initiatives in Poland (World Bank 2014a).
Income support programs


28.     Income support programs are well targeted but struggle to reach nearly half of those
who should theoretically be covered8. Family benefits and last-resort social assistance
(temporary and permanent benefits) represent the two largest programs for social assistance
in Poland. These two major programs, representing 0.7 percent of GDP, are articulated in a
fairly complex system of supplements for different life events and family conditions that
make 30 programs in total (World Bank 2015a). The family benefit program is the best
targeted, and it targets all households with children and living below the relative poverty line.
Social assistance is targeted at an even lower threshold, theoretically with a focus on the
extreme poor.
29.     Although both programs are well targeted by international standards, the Spending
Review (World Bank 2015a) exercise revealed the significant coverage gaps of benefits at the
national level (45 percent of the poor receive no benefit) and that there is space for
simplification of the benefit architecture. Several factors, also emerging from the qualitative
assessment, explain the non-take-up of the family benefit and, especially, of the temporary
benefits. There is some suggestive evidence that the application process can be complex and
very bureaucratic for some types of clients. A second factor is the lack of awareness of
entitlement among some households, and an earlier study conducted on social exclusion in
Poland captured a perceived lack of transparency around eligibility rules for social benefits
(World Bank 2014a). Although the overall perception of social workers that emerged from

8
    Please see note no. 1
the study was a positive one, in some cases some vulnerable families may be reluctant in
approaching social welfare offices, since these are both in charge of benefit management
and have the responsibility to order child custody in case of family neglect.
30.     Also, some social workers and local officials claimed that there are too many types of
benefits, each providing a small amount but resulting in an unnecessarily large bureaucracy.
Some of the practitioners also noted that too often social benefits are provided without
sufficient levers to incentivize behavioral change. A poor client is eligible for benefits just
because of the material condition regardless of whether action is taken to change his/her
situation. The decision on whether to continue to provide social benefits often lies with the
social worker but there is no mechanism to impose sanctions in case beneficiaries are
unwilling to cooperate on addressing specific issues.
31.      Finally, the qualitative study attested to the importance of NGOs, in addition to social
services centers, in providing material support to poor households. As information on who
receives support is not shared, some beneficiaries reported that is not clear whether the
most deserving receive what they need. Some raised concern that to receive social support
one has to be proactive, leading to a situation where those who do not request for help are
left out. These include small farmers, for example, or poor families who may be entitled to
social benefits but who feel ashamed to ask for support. Hence NGOs can play an important
role as intermediaries with local services.

IV. Learning from Past Operational Experiences

The Post Accession Rural Support Project (2006–2011)

32.     A strong example of collaborative local government and direct community support
approaches is provided by the SIP, implemented from 2006 to 2011 as part of the Bank-funded
PARSP (Post Accession Rural Support Project), established to address social exclusion in the
500 most marginalized rural gminas across Poland. The main objective of the program was to
increase citizen participation and enhance the capabilities of local authorities to identify and
plan local social inclusion strategies. The program also aimed at making use of local economic
and sociocultural resources, engaging citizens in decision making on budget and services
provided by gminas, and introducing a variety of new social services by facilitating civil
society institutional development and strengthening informal groups. The program delivered
assistance to rural communities and vulnerable groups—especially youth, the elderly, and
disabled families—to directly tackle their isolation. Under the SIP, over 10,500 contracts
worth €36 million were signed with local service providers for innovative social services to
socially excluded groups and a large number of conferences were held for local governments
and service providers on best practice service innovations. Rural gmina capacity to absorb
similar social-inclusion-focused programs became significantly enhanced, as evidenced by
the growing number of gminas which received external funds.
33.     SIP has been widely recognized as having been very effective, with key success factors:
(a) broadening the approach for tackling social exclusion, including activities related to
education, culture, health, security, sport, and leisure; (b) strengthening local communities
and local leaders—particularly gminas characterized as isolated and relatively more
passive— and building partnerships between local governments, NGOs, companies, and
individuals in the provision of social services; and (c) promoting transparency, open
communication, mutual trust, and respect within communities.
34.     The SIP laid a foundation for local social inclusion practice that remains highly regarded
in-country and measures strongly on sustainability indices. The local development component
design featured two subcomponents:
       (a) A TA program to develop techniques for social assessments, social inclusion
           strategies and action plans, and social service standards and identify best
           practices in these areas. The subcomponent was also designed to develop a
           network of certified training providers to assist local governments.
       (b) A SIP to enable underdeveloped rural gminas to purchase high-priority social
           services for vulnerable groups.

35.     The sustainability of interventions supported under the social inclusion component
primarily hinged on the effectiveness of capacity building provided to gmina authorities and
other local actors and the community mobilization process set in motion. A critical positive
outcome deriving from the PARSP support is the participatory strategic planning practice for
social inclusion at the gmina level, joining mayors and gmina line agency representatives
with civil society organizers, service providers, and the private sector. This represented a
significant transformation in policy and program formulation, and evidence suggests high
interest in sustaining these practices.
36.     The PARSP established a strong foothold in social inclusion strategic and operational
work through its emphasis on socially inclusive participatory planning and outreach for social
inclusion, local civil society mobilization, and innovations in service delivery. The PARSP further
catalyzed a significant increase in organized collective action for social inclusion. A substantial
number of civil society organizations were established over the life of the project—806 new
civil society organizations were formally registered and 1,069 informal social groups were
established in over 370 gminas. This is particularly noteworthy as the level of community
self-organization and presence of civic structures were very low at project inception. Local
authorities in the project’s target gminas credit the program with fueling a paradigm shift in
the attitudes of stakeholders, motivated by the responsibility shouldered to tackle problems
that had been neglected for decades. Countless stereotypes were challenged, including the
accepted mantra that social service provision is the sole preserve of public institutions. The
project encouraged reliance on private providers and municipalities discovered that locally
based private providers, such as NGOs, could offer an attractive alternative to public
institutions.
37.      The diverse formal and informal groups activated under the program were expressions
of strengthened social capital and in turn contributed to horizontal social capital
development. Social capital is defined as the capacity of people to work together for a
common goal and as an expression of solidarity, and its development implies a significant
increase in social inclusion. Altogether, the PARSP activities helped communities and local
institutions broaden their understanding of social inclusion challenges and mitigating
measures by moving away from a focus solely on welfare and benefits. The project provides
an example of how a community driven development approach can act as a catalyst for local
government action, by strengthening their capacity; reinforcing their role as agents of social
cohesion; and catalyzing dynamic learning, knowledge sharing, and dissemination of practice.
38.     A clear lesson from the PARSP implementation was that if economic exclusion is so
closely linked to social exclusion, effective social inclusion requires that both social and
economic elements need addressing simultaneously. An operation to tackle social inclusion in
a comprehensive way should also include a component specifically targeting employment
creation since poverty and unemployment are often at the root of social exclusion.
Implementation of the ESF during the 2007–2013 Financing Period9


39.     Studies on the absorption and impact of EU funds during the 2007–2013 financing
period point to their overall positive influence on economic growth and the labor market in
Poland. The entire ESF funds focusing on the labor market were spent and 83 percent was
earmarked for social integration. In total, 238,200 new subsidized jobs were created with the
help of ESF funding. Under the Operational Program Human Capital (OP HC), 721 new social
economic support centers (SESC) were set up, and ESF funds contributed to the creation of
more than 30 percent of newly registered social cooperatives.



9
 This section is based on the 2014 ESF Annual Report as well as the Partnership Agreement between Poland
and the EU.
40.    Lack of sustainability of results achieved under the 2007–2013 financing period has
been identified as a major concern. By and large, results on labor market inclusion, that is, job
creation for the socially excluded, were unsatisfactory with less than half the beneficiaries of
labor market support programs reporting that they found a job six months after completion
of the program. Fifty-six percent of successful beneficiaries of labor market inclusion
programs reported that they were still employed six months after program completion. Out
of the companies that were created by private persons and subsidized by ESF funding, 93
percent did not survive the first three years, with the majority collapsing after the first year
of operation (successful operation for a full 12 months being the condition for not having to
repay the ESF subsidy). Key challenges that were identified in achieving sustainable outcomes
include the lack of stable sources of funding for initiatives (including repayable and
norepayable financing) and the absence of a clearly defined leader and system for social
economy development in Poland.
41.     The ESF evaluations find that further support is necessary to modernize,
professionalize, and improve the quality of services offered by the PES. ESF funding has so far
not been able to contribute toward permanent improvement of the quality of PES
functioning. Particular challenges include the high case load per employment agent and the
lack of sufficient career advisors to meet the individual needs of clients rather than providing
blanket approaches. An ESF evaluation found that half of the beneficiaries for whom
individualized action plans had been developed were not able to describe how their work
plan had been developed and what elements it contained. Key recommendations of the
evaluations are that a careful selection of the target groups and an individual approach to
beneficiaries through personalized activation paths are prerequisites for the success of
actions carried out by the PES.
42.     Comprehensive measures integrating mutually complementary methods and financial
instruments that are adapted to the local context were found to be the most efficient way of
supporting poverty reduction, social inclusion, and labor market integration in Poland.
Integrated interventions in the form of multisectoral investment packages adjusted to the
territorial context at voivodship level were found to be most efficient in achieving effective
results. One-dimensional programs and single-sector interventions as well as interventions
that were not sufficiently adapted to the local (‘territorial’) context were found to be least
effective as they resulted in inefficient fragmentation of policies.

Priorities for ESF Funding for the 2014–2020 Financing Period
43.     The 2014–2020 ESF programs have two broad objectives in line with the Europe 2020
strategy: reducing poverty and increasing social cohesion and employment. EU funding targets
increasing employment in Poland to 71 percent in 2020 by promoting labor force
participation of the nonworking population, improving the adaptability of economically
active persons and enterprises, and improving the health of labor resources. Priorities
regarding poverty reduction and increased social inclusion are (a) improving chances for
social inclusion and integration of persons in particularly difficult life and professional
situations and (b) improving accessibility to high-quality social services.
44.     ESF funds for the 2014–2020 programming period will be disbursed through a
structure of 16 regional programs and 1 national OP. The national Operational Program on
Knowledge, Education, and Development (OP KED) is centered on priority strategic revisions
in the legal and implementation framework of state policies in education, health,
employment, and social assistance. The OP KED also hosts the Youth Employment Initiative
(YEI), which focuses in particular on NEETs in regions with a youth unemployment rate above
25 percent. The total budget of the YEI for 2014–2020 is €252 million and the 10 Polish
regions with the highest level of NEETs are eligible to receive these funds. The regional OPs
were developed in cooperation with the Voivodship Labor Offices and Regional Social Policy
Centers (both under the supervision of the Marshal, head of regional administration) and
they fund direct services through powiat- and gmina-level institutions and service providers.
The majority of ESF funds over the programming period will be disbursed through these
regional OPs.
45.      Funding under the regional OPs directly goes to and is being administered by
Voivodship Labor Offices and/or Regional Social Policy Centers. Key targeted beneficiaries
under these OPs are vulnerable groups who are facing challenges with entering the Polish
labor market, including women, the disabled, and the elderly.10 Priorities for activities
financed under these OPs include (a) social and professional activation measures dedicated
to those parts of the population who are registered with the social assistance centers; (b)
improved access to health care services for people at risk of poverty and social exclusion; (c)
support to the development of new social economy activities as well as encouraging job
creation in existing social economy activities; and (d) community-led local development
activities.




10
  As youth have their separate funding window under the YEI, they are not eligible for support under the
territorial OPs.
V. Areas for Potential Intervention at the Policy and Operational Level

46.     A cornerstone of modern social inclusion policies combines economic inclusion of
vulnerable households with the protection of minimum living standards. This results from the
interaction of labor supply and labor demand, national polices, and their local execution.

                Support labor supply and increase            Protect incomes while
                          employability                incentivizing entry in employment


                                             Social Inclusion

                 Develop local capacity to deliver
                                                       Stimulate private job creation in
                  services and exectute national
                                                               lagging localities
                             policies



47.     In Poland, the integration in the labor market of the most vulnerable out-of-work
population is constrained by a number of inefficiencies and bottlenecks; these in part
originate from shortfalls in the national policy and in part are deficiencies in the cooperation
between the central and local governments for social and labor market policies and
programs. Local governments should be allowed to design, implement, and enhance their
capacity to manage local programs and benefit from a simplified system of
intergovernmental fiscal transfers, instead of dealing with dozens of specific flows of funds
and differing procedures. At the same time, at the local level, there are serious capacity
constraints to implement national regulations and programs, which result in services of
insufficient quality and scattered coverage of the needy.
48.     Lessons from experience in Poland and elsewhere suggest considerable dividends
would accrue from further strengthening participatory planning and execution with civil
society at the local level. Participatory local development support would build on multilevel
partnerships, mobilized to connect local and regional authorities and the broad social
economy. These partnerships would bring together sectoral experience on how to effectively
organize, manage, and deliver services at the local level with systems of decentralized
governance and accountability mechanisms, complemented by community support
approaches to promote empowerment, inclusive growth and participation, and social capital.
The mobilization of community resources is a key ingredient to combat social exclusion and
isolation.
49.   Finally, interventions on the supply side alone are unlikely to generate social inclusion
outcomes unless this is met by sufficient job creation. Jobs are created by the private sector,
 and supply side interventions alone are unlikely to address social exclusion, though these are
 essential for vulnerable population. It is therefore important to consider complementary
 initiatives that can stimulate the creation of jobs for the target populations of social inclusion
 interventions, especially in lagging economic areas. These range from social
 entrepreneurship and social cooperatives to additional interventions meant to increase
 linkages between isolated localities and larger growth poles or inputs into specific value
 chains.
 50.     The policy and investment recommendations are structured around five intervention
 areas: (a) institutional reforms of active labor market policies and other services that can
 serve to stimulate supply and employability, coupled with local-level pilot programs; (b)
 reforms of social policies to improve the design and outreach of income support programs;
 (c) delivery of social inclusion interventions in highly disadvantaged locations and capacity
 building, intensive practice and knowledge sharing through peer learning, and institutional
 support with a focus on results and outcomes; (d) interventions to stimulate economic
 inclusion (labor demand - job creation); and finally (e) mechanisms to improve M&E,
 interagency coordination, and accountability mechanisms (Figure 9).


                   Figure 9. Schematic Framework for Comprehensive Social Inclusion Reforms


                       Support Labor                                                                        Participatory
                                                  Minimum Income                   Local Job
                        Supply and                                                                             Local
                                                      Support                      Creation
                       Employability                                                                        Development

                        Fine-tuning profiling       Simplify benefits and                                   Building capacity for
                                                                                Revamp services for
                       system and protocols         their administration                                        participatory
 Institutional                                                                    employers and
                                                                                                             planning, diagnosis,
  reforms at                                                                     vacancy collection
                                                                                                            and program delivery
national level
                       Monitoring system of          Introduce in-work
                             ALMPs                        benefit
                                                                                  Social enterprise           Accountability in
                                                                                   development                Implementation
                                                         Support and
                       Employment insertion
                                                      incentivize active
                            programs
                                                          outreach
    Local
interventions                                                                     Linkage to value            Peer learning and
                                                     Requalification of         chains/growth poles           capacity building
                           Care services
                                                      social workers



                                           Accountability, Monitoring, and Evaluation
                 enhance vertical accountability, information system for horizontal coordination, impact evaluation


 Thematic Area 1: Support for Labor Supply and Employability
Refine client profiling and segmentation protocols


51.     Qualitative research as well as a comparison with international experience on
profiling methodologies (Loxha and Morgandi 2015) suggest that under many aspects, the
profiling tool in place could be refined. Improving profiling would contribute to (a) aligning
the classification of registered unemployed with their actual likelihood of long-term
unemployment, as suggested by actual administrative data; (b) reducing the scope for
manipulation of the tool by social workers and clients by eliminating the use of subjective
variables from the model; and (c) reducing the current wide gap in the services to which
individuals have the right according to their profile. The reform could maintain the
differentiation of workers, including those who are recommended for outsourcing to private
service providers or CSW, but it would correct some of the imbalances that are observed at
present in terms of an effective gap between service access, monitoring, and PES
accountability to follow up on the state of beneficiaries. This reform would be
complementary to a change in the method to distribute health insurance since the only way
to truly discriminate active jobseekers from those seeking registration just for benefits is to
reduce the incentive to misrepresent one’s unemployment status—or potentially by making
job search conditionalities much harsher.
Remove incentives of registration in the PES for motives other than finding a job

52.     National performance criteria for the PES exist but need improvement. One success
criterion, as identified in the local assessment, refers to an unemployed client getting paid
work three months after completing an activation program. Some officials regarded this as
too short a period to claim success. There is also a concern that using performance criteria
will be at the expense of profile III people, who are more difficult to employ and more
expensive to activate. Monitoring self-performance and learning at the local level is
inadequate. For example, even though there is evidence that internships at the gmina office
do not lead to employment when the internship ends, this activation measure is still
commonly used.
53.     Removing the current incentives to register to obtain health insurance is important
to free up case managers’ time to focus on active jobseekers. The estimates from the PES
office directors suggest that 30 percent of the registered unemployed could be motivated
only by health insurance. This is an issue encountered in many other countries in Southern
and Eastern Europe with insurance-based health care financing. Countries have solved this
problem through one of the following methods:
            Move to a tax-financed universal health care system (as in other European
             countries as the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain). A cost-benefit analysis could
             be undertaken to quantify the advantages and drawbacks of this approach.
            Reassign health insurance provision to a different institution or without similar
             rights and obligations as for the active jobseekers (Serbia).
            Provide means-tested health insurance access for the unemployed (Croatia),
             although this may result in growing coverage gaps, especially among young
             people.
            Make job search requirements more stringent and revise the criteria for a
             ‘suitable job’.
            Introduce state financing for health insurance for those who apply for assistance
             in social assistance centers.

54.     This is a major reform and one of the most frequently suggested for Poland by the
literature that explores how to improve employment services.
Build ALMPs’ evaluation systems

55.    Poland has experience, on a pilot basis, with ‘net effectiveness’ evaluations of ALMPs
through administrative data and, in particular, by relying on statistical methodologies that
generate quasi-experimental control groups. Currently, the national monitoring framework
of measures relies on crude three-month placement rates. Since these rates are not
compared to a counterfactual, there is an inherent incentive to enlist into the groups the less
disadvantaged jobseekers from among all those who have the right to the benefits (profile II
beneficiaries).11
56.     Information on programs’ net effectiveness should then be fed back to the PES offices
as an instrument for improvement in the identification of the subgroups of beneficiaries that
are more likely to benefit from specific interventions (targeting) but also to identify relevant
measures. Equally important is to use this information at the central level as a tool to
redesign the regulations of programs (which are centrally defined) that prove less effective.12


11
  The qualitative study suggests, at least anecdotally, that this unintended incentive may at times occur.
12
  For instance, the most recent data on ALMPs’ allocation (Eurostat 2013, in World Bank 2015a) suggests that
most financing of ALMPs, apart from services for people with disability is directed to wage subsidies
(particularly youth internships). Other services that the evidence would suggest to be important are very
seldom provided, including training (only 2 percent of labor market programs in 2012, PLN 218 million), and
subsidized childcare (less than 0.1 percent of spending, PLN 0.56 million).
Regular reports on the ALMPs’ net effectiveness, at the central and local levels, would be
developed with the data and then used as the basis to make regular changes.
Develop programs for insertion of vulnerable groups in the labor market

57.      Qualitative evidence suggests that the beneficiaries of social services and, more
broadly, those who are profiled as ‘hard to serve’ cannot often access labor market programs
that are open to other unemployed individuals. The local assessment revealed that
prioritization, budgeting, and planning of skills training measures was not always in line with
market demand or the extent to which these had been successful in helping people obtain
jobs. Decisions on skills training were said to not be grounded in an assessment of labor skills
demanded in the market. The prequalification and background of the unemployed person
were also not always taken into account when deciding on skills training. Also, the quality of
the training was often qualified as low according to clients and employment office staff.
58.     It is too early to assess the reform that took place in 2014, which should have opened
a role for private services to deliver activation and integration programs, since it has had
limited implementation so far. However, even when implemented, the design of the reform
puts private service providers in competition, rather than in collaboration, with the work of
social assistance centers. As a response to this cooperation gap, the ESF has developed a
separate funding line meant to finance programs for labor market insertion of beneficiaries
of the PES that are underserved, such as the profile III beneficiaries (see Box 3). One of the
key aspects of the new ESF program is the need for cooperation between employment
offices, NGOs, and social assistance centers or centers for social integration. While funding is
thus available, there are evident capacity constraints and coordination failures at the local
level that in the past have meant under-utilization of funds.
Box 3. ESF Funding Window for Labor Market Insertion of the ‘Hard to Serve’

To support the effective targeting of profile III clients of the PES, as established by the law on the promotion of
employment and labor market institutions, a separate funding window under the ESF funds has been
established. This funding window supports the identification of ‘activation paths’ for profile III clients and sets
out criteria for effective cooperation between local level administration and private service providers. The
pathway to activation of profile III clients consists of two phases:

(a) The establishment of individual action plans, which will contain a social inclusion as well as a professional
inclusion dimension. This will need to be jointly drawn up by social assistance offices, local labor offices, and all
relevant nongovernmental social service providers.

(b) The execution of the individual action plans, with a clear division of labor between the social assistance
offices responsible for the social inclusion dimension and the labor offices, which will be in charge of
implementing the professional insertion component.
In the selection of eligible proposals, the European Commission will pay particular attention to and insist on
effective cooperation between institutions and local nongovernmental service providers. Only if this
cooperation is sufficiently demonstrated, will proposals be eligible for funding under this window.


59.    Better integrated programs for support, rehabilitation, and reintegration of the most
vulnerable workers in the labor market are needed, particular for young people. Given that
the groups to be served face a complex set of barriers, international experience suggests the
importance of coupling technical skills development, with other non-labor market
interventions, such as soft skills development and counselling. Box 4 illustrates two examples
of impact evaluated programs for vulnerable youth that adopted such holistic approaches,
with measured results.
60.      Capacity-building activities could be provided to local authorities to design such
programs through partnership among different institutions, harnessing the ESF funding
window. The institutions that are likely to participate in the process are the local social
assistance centers, centers for social integration, and public employment offices; NGOs
would also be able to participate in service delivery. A key feature of training provision
should be to ensure that they have taken into account all elements commonly thought to be
behind successful interventions: (a) training providers show proof that there is sufficient
demand for the skills developed; (b) good practices to work with hard-to-serve populations
are considered, such as the provision of behavioral skills development and counselling; (c)
close coordination between employment and social services and tools to motivate and
monitor progress (such as the social contract) to share across different offices; and (d) M&E
is in place and service providers are held accountable for results.
Box 4. Holistic Employment Programs for vulnerable youth

Jóvenes Youth Employment Programs (Argentina, Chile, Dominican Republic)

The Jóvenes Employment Programs offer comprehensive training to unemployed and economically
disadvantaged youth aged 16 to 29 years and were implemented in eight Latin American countries (Argentina,
Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela). The overall aim was to improve
human and social capital of participants as well as their employability through a combination of technical
training, internship experiences with employers, and basic life skills training. The programs targeted the poor,
with more than 60 percent of the participants coming from low-income families. Impact evaluation proved that
these approaches have a net positive effect on a number of outcomes. In terms of employment, the programs
increased the probabilities of beneficiaries to find employment upon graduation, especially for women,
compared to a control group. In addition, earnings for Argentinian participants increased by about 10 percent in
comparison to a control group. For Chile, evidence on income is mixed, as one study found a decrease in wages
by 8.8 percent while others found an increase of 26 percent. In the case of the Dominican Republic, the
program had an effect particularly in terms of increased earnings, 7 to 10 percent higher than the control
group. Overall, the net present value of the programs is positive, taking into account only the direct effects on
participants. A recent meta-analysis of these programs also suggests that the programs have stronger effect in
the medium term than in the short term.

Source: World Bank 2009, Card et al. 2011.

New Deal Program for Young People (United Kingdom)

In 1997, the Labor Government of the United Kingdom launched the New Deal program as part of their flagship
initiative on assisting long-term unemployed. The overall aim was to address labor market inefficiencies and to
assist individuals who struggle to compete in the labor market through additional support, training, and
subsidized labor market entry. The main part of the program focusses on young unemployed people, ages 18-–
24 who become eligible after six months of unemployment, but it also covers long-term unemployed above the
age of 25. Participation for eligible youth is compulsory and nonparticipation results in a withdrawal of benefits.

In a first stage, designed to improve the job-matching process, individuals were assigned a personal advisor who
supported and advised them about available jobs and provided contacts with potential employers. If this
measure was unsuccessful, participants were offered four different options in stage two, including full-time
education or training for twelve months, voluntary work, or six months subsidized employment with on-the-job
training. In a third stage, individuals who did not enter into permanent unsubsidized employment after stage
two would resume a new phase of intensive job search.

Overall, unemployment figures in the United Kingdom decreased from 6.3 percent in 1998 to 5.2 percent in
2000 while youth unemployment fell from 12.0 percent to 10.4 percent following the introduction of the New
Deal. However, as unemployment decreased not only among young people and unemployment rates have been
falling since 1993, only a part of the decrease can be attributed to the New Deal.

Source: Myck 2002.


61.     A second set of relevant international experiences relate to ‘family-centered’ SIPs
(Box 5), which provide a set of incentives and funding to local authorities to coordinate the
action of different local agencies, all aiming at the activation of families who face multiple
social and economic barriers. Programs have a strong monitoring component to measure
regularly the state of the household members under different dimensions. These programs
rely on the coordinating function of the social worker and on the social contract, an
instrument that is already established in Poland.
Box 5. Integrated Interventions for Activation of Vulnerable Families

Troubled Families Program (United Kingdom)

To improve the lives of 120,000 troubled families the U.K. government initiated a three-year program, which
aims to decrease antisocial behavior, reduce crimes and truancy, and increase employment. To foster
concentration on service delivery and output, a payment by result approach was chosen. Therewith, evaluation
and performance review are embedded into the payment process of the program. Evaluation shows that
performance varies across local authorities—while some reach 207 per cent of their initial commitment, others
only reach 33 per cent. To date, 35,618 families have been attached to the program, 15 percent below the
initial commitment.

Source: National Audit Office 2013.
Chile Solidario (Chile)
Solidario is a targeted holistic social welfare program designed to reach the 225,000 families, equivalent to 5
percent of the total population, living in extreme poverty in Chile. The program started in 2002 and combines
cash transfers and other assistance programs with regular visits by social workers who support families to
access benefits and services. It involves priority access to employment and education, housing improvements,
and special programs for children. To evaluate the effectiveness of the program, researchers used a regression
discontinuity design which compares families just above the eligibility cutoff to those just below. The method
allows attribution of differences in outcomes observed, including income and employment, to program
participation. Data were drawn from administrative records, which were the basis for determining eligibility,
and from survey data collected specifically for the evaluation. The findings show that living conditions for the
poor stabilized and even increased, ranging from 2 percent to 20 percent, depending on the specific subsidy
and how long the family has been in the program. Take-up rates for subsidies were higher among families living
in municipalities with a good social services network, working with a social worker with a low caseload, or who
had a male household head.

Source: World Bank 2011.



Develop community-based care services to support labor supply

62.     As shown in the profile of the out-of-work population and corroborated in focus
groups, many beneficiaries—especially women aged 30 to 60 years—cannot work because of
their duties in caring for children and the elderly. Such care services are underdeveloped in
Poland. A recurrent complaint emerging from the qualitative analysis is that women with
children are discriminated in view of their perceived lower flexibility. For this reason, the
development of private or publicly provided care services in intervention areas will be very
important to sustain labor force participation. Local authorities will be able to experiment
with different methods to stimulate greater supply of these services, including using
vouchers to partially subsidize service provision for some customers while expanding the
base for commercial customers by creating more demand than at present.
63.     A regulatory assessment and, if needed, standards drafting for home-based childcare
services or home-based services for the elderly are a first step. The key will be to strike a
healthy balance between quality and openness to entry into the sector. Establishment of
these services should favor a more efficient allocation of human resources than observed
now and generate some entrepreneurship opportunities (most likely for women). If services
provided meet quality standards, they could also be an important opportunity for cognitive
development of children at an early age, since the penetration of early childhood education
in Poland is minimal. It is important to acknowledge that this is a complex (and yet critical)
agenda, and the component’s feasibility will depend on the extent to which the institutional
arrangements are already in place and the expansion of services can realistically happen in a
limited time span at the local level.
Thematic Area 2: Income Support
Making formal work paid better

64.     A few important reforms have taken place in 2015 to increase the in-work incentives
of recipients of family benefits. However, the World Bank’s own diagnostic work suggested
that inherent disincentives of family benefits were limited in scope due to very low
generosity (World Bank 2015c). Disincentives may increase when the family benefits are
combined with last-resort social assistance and housing benefits, but even when combined
together, working appears to be more profitable than reliance on transfers13. The real issue is
when benefits are combined with informal work (seasonal jobs in agriculture, for instance)
and the cost of reaching formal jobs due to access and mobility constraints, as seems to be
the case in some of the poorest and most remote gminas. In such cases, it becomes clear
that receiving benefits for a long period is a rational survival strategy.
65.     Designing and implementing an in-work benefit could be a potential way to redress
the incentive compatibility of last-resort social assistance with formal jobs at low pay, by
topping up the formal wages of the low-income earners and reducing the pay-offs from long-
term stay-on benefits or working informally. The benefits could also include a transportation
voucher, conditional on working. On the other hand, qualitative research suggests that other
barriers to labor supply in the formal labor market exist and may be even more binding than
incentives: the cost of purchasing care on the market for non-work-able members (when
available at all) and the lack of sufficient jobs at the local level.
Simplify benefits to free up human resources for frontline case work and reduction in coverage
gaps

66.     To reduce the gap in coverage of social assistance benefit, recommendations from
the Spending Review included (a) developing a better understanding of the factors that
explain non-take-up of the family benefit and, especially, of the temporary benefit that
should act as a last-resort safety net for the very poorest and in turn address coverage gaps;
(b) revising eligibility thresholds to make benefits accessible to families living below the
poverty lines and reconsider generosity (while ensuring work incentives are maintained); (c)
improving benefit responsiveness to shocks by improving the eligibility determination
process and criteria; and (d) simplifying the number of benefit supplements to save social
workers’ time and achieve administrative efficiency savings.
13
     See note no. 1
67.      National-level simplification should contribute to reducing bottlenecks in the
application process, including the long lag between certification and receipt of benefits. Most
of the other constraints (excluding the financial constraint) will depend on the level of local
initiative (Table 1). Identification and needs assessment would consist of (a) an in-depth
diagnostic of the causes of non-take-up and (b) preparation of a training program for social
workers and an incentive system for gminas to actively reach out to the poor and assess their
needs, including those not included in social programs at present. Lessons learned from
programs such as Bolsa Familia, (subprogram to fight extreme poverty), which developed a
system of active outreach and identification of the extreme poor and a communication
campaign (see Box 6) would be of value. NGOs appeared to be more active in some gminas
and in closer contact with the vulnerable than the civil servants, could also be engaged in this
process.
                     Table 1. Potential Reasons for Coverage Gaps in Social Assistance Benefits
     Cause of Coverage Gap                                       Implementation Option
Complexity in application               Simplify administrative procedure (use income tax, decrease numbers
                                        of documents required) and improve interinstitutional coordination
Lack of awareness and/or stigma         Advocacy campaigns
Lack of human resources and time        Simplify administrative procedure and/or increase staff in Centers of
in administrations                      Social Assistance
Inappropriate income test               Revise the income test (income and period of reference) to include
                                        more poor
Source: World Bank 2015b.

68.     The joint review of social benefits carried out by the Bank and the government of
Poland (World Bank 2015a) included the recommendations to consider reducing the number
of benefit supplements attached to core benefits such as family benefits (eight supplements)
to save social workers’ time and achieve administrative efficiency savings. Furthermore, the
qualitative study highlighted how frequently local governments distribute very small
amounts to beneficiaries. A study on counselors’ time use and cost-benefit ratios of different
supplements and consultations with social workers could help identify the scope for process
simplification. The study would be followed by simplification, measured in terms of
processing time and transactions for both beneficiaries and counselors. Freeing up case
workers’ time is particularly important to focus on reducing the gap in coverage of the poor
through active search of beneficiaries.



Box 6. Busca Ativa (Active Search) in Brazil

In 2010, Brazil established Plan Brasil Sem Miséria, a national strategy with the objective to combat extreme
poverty. A key pillar of the strategy was Busca Ativa, a strategy that was meant from its outset to register all
extremely poor families who had remained excluded from the first years of expansion of the national
conditional cash transfer program. Developed at the municipal level, it was implemented by social assistance
mobile teams and incentivized through an increase in the transfers of the federal government to city
governments. Within its first year, the program added 1.35 million households to the single family registry and
included them in the Bolsa Familia cash transfer.

Source: Ministério Do Desenvolvimento Social E Combate À Fome. 2014. O Brasil Sem Miséria.



Thematic Area 3: Local Institutional Development and Participatory Approaches

69.     The local assessment findings suggest that social inclusion is not a key priority for
local authorities. Local area development strategies were claimed to ignore the issue of
social inclusion and lack a vision on how social integration could be tackled over time. Even
though expenses on social assistance can form up to 20 percent of the gmina budget, local
development strategies typically focus on infrastructure development.
70.     Local-level activities should focus on several complementary trajectories: building
capacity for participatory approaches to social and labor policy implementation;
identification and stimulation of labor demand, especially for young people; and support for
local initiatives to build assets and improve service accessibility for marginalized groups.
Given the impressive level of employment and income growth that Poland experienced in the
past decade, it is clear that lagging regions and localities are missing critical elements to
participate in economic growth. Part of the diagnosis relates to the poor level of human and
social capital among those who have not out-migrated from these areas and to the lack of
appropriate instruments, including public authorities, to change this situation. Thus, while it
is clear that better service delivery could ensure that the available supply-side instruments
play their role, it is equally important to ensure that there are sufficient jobs, especially for
young people, who are among the most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.
Identification and needs assessment of households excluded from social benefits

71.    Incentives for local gminas are required to mobilize identification of poor households,
especially those that are currently excluded from social assistance benefits, and generate a
monitorable database of households in extreme need. Gminas will then be incentivized to
address the gaps in coverage of the poor by income support programs.
72.     Select localities are at a high disadvantage from a national standpoint. Poverty maps
can be used as a primary tool to identify powiats that should be targets for interventions;
participating gminas could be then selected according to a series of national criteria or a
combination of national and local criteria (for instance, average household per capita
income, share of registered unemployed per adult or number of employed per adult,
incidence of long-term unemployment, and indices for relative active and passive gminas as
developed under the PARSP).
Build participatory planning competencies and enhance capacity for local development

73.     Social exclusion in Poland has a strong regional and local imprint connected with
disparities in economics and development levels between regions and local communities. The
analytics strongly suggest that measures are needed to build social capital in regions and
local communities to achieve better social and economic cohesion and counter the sense of
passivity and helplessness in the area of policy and civil action—an enduring legacy of the
former sociopolitical system. These local measures would be enhanced by appropriate social
policies to favor social activation of local communities and involve applying participatory
approaches to local development challenges and social inclusion processes associated with
the rubric of local and community-driven development.
74.     Local and community-driven development approaches aim to strengthen agency,
voice, and participation of communities and local governments with resources and decision-
making authority. Empowerment equates to the expansion of assets and capabilities of
people to participate in, negotiate with, and hold accountable institutions that affect their
lives and translates in programmatic terms into enhancing access to information, expanding
participation, augmenting social accountability, and building social inclusion and
organizational capacity. A principle of the approach is that of harnessing and magnifying
social capital—bonding social capital within groups and bridging social capital between social
groups. Taking local development approaches to scale, which should be a clear objective in
future social inclusion local initiatives, implies the coproduction of investments, outputs, and
services by different stakeholders at different levels: community social workers, local
government officials, civil society, the private sector, technical specialists, administrators,
program managers, and bureaucrats and politicians.
75.     Core features of a local development program would include the following four
features: (a) meaningful participation by all stakeholders—in particular the target groups of
the socially excluded—in planning, implementation, and M&E, with a focus on the
subsidiarity principle of devolving authority to the lowest level with the capacity to make
decisions and take effective action; (b) improved accountability; (c) technical soundness of
local initiative design, including institutional arrangements, coordination mechanisms, and
communications and dissemination strategies; and (d) sustainability planning. Local
development programs fit well with the governance agenda as well-designed programs
strengthen both transparency and accountability at the local level and in communities and
the accountability of service providers to their clients.
76.      Critical steps in preparing a program of local initiatives would include the following
steps: (a) a diagnostic phase, to assess local context, institutional arrangements, needs, and
priorities; (b) strategy and program content drafting, to align with national government, laws,
and regulations; (c) local initiative design and pilot site selection; (d) outreach and
mobilization; (e) training, facilitation, and participatory planning; (f) definition of resource
flows and accountability; and (g) design of management system, communications strategy,
M&E system, and sustainability plans.
77.      There are several typical challenges which an SIP in Poland would need to directly
address. The first is the panoply of incompatible incentives; coproducers lacking compatible
incentives will produce low-priority outputs that bring them rewards (such as reports or
workshops). The local assessment report cites problems of unemployment support:
“designed according to a general policy and offers tools which are currently used, regardless
of their usefulness to a person.” Different levels of government are coproducers bu t may act
as opponents rather than as collaborators. The second is the confusion generated by unclear
assignment of functions to different coproducers. Sectoral approaches to local development,
defined through functional specialization, tend to be better at mobilizing technical capacity
but are less responsive to local demand. Local government approaches often safeguard
formal autonomy and accountability of local decision makers but are equally often more
politicized and less effective in managing service provision. Direct community support
approaches are organized around social groups that make collective decisions, but their
entry point through community processes often complicates coordination with local
government. Convergence between the three approaches is a challenge but can lead to a
synergy that builds on the strengths of each approach and focuses on improved
coordination, synergy, efficiency, and responsiveness.
78.      Findings from the local assessment suggest that local officials often appear reluctant
to work with NGOs, expressing concerns about their lack of experienced personnel and lack
of financial means. However, a number of examples of state-NGO cooperation were found in
the field. Many of these concern EU-funded projects, which are temporary. In some gminas,
where the local government is more active and entrepreneurial, collaboration with NGOs
appears more common. NGO officials claimed they would benefit from information held by
public agencies. Local people often appear poorly informed about NGO activities that exist in
their area. While some officials claimed NGOs are more innovative and flexible, ministry
officials claimed there is little evidence on the performance of NGOs in the areas of social
inclusion and activation. In particular, employment offices said they do not see the added
value of NGOs as these do not have the resources to assist in employment services.


Thematic Area 4: Supporting Job Creation at the Local Level

79.      Productive inclusion of the vulnerable is increasingly recognized as key to effective and
operational social inclusion and critical to making poverty eradication sustainable. While
interventions on supporting labor supply and employability and on addressing some of the
social challenges of households are important, they are not sufficient. The lack of a sufficient
number of jobs in localities remains one of the most difficult barriers to sustainable social
inclusion. For this reason, stimulating job creation is considered a corollary instrument of
critical importance to building social inclusion, which this technical note develops only in
part. The strategy would focus on three areas: (a) further analysis of social economy
approaches and opportunities at the local level; (b) improving the services available for
employers in the PES and vacancy collection rates; these are important to capture additional
vacancies in the market and redistribute them toward the poor and to favor mobility; and (c)
piloting approaches to expand linkages between poor localities and higher value chains of
regional and national interest.
Develop social economy initiatives

80.     Social economy is defined as the “set of tools that increase the participation of
people marginalized by the labor market and members of neglected communities in both
economic activity and social life” and can be conceptualized as the space for realization of
programs that promote active social policy. Social enterprises function competitively and
generate income, as with normal enterprises, but aim to generate benefits rather than
profits. Such enterprises emerge from local and collective initiatives that coalesce around
social as well as material and financial capital. Social enterprises can be a very effective
mechanism for transforming social capital into other transformative stocks of capital (material,
organizational, human, and physical); can serve as a stimulating agent for local development;
and constitute an important component of community capacity.
81.     Social entrepreneurship has been accepted as an innovative and practical solution to
the problem of unemployment and social capital deficits. Social enterprises in Poland offer
creative approaches to maintaining financial self-sufficiency while fulfilling a clearly defined
social mission. They can provide employment to the most vulnerable social groups and
incorporate a variety of institutions, ranging from time banks that function on the basis of
exchange between members (whereby the value of services or goods is measured in units of
time rather than money, making it an effective support mechanism for low-income people)
to social enterprises—private sector companies, whose modus operandi is to provide social
benefits.
82.     EU structural funds have supported the EQUAL Initiative program, which has enabled
cross-sectoral partnerships to support the most vulnerable social groups in the labor market.
Social economy has been identified as an innovative and practical mechanism to counteract
the problem of unemployment, foster local social and economic development, and
strengthen civil society.
83.    The main types of social economy institutions currently functioning in Poland include
NGOs; cooperatives, including social cooperatives (the majority of which have been founded
since the 2006 Act on Social Cooperatives was adopted and assume the form of worker
cooperatives that provide labor market and social reintegration support); and mutual
organizations, typically lending and savings institutions. Two other types of institutional
forms play a significant role in supporting the development of the social economy sector and
offer transitional employment programs for the most marginalized social groups: CIS,
providing vocational training programs and employment, and employment activation units,
which offer social and employment reintegration programs specifically to the physically and
mentally disabled.
84.      Legislation that specifically focuses on the social economy includes the Act on Social
Benefits Activity and Volunteerism (April 24, 2003) which allowed NGOs to engage in income
generating to cover the costs of selected services or goods production; created the
possibility for tax-payers to designate 1 percent of their income tax to a chosen NGO with the
status of a Social Benefit Organization; established the Public Benefit Work Council, a
permanent advisory committee on third sector institutions to the MoFLSP; and
institutionalized volunteerism by creating incentives. The Act on Social Employment (June 13,
2003) created two new types of institutions: KIS, which take the form of support circles or
interest groups and can engage community members in local development projects, and CIS.
The Act on Social Cooperatives (April 27, 2006) defined Polish social cooperatives as
enterprises established by especially vulnerable social groups (the homeless, long-term
unemployed, formerly incarcerated individuals, people with substance abuse, refugees, and
the mentally and physically disabled) with a stated primary objective to support their social
and economic reintegration.
85.    The social economy is a powerful source of creative and practical solutions that can
have an impact on the economic and social development of people and their communities,
promoting entrepreneurship, nurturing networks of cooperation, and generating
opportunities for employment. Moreover, the social economy is competent in many fields
that were traditionally a domain of welfare institutions’ activity, such as (a) labor market
integration, though targeted training to cultivate relevant skills and enduring and specialized
support to the most vulnerable social groups; (b) services provision, by providing a range of
services focused on a specific target groups; (c) goods production, integrated within larger
value chains, especially in labor-intensive, specialized, handmade products such as carpentry,
sewing, and furniture making; and (d) community development, though engagement in
activities that foster social cohesion and belonging.
86.      The key challenges facing the social economy sector can be characterized as those of
(a) modernizing the cooperative sector, by providing improved start-up funding and
institutional support for new social cooperatives; (b) social enterprise institutional
development, through improved integration and networking to enhance capacity and legal
reform; and (d) making better use of different financing mechanisms, including incentives,
tax deductions, employment subsidies, and start-up capital schemes.
87.     Broadly, a local development support program would accommodate these core
features: participation, transparency, service innovation, dynamic peer learning and
knowledge exchange, innovative accountability mechanisms, intense capacity enhancement
efforts, and social economy and value chain linkages.
Enhance vacancy collection and services to employers

88.     As observed during field assessments, departments for employers’ services remain
among the least-developed areas of Polish PES offices. The high workload caused by the
unemployed appears to capture most human resources, with just a few staff dedicated to
firms. Without sufficient number and quality of vacancies, however, decongesting labor
offices becomes nearly impossible. While the unemployed have few alternatives to turn to
for income support or health insurance, firms can simply turn away from providing vacancy
information if the service that they receive is poor. Part of the reason why few resources are
dedicated to firms is also that the voice of firms in the governance of the services is limited.
Powiat labor offices are ultimately accountable only to the leader of the poviat (Starosta),
with no other lines of accountability to the region (with the exception of the ESF-financed
programs) or even to the Ministry of Family Labor and Social Policy (with the exception of a
small incentive system to finance the labor fund). Ultimately, the relationship is political. This
is an important departure from cases of well-functioning PES, such as in the United Kingdom
or Germany, where employers are board members, or the United States (where employers
own 51 percent of the PES).
89.     This set of tasks would focus on revamping the strategy to engage with employers,
with a clear focus on achieving improvements in performance at the local level as measured
by the number of vacancies collected and the share of vacancies filled. The type of
interventions would include the establishment of a national-level representative of the PES
network, so as to form national partnerships with large employers; the latter could would
have a direct say in the definition of tailored skills development programs to be then
implemented locally or regionally for staffing specific branch offices (such examples include
retail chains). The key to ensure value added for these programs is that they target
disadvantaged groups.
          Establishing an incentive system for local offices tied to number and quality of
           vacancies collected. This would be coupled with capacity building and a small
           grant fund to equip offices to achieve the result.

          Systematizing vacancy sharing across labor offices by removing the option to post
           vacancies only locally.

          Enhancing local skills development strategies as part of the local employment
           plans. This should, in particular, focus on redefinition of standards for the design
           of training programs by requiring that employers provide direct input to training
           curricula and the skills needs are prioritized at the local level.
Thematic Area 5: Accountability, Monitoring, and Evaluation

90.    The primary objectives of an improved M&E framework would be to (a) monitor
implementation and track progress toward the achievement of objectives; (b) assess
outcomes and the effectiveness of interventions; and (c) contribute to the empowerment of
primary stakeholders by promoting community participation in M&E and a forum for citizen
engagement and beneficiary feedback throughout all phases of a program, from inception to
closure.
91.     Critical areas to be addressed by the M&E system would include (a) providing
systematic and continual information on all aspects of program implementation to ensure
evidence-based decision making and management and track the status of progress toward
achieving the intended goals; (b) assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of interventions,
including cost-benefit/cost-effectiveness analysis; (c) evaluating the economic impacts of
interventions, user satisfaction with services and social capital impacts measured through
changes in information access and density of social networks; (d) assessing the extent to
which service provision meets the expectations and needs of the intended beneficiaries; and
(e) identifying critical lessons learned and key factors for sustainability of impact.
Monitor results for performance management
92.     At present, the monitoring system between government levels on social benefits and
the delivery of social case management appears to be inadequate, even in comparison with
the operation of labor offices. Local finances spent to top up programs or to deliver parallel
transfers are not monitored. In-kind services do not have a common framework for
evaluation. Furthermore, a key area of weakness identified in ESF implementation is the lack
of an effective M&E framework and rigorous evidence from practice.
Information system for horizontal coordination, monitoring, and evaluation

93.      The existing information system should be used and improved (see Box 2). This will
enable information flows across public agencies for joint client management and
enforcement of social contract. However, considering past experiences in Poland, it will be
key to ensure that there is a legal basis to perform joint client management and information
exchange, including passing microdata appropriately anonymized to the upper management
level, to allow for performance management. It will also be important to generate capacity to
use the system among local workers and start monitoring results through it.
94.      Poor information flow between institutions was highlighted in the local assessment.
Information sharing would improve the accuracy of the diagnosis, contribute to better design
of support, and enhance results. Lack of systemic instruments of sharing information was
cited as a causal factor. The SEPI platform seems to be, at least partially, a solution. Yet other
actions should be taken here, such as removing the obstacle of personal data protection or
clarifying to local officials that this should not be concern. Although the system does not limit
information sharing, it does not provide incentives to do so and personal data protection
provides a convenient justification for not sharing information. Fragmentary information
available to officials contributes to the use of unofficial contacts, which leads to decision
making that is not transparent.
Participatory M&E, citizen engagement, and beneficiary feedback

95.     The purpose of Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PM&E) is to empower
primary beneficiaries by directly engaging them in monitoring a project’s processes and
results. The focus of PM&E is on learning and capacity building applied to different levels and
groupings of stakeholders. It comprises a set of participatory tools and methods for
measuring, assessing, reporting on, and ultimately improving performance through a process
of shared learning. PM&E can be structured to solicit feedback from primary stakeholders as
well as to promote dynamic and structured learning among and between stakeholder
groups. Activities that could be implemented under PM&E include participatory rural
appraisal or participatory learning and action-inspired techniques in selected communities to
benchmark progress with respect to self-selected milestones and indicators and cross-
project community visits to enable community peer learning and capacity building.
96.      PM&E is both a form of public supervision and an effective way to mobilize
communities. In addition to increasing the efficiency of the decision-making process, it
contributes to raising people’s awareness regarding their rights to quality services as
beneficiaries and citizens and provides a platform for voice and agency in holding other
institutions to account and advocating for change.
97.     PM&E provides a pathway for direct data collection from participating communities
with respect to feedback on the effectiveness of implementation of project and policy
measures and assessment of relevance, coverage, accessibility, and affordability of services.
It can also assess the possible obstacles that disadvantaged communities face in accessing
and using services and can be an effective tool in identifying gaps in service provision. With
respect to citizen engagement practice, it is a very effective public awareness and advocacy
tool for the rights of vulnerable groups and can serve as an open platform for program and
policy influence with respect to choice of programs, policies, and practices for improving
community well-being. Ideally, process monitoring should provide continuous feedback that
enables the scaling-up process to constantly be improved.
Impact evaluation

98.    A randomized experimental design impact evaluation (with treatment and control
groups) could be employed to assess the impact of variations of the intervention packages
such as measures to increase the participation of selected excluded groups and to increase
the link between different institutional levels (community, municipality, and powiat).
Different or additional variations could be defined at a later stage. The evaluation framework
would measure against indicators that are linked to the results framework and would be
expected to measure change at input, output, and outcome level, including behavioral
change. In addition to the quantitative impact assessment, repeated qualitative assessments
could be fielded regularly to identify causal factors and client satisfaction.
References

Card, David, Pablo Ibarrarán, Ferdinando Regalia, David Rosas-Shady, and Yuri Soares. 2011.
       “The Labor Market Impacts of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic.” Journal of
       Labor Economics 29 (2): 267–300.
Goraus K., R. Gatti, and M. Morgandi M. 2014. Understanding Labor Market Duality in
       Poland. The World Bank. Warsaw.
Lewandowski, P. 2013. In-work Poverty in Poland: Causes and Possible Remedies. Institute of
      Structural Research, Warsaw.
Myck, Michal. 2002. “How the New Deal Works.” Economic Review (19): 3.
Ministry of Labor and Social Policy of Poland. 2004. Polish Social Policy Strategy.
National Audit Office. 2013. Programmes to Help Families Facing Multiple Challenges.
       National Audit Office of the United Kingdom. London.
Poznan Statistical Office. 2014. “Poverty Maps at the Sub Regional Level in Poland Based on
      Indirect Estimation.”
Rymsza, M., ed. 2014. Toward Active Welfare. The Development of Social Work and
      Community Work in Poland and Europe. Institute of Public Affairs. Warsaw.
WISE (Warsaw Institute of Economic Studies). 2015a. Social Inclusion and Activation Reforms
      in Poland. PSIA report.
———. 2015b. Social Inclusion and Activation in Poland. A Qualitative and Institutional
    Assessment in Seven Disadvantaged Localities. Warsaw.
World Bank. 2009. “MENA Knowledge and Learning. Investing in Youth in the MENA Region:
       How to operationalize youth interventions (I).” Fast Brief Series No 33. Washington,
       DC: World Bank.
———. 2011. From Evidence to Policy. Can Targeted Assistance help the Very Poor?
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013a. EU-11 Regular Economic Report: Promoting Shared Prosperity during a Weak
    Recovery in Central and Eastern Europe. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013b. Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC:
    World Bank.
———. 2014a. Social Inclusion TA Supplemental Task Description. Washington, DC: World
    Bank.
———. 2014b. Poland Shared Prosperity Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015a. Spending Review on Low Income Families in Poland.
———. 2015b. Spending Review of Low Income Family Support in Poland. Warsaw.
———. 2015c. Activation of the Out of Work Population and Public Employment Services in
    Poland.
———. 2015d. Activation and Public Employment Services in Poland. Enhancing Labor Market
    Policies for the Out of Work Population. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015e. Poland Snapshot.
Annexes
Annex 1. The Profiles on Unemployed in the Act on Promotion of Employment and on Labor Market
Institutions
  The profile                            I                                      II                      III
   number
Classification  The powiat labor office analyzes the chances of the unemployed to return to the labor market,
         14
method          considering the previous distance from the market and his/her determination to return. The
                factors under consideration include age, sex, education, skills, work experience and
                qualifications, certified disability, the time of unemployment, the place of living and the distance
                from the potential workplace, and the access to the contemporary measures of communication
                with powiat labor office and employers. In declaring the determination to return or enter the
                labor market, the powiat labor office shall consider factors which show the necessity and
                willingness of the unemployed to start working, engagement to the independent job hunting,
                the ability to accommodate to the labor market, the availability, reasons which led to work,
                reasons for registration in the powiat labor office, and the previous and current cooperation
                with the powiat labor office and employers.
The forms of    Job placement,                                        Services and            The AIP
support         Career counselling                                       instruments of        Activation
available for   Unemployed training to improve                           the labor                activities
the                  professional qualifications                          market                   delegated by the
unemployed      Finance, to the level of the minimal wage,            Activation                 labor office
                     the cost of exam, which allows to gain               activities            Special programs
                     certain entitlements, job titles, or licenses        delegated by          Delegation to
                     which are necessary to certain positions             the labor office         supported work
                Refund (up to a 12-month period) the cost             Other forms of             to the employer
                     of traveling from the place of living to the         support with          Employment in
                     work (or the internship or career guidance)          exclusion of the         the social
                One-time premium to the individual                       AIP                      cooperative
                     entrepreneurship (up to the 6, 4, or 3                                        settled by the
                     average salaries)                                                             legal persons
                Activation benefit for the full-time work of
                     the parent who is returning to the labor
                     market after a time of childcare or for the
                     unemployed who was caring for a
                     dependent person
                Entrepreneurship loan
                Training (only the unemployed up to 30
                     years old)
                Internship (only the unemployed up to 30
                     years old)
                Employment debenture (only the
                     unemployed up to 30 years old)
                Settlement debenture (only the
                     unemployed up to 30 years old)
Source: Own elaboration basing on the 2014 Act on Employment Promotion.



14
     2014 Journal of Laws, item 631.
Annex 2. Categories of Labor Market Support Instruments (ALMPs)
             Category                                             Instruments
Developing innovative labor          The national employment action plan
market policies
                                     The regional employment action plan, program of promotion of
                                     employment and activation of local labor market, profiling, regional
                                     programs
Supporting the creation of           The labor market council, voivodship labor market councils, powiat labor
partnerships for employment at       market councils
the local level
Activating unused resources of       Job placement, career consulting, and trainings
the labor market and
complementing existing labor
market shortages through labor
immigration
Supporting mobility and              Support for work commuting, accommodation grant, refund of social
employability of employees           security contributions, one-time premium for setting up enterprise,
                                     activation supplement, delegation for internship, refund to the organizer
                                     of public works part of the cost for salaries and social security
                                     contributions, special programs, and prevention mechanism
Supporting the vocational            Refund the cost of the postgraduate studies, refund of vocational
education system and lifelong        training of adults
learning
Supporting people with             Priority access to special programs; obligation to deliver to the
disadvantages in the labor market  unemployed who are under the age of 25 years benefits from the social
                                   assistance or job offer in particular terms; refund of a part of the cost of
                                   salaries, rewards, and social security contributions; delegation to
                                   internship of the unemployed who are under 30 years up to a period of
                                   12 months; delegation of the unemployed who are over 50 years to the
                                   intervention works up to a period of 24 months; grant for telework;
                                   activation benefit for full-time employment of delegated unemployed
                                   parent who is returning to the labor market or who is taking care of a
                                   dependent person; refund the documented cost of childcare; refund of a
                                   part of the cost of salary of the delegated unemployed who is over 50
                                   years; activation and integration program; training voucher, internship
                                   voucher, employment voucher, and settlement voucher
Supporting the creation of new     Refund to the entrepreneur the cost of equipment of the workplace,
jobs                               loans for the creation of jobs, and loans for starting an entrepreneurship
Source: Own elaboration by WISE basing on Act on Employment Promotion.
Annex 3: Social Assistance In-kind and Cash-based Benefits, According to Local Assessments
Social support benefits are initiated through a formal application system or upon referral of this need
by another family. The social welfare office has one month to make contact with the family and
conduct an interview in the place where the family lives. Unlike labor office assessments, social
welfare offices assess the situation of the whole family and pay benefits for the entire household.
NGOs, such as Caritas, which distributes clothes, food, and other material, provide help.
                                    Benefits Paid by Social Welfare offices
   Benefit                  Types of Benefit                         Sum                 Beneficiaries
Permanent      Permanent benefit                           Difference between       For people
                                                           income criterion and     permanently unable to
                                                           actual income            work
Periodical     Periodical benefit                          50%–100% of              For people with long-
                                                           difference between       lasting disease,
                                                           income criterion and     disability,
                                                           actual income            unemployment
Targeted       For food, medicine, heating, clothing,      Varies                   For people below
               indispensable everyday objects, minor       in practice low amount   income criterion; in
               repairs, funerals                           of each benefit          special cases (for
                                                                                    example, natural
                                                                                    disasters), also for
                                                                                    people with higher
                                                                                    income
In-kind            Social work                            Varies                   In most cases for
benefits and       Tickets                                                         people who meet
services           Contribution to health and social                               income criterion
                    insurance
                Material help for gaining economic
                    independence
                Organizing funeral
                Special advisory
                Crisis intervention
                Shelter
                Meals
                Clothing
                Nursing services
                Protected housing (apartments in
                    which they have access to nursing
                    services)
                Stay in social support house
                Material help for obtaining housing,
                    finding employment
Other (cash)   Benefit/loan for gaining economic           Varies                   For specified groups
               independence; for continuation of                                    (depending on type of
               education; benefit for foreigners and                                benefit)
               refugees; wage for provision of nursing
               services
Family          Child allowance                           Zł 500 per second and    For parents of children
   Benefit                  Types of Benefit                          Sum                   Beneficiaries
benefits           Basic family benefit                    next child, and for the    below income criterion
                   Benefit for giving birth                first child when income    (different than above)
                   Taking care of child during maternity   per person in family is
                    leave                                   below Zł 800
                   For single parents                      Basic family benefit: Zl
                   For families with many children         77–115 per child; one-
                   For families with disabled children     time benefit for giving
                   For children who study outside their    birth: Zl 1,000; other:
                    hometown                                usually around Zl 100
                   For beginning of school year            per child
Housing            Housing benefit                            Housing benefit:       For people who meet
benefits           Energy benefit                              Amount calculated      income criterion
                                                                in a complicated       (different one)
                                                                way, based on
                                                                income, number of
                                                                household
                                                                members, and
                                                                expenses
                                                               Energy benefit: Zl
                                                                11–19
School             School stipend                             School stipend: Zl      School stipend: For
benefits           School benefit                              84–212                   children who meet
                                                               School benefit:          income criterion
                                                                One-time, max Zl         (the same as for
                                                                530                      permanent benefit)
                                                                                      School benefit:
                                                                                         random situations
Source: Own elaboration by WISE based on Act on Social Help and information found on the MoLSP websites.
Note: Income criterion for permanent, periodical, targeted benefits: Zl 542 for single person, Zl 456 for each
person in a family; in some cases it can be raised by the local government; for family benefits: Zl 574, family
with disabled children Zl 664.
Annex 4: Example of the Support Path of a Long-term Unemployed through the Activation and
Integration Program (Scheme 2)




Source: WISE 2015a.
Annex 5. Analytical Work Underpinning this Technical Note

Social Inclusion Technical Assistance
Two original outputs were produced under the TA. First, a de jure mapping of the institutions
for labor and social policy in Poland that are oriented toward populations at risk of social
exclusion. The paper covered key legislation, mapping of institution at different levels of
government, and a description of the major programs for labor market activation and social
inclusion. The second product was a qualitative assessment of the implementation on the
ground of these policies, from the perspective of beneficiaries and providers in eight
municipalities. In each gmina, a series of in-depth interviews were held with local authorities,
together with focus groups with public employment offices, social service centers, and other
government and NGO officials and clients of these services. The assessment revealed the
availability or absence of relevant services, challenges and shortcomings in their delivery,
some good practices, and potential solutions.
Activation and Employment Promotion TA
The Activation and Employment Promotion TA used a combination of analytical work,
capacity building, and just-in-time advisory services to inform policymaking in the area of
social and employment policy in Poland. This included a policy note on ‘Activation and Public
Employment Services in Poland’ that combined a profiling of the out-of-work population with
an assessment of the main bottlenecks in public labor policies to serve these groups.
Spending Review on Low-income Family Support
Spending reviews are internal evaluation processes adopted by the governments in OECD
countries to identify ways to ameliorate the cost-effectiveness of expenditure in comparison
with the intended policy objective. The review can lead to reforms of programs or
reallocations meant to achieve better outcomes (value for money), or it can assist
governments in finding ways to achieve the same outcomes with lower spending (efficiency
savings). The first Spending Review pilot was conducted by a multisectoral World Bank team
in FY15 (Social Protection and Labor, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management) in
collaboration with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and the Ministry of
Labor (Department of Analysis and Forecast), and it focused on low-income family support.
The review analyzed cash-based benefits and child tax credits.
