Report No: ACS12422



Republic of Indonesia
Strengthening the Indonesia National
Water and Sanitation Information
Services Center (NAWASIS) for
Improved Planning


March 2015




GWASE
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission
to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of
the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-
mail pubrights@worldbank.org.


                                                                                                          ii
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658




                                                     Table of Contents
Acronyms
Executive Summary

1    Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 1
    1.1 Purpose of the report .................................................................................................. 1
    1.2 Report structure and content ...................................................................................... 1
2    Context ................................................................................................................................ 1
3    Description of the NAWASIS technical assistance .............................................................. 3
4    Development of the NAWASIS Info Instrument ................................................................. 6
    4.1 General development .................................................................................................. 6
    4.2 NAWASIS Info module development ........................................................................... 8
       4.2.1 Modular data entry as a basic NAWASIS Info principle ....................................... 8
       4.2.2 Finalisation of the DAK Module............................................................................ 8
       4.2.3 Regional consultation module.............................................................................. 9
       4.2.4 Development of the Sector Performance Module ............................................... 9
       4.2.5 Household WSS Access Survey Module ............................................................. 10
       4.2.6 WSS Overlay Map ............................................................................................... 11
    4.3 Development of NAWASIS Info operationalization supporting documents ............. 12
5    NAWASIS Info integration and Consolidation ................................................................... 13
    5.1 Indicator definition and data collection .................................................................... 13
    5.2 Cross-system data collaboration ............................................................................... 16
6    Strengthening Local Government capacity for WSS data management .......................... 17
    6.1 Identifying a Household–Based WSS Data Management Model .............................. 18
    6.2 Regional WSS data management horizontal learning ............................................... 18
    6.3 Data Management pilots in three districts/municipalities in West Sumatra province
            ............................................................................................................................... 19
    6.4 Conclusions with respect to capacity building .......................................................... 20
    6.5 Key challenges with respect to capacity building and WSS sector monitoring ......... 21
       6.5.1 At the district/municipal government level ....................................................... 21
       6.5.2 At the provincial government level .................................................................... 21
       6.5.3 At the national government level ...................................................................... 21
7    Knowledge sharing and awareness building on WSS sector monitoring .......................... 22
8    Future of NAWASIS ........................................................................................................... 23
9    Conclusions, Key Issues and Recommendations............................................................... 25
    9.1 Summary of conclusions ............................................................................................ 25
    9.2 Key issues and recommendations ............................................................................. 25
    9.3 The future of NAWASIS .............................................................................................. 27




                                                                                                                                            iii
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

Acronyms
AMPL            Water Supply and Environmental Sanitation (Air minum dan penyehatan
                lingkungan)
APBD            Local Government Budget (Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Daerah)
APBN            Central Government Budget (Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara)
AusAID          Australian Agency for International Development (now DFAT)
AWPB            Annual Workplan and Budget
BAKD            MOHA DG for Local Government Financial Administration
BAPPEDA         Provincial/District Planning Agency (Badan Perencanaan Daerah)
BAPPENAS        National Planning Agency
BPPSPAM         Water Supply System Development and Support Agency
NSA             National Statistics Agency (Badan Pusat Statistic, BPS)
STBM            Community Led Total Sanitation (Sanitasi Total Berbasis Masyarakat)
DAK             Special Budget Allocations/Grant (Dana Alokasi Khusus)
DFAT            Australian Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade (former AusAID)
DPRD            Provincial/District Legislative Assembly
GIZ             German Bilateral Society for International Cooperation
IndII           Indonesian Infrastructure Initiative (funded by Australia)
ISSDP           Indonesia Sanitation Sector Development Program
KDP             Kecamatan (Subdistrict) Development Program (World Bank)
LG              Local Government
M&E             Monitoring and Evaluation
MDG             Millennium Development Goal
MIS             Management Information System
MoE             Ministry of Environment
MoF             Ministry of Finance
MoH             Ministry of Health
MoHA            Ministry of Home Affairs
MPW             Ministry of Public Works
MTEF            Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
NAWASIS         National Water and Sanitation Services
NGO             Non Government Organisation
PAMSIMAS        Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities Project
                (WSLIC III)
PDAM            District Water Supply Company (Perusahan Daerah Air Minum)
PDD             Program Design Document
PERPAMSI        Water Supply Association of Indonesia
PMD             Directorate General of Village and Community Empowerment
PNPM            National Program of Community Development
WSS-WG          National Water and Environment Sanitation Working Group (Kelompok
                Kerja Air Minum dan Penyehatan Lingkungan)
PPSP            Urban Sanitation Development Acceleration Programme (Program
                Percepatan Sanitasi Perkotaan)
RENSTRA         Strategic Plan (Rencana Strategis)
RPIJM           Medium-term Investment Development Plan
RPJM            Medium-term Development Plans
SHAW-SIMAVI     Sanitation, Hygiene and Water Project of the organization Simavi
SOE             State Owned Enterprise
SUSENAS         National Socio-Economic Survey

                                                                                        iv
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

SWAp            Sector Wide Approach
ToT             Training of Trainers
UNICEF          United Nations Children’s Fund
WASPOLA         Water Supply and Sanitation Policy Formulation and Action Planning
Facility        Facility
WB              World Bank
WHO             World Health Organisation
WSES            Water Supply and Environmental Sanitation
WSP             Water and Sanitation Program of the World Bank
WSS             Water Supply and Sanitation




                                                                                            v
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

Executive summary

Access to reliable, accurate and timely data and information on WSS services continues to
be a challenge in Indonesia. Ensuring universal access (100% access to improved water and
sanitation) by 2019 means that reliable sector information will become even more
important. Recognizing this, the Government of Indonesia initiated efforts, in 2010, to
establish an institutionalized and funded framework for a national water supply and
sanitation monitoring system. In 2012, responsibility for this early system was transferred to
the National Water and Sanitation Services (NAWASIS) Centre under the National Water and
Sanitation Working Group. The NAWASIS Centre has three focus areas: (1) data and
information; (2) capacity building, and; (3) advocacy and communication.

The monitoring instrument, called NAWASIS Info, is a modular part of the overall services
provided by the NAWASIS Centre and falls under its first focus area, data and information.
The NAWASIS Info module is meant to:
     Generate a reliable and easily accessible set of water and sanitation data, based on
       standardized indicators linked to sector planning;
     Help to systematically monitor WSS sector progress;
     Measure institutional performance — of public service providers as well as users of
       public WSS funds;
     Support a more equitable allocation of limited WSS financial resources based on
       accurate and up-to-date data (ie: allocation of Special Allocation Funds [DAK]);
     Increase sector transparency;
     Generate more interest and resources for water and sanitation generally.

Recognizing the significant efforts needed to consolidate WSS sector monitoring and
generally strengthen the role of the NAWASIS Centre in data and information management,
technical assistance was provided through the Water and Sanitation Programme’s “poor
inclusive sector reform” business area to the NAWASIS Centre to achieve four key outcomes.
These outcomes, along with the indicators and summary of progress made, is presented in
the table below:

Table 1: Results framework of NAWASIS (taken from Project Concept Note).

Intermediate Outcome(s)                  Indicator(s)                Progress towards achieving outcome (s)
Outcome 1:                    WSS DAK module finalized in              Module finalized but not yet
Policy/strategy informed       September 2013, and utilized to           approved for use
                               estimate DAK allocation for FY 2014.
Outputs: NAWASIS Info         MPW’s Regional Consultation              Module developed but development
System further developed       module developed, tested, and             stopped and responsibility
in accordance with             utilized in Regional Consultation         transferred to PPSP
stakeholders’ needs and        event in 2014.
priorities.                   Sector Performance module finalized      Module under development but not
                               in October 2013 and utilized by           yet fully operational
                               relevant stakeholders at national
                               level by 2014.
Outcome 2: Client             200 participants attend, successfully    At least 200 persons have
capacity increased             complete capacity building activities     participated in CB activities
                               in 2013-2014
Outputs: Regions’             At least 30% of all districts/cities     Districts are not yet inputting WSS
capacities improved in         regularly input and update advanced       data on a regular basis
data management, in            WSS data into NAWASIS Info by 2014
particular utilizing          Selected, high-priority, basic WSS       Districts are not yet inputting WSS


                                                                                                               vi
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

NAWASIS data and info          data inputted by at least 330              data on a regular basis
modules                        districts/cities by 2014.
Outcome 3: Knowledge          NAWASIS data and information              Introduced to 400 districts/municipal
deepened                       modules introduced to 33 provinces         governments
                               in Indonesia by 2013
Outputs: Awareness            Demand from provinces and districts       Additional requests for NAWASIS
among stakeholders of          for accurate, relevant WSS data and        monitoring have been received, but
the importance of              information is reflected in letters of     no commitments made yet
accurate, timely WSS           commitment to utilize NAWASIS Info
data, and of NAWASIS as        as one instrument for their data
an integrated data             management by 2014
management instrument
is created.
Outcome 4: Innovative         Established sector database, utilizing    The web-based NAWASIS database is
approaches, solutions          online web-based data entry, which         not yet fully functional
generated                      is endorsed by relevant
                               ministries/agencies and
Outputs: NAWASIS Info          programs/projects, August 2013
database integrated with
existing relevant
databases/systems.


While progress has been made towards achieving the expected outcomes under the TA,
there have been significant challenges as well. Good progress was made towards the
consolidation of NAWASIS Info as a potentially useful tool for WSS sector monitoring; the
key word here is ‘potentially’. Five specific purpose modules have been developed and
tested on the ground, and interest has been generated for using and applying these
modules. Manuals (SOPs and guidelines) exist to assist users who want to use apply them.

Efforts have also been made to consolidate the approach to WSS data and information
collection; this includes trying to develop consensus on the main indicators for measuring
WSS status, promoting the concept of cross-system data collaboration, and generally
encouraging WSS sector information sharing to a much larger extent than is currently the
case.

Progress has also been made in developing the local government capacity for WSS
monitoring, with the up-scaling of the household-based WSS data management model.
Demand has been generated for improved WSS sector monitoring as a result of an increased
knowledge and awareness of the importance of useful and reliable data for decision-making.

At the national level, all key ministries have been exposed to NAWASIS Info, and there is an
increased understanding of and agreement on the need for a national WSS sector
monitoring system, in particular at the operation levels. All of the main WSS non-
government programmes are also aware of the system. Through participation in various
events over the past two years, the NAWASIS team has managed to present the system to
up to 400 district / municipal governments.

Despite the extensive efforts undertaken during the course of this TA, formal acceptance
and approval of NAWASIS Info as a national WSS sector monitoring tool is pending. While
this is due to a number of reasons, the most relevant is that monitoring continues to be seen
as a ‘sector’ responsibility, and the philosophy promoted by NAWASIS, of having a
monitoring system that is cross sector, collaborative and based on open sharing and easily
accessible information, is still a relatively new concept that will require some time to be fully
accepted.

                                                                                                            vii
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658


Clearly, continued effort will be needed to shift NAWASIS Info from a ‘potentially’ useful
instrument to one that is actively and broadly applied throughout the country to generate
useful and accurate WSS monitoring data. Further efforts are needed to generate interest in
using the system, in particular at the national government level. A crucial aspect of this is
continuing to demonstrate the utility of the system to an increasingly larger audience —
generating increased ‘buy in’ from both government and other partners (ie: donors).

While local governments in particular have received substantial support in developing their
capacity for WSS sector monitoring, Indonesia is a large country with many local
governments, and the TA efforts, given the scale of the task at hand, have been relatively
limited. Continued and concerted efforts will be needed to ensure that the good progress
made to date is sustained.

Although the TA was designed to further develop WSS sector monitoring on the many
critical issues mentioned above, one of the key lessons learned is that developing a clear
understanding of WSS sector monitoring and how to best achieve it is a long process that
requires a great deal of patience, repetition and time




                                                                                             viii
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

1     Introduction
1.1    Purpose of the report

This report summarizes the main achievements of technical assistance (TA) provided under
the Water Supply and Sanitation Policy Formulation and Action Planning (WASPOLA) Facility1
to the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services (NAWASIS) Centre
from October 2012 to December 2014 to further consolidate the water supply and
sanitation (WSS) data and information management instrument (NAWASIS Info) as a
modular part of the overall services provided by the Centre. It highlights some of the
continued challenges of effective WSS monitoring, and proposes strategies for further WSS
data and information management development.

1.2    Report structure and content

This reports is divided into nine sections. The first three sections provide background
information, including the report purpose, general context and description of the assistance.
Sections four to seven describe the progress made in achieving the expected outcomes,
while the final two sections describe the future of NAWASIS and some recommendations on
moving forward.

2     Context
Although access to improved water and sanitation has increased in recent years2, there are
still a significant number of people who do not have adequate WSS services in Indonesia.
The most recent figures (based on National Statistics Agency (NSA, Badan Pusat Statistik —
BPS) data, presented by BAPPENAS on 09.12.2014) now indicate that 67.73% and 60.91%
respectively have access to improved water and sanitation3. To achieve universal (100%)
access by 2019 — the current government target — an additional 80 million persons will
require access to water within the next five years, and about 100 million to adequate
sanitation. This represents a significant challenge for the government, and in particular for
the local governments, who are responsible for delivering these services.

While there are many issues that need to be addressed to facilitate achievement of the
universal access targets, one key challenge continues to be the lack of reliable, accurate and
timely data and information on WSS services, as evidenced in the figures presented above.
Poor data makes detailed planning difficult, and means that even if funds are available, they
may not be used effectively. The numerous project and programme specific databases and
management information systems (MIS) add to this problem — indicator definitions are not
coordinated and/or jointly agreed on, baseline data standards are not set or clearly defined,
and sharing of information is the exception rather than the norm. Often, the data provided
by the local governments (LG) is not what is needed at the national level, or vice versa, and
although the NSA does provide WSS data, this can only be used for some of the WSS sector
indicators, and is not useful for detailed LG WSS planning.



1
  Administered by the World Bank (WB) under TA no. P13365.
2
  Values vary depending on the data source; in 2011, 43% of Indonesians had access to an improved water source
(a third of this piped water) and 56% had access to improved sanitation (based on SUSENAS data; Joint
Monitoring Programme (JMP) figures for the same year were 84% and 59% respectively).
3
  JMP figures for 2012 are 85% and 59% respectively for water and sanitation).

                                                                                                            1
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

Recognizing this challenge, the Government of Indonesia initiated efforts to improve WSS
sector monitoring. In 2010, under the Netherlands-funded Water and Sanitation Action
Programme (WASAP)4, the Government took initial steps towards the establishment of an
institutionalized and funded framework for a national water supply and sanitation (WSS)
monitoring system, including developing key performance indicators and a management
information system (MIS) at national level to guide sector policy making for the achievement
of national development goals5. The WASAP-E activities ended in 2012 and the task of
further developing and consolidating WSS sector data and information management was
transferred to the NAWASIS Centre. This Centre, established in 20106, provides support to
the WSS Working Group (WSS-WG or Kelompok Kerja Air Minum dan Penyehatan
Lingkungan — PokJa AMPL7) in implementing its priorities and long-term strategies. Initially
focusing primarily on communication and information, NAWASIS evolved to better respond
to increasing WSS stakeholder needs and demands.

Institutionally, NAWASIS is positioned under the Secretariat of the National WSS Working
Group. NAWASIS is answerable to the Chairman of the National WSS Working Group and
follows the Secretariat’s operating guideline and procedures in the operationalization of its
programs and/or activities. In its initial development phase, NAWASIS was financed by the
Australian Government through the WASPOLA Trust Fund. However in the recent years,
some funding (through national Government budget APBN) has been allocated for the
implementation of NAWASIS-related activities.

The NAWASIS Centre focus areas are: (1) data and information; (2) capacity building, and; (3)
advocacy and communication. The first area includes sector monitoring as well as a variety
of information services that are of importance to the sector, such as the WSS information
bulletin PERCIK, PERCIK Junior (for grade school children), a newsletter, a digital library, and
a water and sanitation internet portal. A division within the structure of the WSS-WG
Secretariat manages NAWASIS; when this TA commenced, it was run by a team of staff and
experts and funded jointly by government (BAPPENAS) and the WASPOLA Facility.

As part of the task of consolidating WSS data and information management that first began
under WASAP-E, a data and information management instrument called NAWASIS Info was
developed in 2012 — this instrument is a modular part of the overall services to be provided
by the NAWASIS Center and falls under its first focus area, data and information. The
NAWASIS Info instrument was a merger of the WASAP-E monitoring framework and the
Urban Sanitation Development Acceleration Programme (USDP, Program Percepatan
Pembangunan Sanitasi Perkotaan — PPSP) monitoring system.

The NAWASIS Info instrument was expected to become the WSS sector data and
information hub/portal, ensuring synergy (collaboration) and consolidating data from the

4
  WASAP E was one of nine sub programmes under WASAP, a trust fund held by the World Bank (WB) Indonesia
and which includes both bank-executed (BE) and recipient-executed (RE) programmes; WASAP-E was one of the
latter.
5
  The achievements of WASAP-E are detailed in the WASAP Final Report, 2013.
6
  The NAWASIS Centre was originally established in 2006 with support from PLAN Indonesia as the National
Water, Sanitation and Environmental Health Information Center (PIN AMPL — Pusat Informasi Nasional Air
Minum dan Penyehatan Lingkungan). In 2010 it was renamed to the National WSS Advocacy and Information
Centre (PAIN — Pusat Advokasi dan Informasi Nasional) and focused on producing advocacy materials and tools
for the WSS sector.
7
  WSS-WG is an inter-ministerial coordinating body, which coordinates the implementation of WSS-related
policies / strategies to ensure effective delivery of WSS services. Disseminating data and information on WSS is
one of its tasks.

                                                                                                                   2
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

various other information systems in the WSS sector — it would be an MIS instrument
capable of producing reliable and relevant WSS data, easily accessible to users. Ideally, the
NAWASIS Info data could be used to measure the various WSS sector development targets
and goals indicators, including the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), National
Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) targets, and Regional Medium-Term
Development Plan (RPJMD) targets. Accurate WSS data and information is crucial to
effective sector planning and budgeting, and good data will ultimately support more
effective WSS sector decision-making and policy development.

An important role of NAWASIS Info was also to build synergy between the numerous
stakeholders in the WSS sector; it could be used as a platform for reaching consensus on
operational definition of indicators and data variables.

In summary, the NAWASIS Info module was meant to:
     Generate a reliable and easily accessible set of water and sanitation data, based on
       standardized indicators linked to sector planning;
     Help to systematically monitor WSS sector progress;
     Measure institutional performance — of public service providers as well as users of
       public WSS funds;
     Support a more equitable allocation of limited WSS financial resources based on
       accurate and up-to-date data (ie: allocation of Special Allocation Funds [DAK]);
     Increase sector transparency;
     Generate more interest and resources for water and sanitation generally.

Although significant progress had been made by 2012 with respect to WSS sector
monitoring, further support was needed to ensure that the momentum established was not
lost. In 2012, a data module on the Special Allocation Fund (DAK) was developed; the first of
a number of planned modules that would be incorporated into NAWASIS Info. Potential
users, however, needed to be trained, and awareness created, about the utility of such
modules. Other pending tasks included: (1) simplification of the existing NAWASIS Info to
make it more user friendly; (2) increased dialogue on data harmonization between the
various data providers, especially with respect to some subsectors such as solid waste; (3)
more intensive efforts to build LG demand for and commitment to inputting data; (4) further
advocacy and capacity building efforts to effectively institutionalize WSS monitoring.

Recognizing the significant additional efforts required to consolidate WSS sector monitoring
and generally strengthen the overall roles of the NAWASIS Centre with a particular focus on
data and information management, the Government requested technical assistance (TA)
from the WASPOLA facility trust funds, to undertake this.


3   Description of the NAWASIS technical assistance
The TA was intended to strengthen NAWASIS in the “design, roll-out and management of
data and information towards a widely accepted, integrated, multi-purpose information
service to improve water and sanitation sector development”. The TA falls under WSPs
support to “Poor Inclusive Sector Reform” business area and contributes to WSP country
results framework output 1, which focuses on improving the national government capacity
to support a coordinated scale-up of local implementation of strategies and programmes on
rural and urban water and sanitation.


                                                                                                3
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

While the main focus of the support was on data and information management, the TA
would also provide support with regards to capacity building and advocacy and
communications, where these contribute directly to the development and implementation
of NAWASIS Info. This approach is reflected in the four intermediate outcomes and
associated outputs. These, along with the associated indicators, are:

Table 2: Detailed NAWASIS Results Framework.

     Intermediate                     Indicator(s)                    Progress towards achieving
      Outcome(s)                                                             outcome(s)
Outcome 1:                  WSS DAK module finalized in             Module finalized but not yet
Policy/strategy              September 2013, and utilized to          approved for use (see section
informed                     estimate DAK allocation for FY           4.2.2 for further details)
                             2014.
Outputs: NAWASIS Info       MPW’s Regional Consultation             Module developed but
System further               module developed, tested, and            development stopped and
developed in                 utilized in Regional Consultation        responsibility transferred to PPSP
accordance with              event in 2014.                           (see section 4.2.3 for further
stakeholders’ needs                                                   details)
and priorities.             Sector Performance module               Module under development but
                             finalized in October 2013 and            not yet fully operational (see
                             utilized by relevant stakeholders        section 4.2.4 for further details)
                             at national level by 2014.
Outcome 2: Client           200 participants attend,                At least 200 persons have
capacity increased           successfully complete capacity           participated in CB activities
                             building activities in 2013-2014
Outputs: Regions’           At least 30% of all districts/cities
capacities improved in       regularly input and update              Districts are not yet inputting
data management, in          advanced WSS data into                   WSS data on a regular basis (see
particular utilizing         NAWASIS Info by 2014                     chapter 6 for further details)
NAWASIS data and info       Selected, high-priority, basic WSS
modules                      data inputted by at least 330           Districts are not yet inputting
                             districts/cities by 2014.                WSS data on a regular basis (see
                                                                      chapter 6 for further details)
Outcome 3: Knowledge        NAWASIS data and information            Introduced to 400
deepened                     modules introduced to 33                 districts/municipal governments
                             provinces in Indonesia by 2013
Outputs: Awareness          Demand from provinces and               Additional requests for NAWASIS
among stakeholders of        districts for accurate, relevant         monitoring have been received,
the importance of            WSS data and information is              but no commitments made yet
accurate, timely WSS         reflected in letters of
data, and of NAWASIS         commitment to utilize NAWASIS
as an integrated data        Info as one instrument for their
management                   data management by 2014
instrument is created.
Outcome 4: Innovative       Established sector database,            The web-based NAWASIS
approaches, solutions        utilizing online web-based data          database is not yet fully
generated                    entry, which is endorsed by              functional (see chapter 5 for
                             relevant ministries/agencies and         further details)
Outputs: NAWASIS Info        programs/projects, August 2013
database integrated
with existing relevant
databases/systems.


                                                                                                      4
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

Outcomes 1 and 4 are closely linked, in that both focus on the further development and
consolidation of the existing data and information system, while outcomes 2 and 3 depend,
to a large extent, on successful progress in achieving outcome 1.

Under outcome 1 and 4, anticipated activities were:
 Finalizing, testing, and scaling up the implementation of NAWASIS Info, emphasising
   finalisation of the web-based Management Information System (MIS) developed under
   the WASAP-E program;
 Developing additional “specific purpose” modules similar to the DAK module — these
   modules would be linked to existing financial or other incentive programs, such as the
   AusAID Water and Sanitation Grant Program (although an overriding principle is that the
   web-based NAWASIS system should encourage users to apply the same basic set of
   indicators and data);
 Developing standard operating procedures (SOPs), and user manuals and guidelines;
 Achieving consensus on the system, including for the user interface (based on the draft
   prepared in 2012);
 Facilitating coordination between key sector agencies responsible (Ministry of Public
   Works, Ministry of Environment and the local governments) to jointly develop strategies
   for collecting the necessary data, and in particular for indicators where data is still scarce
   and/or unreliable such as for solid waste.

Under outcomes 2 and 3, key anticipated activities were:
 Providing support to a group of up to 50 local governments to input a minimum set of
   data into the system and to generate useful information (comparison tables and charts,
   maps);
 Using the interest and experience generated in horizontal knowledge and learning
   exchanges, encouraging replication of successful experiences in other LGs and increasing
   demand for accurate, relevant WSS data and information.

Table 3: Key progress under the TA for the main areas supported:
Items                    Pre-TA                          Post-TA
Sector performance       Using indicators and data       Adjusted towards the new WSS target
module                   to track progress towards       according to the new National Mid-Term
                         National Mid-Term               Development Plan 2015-2019 (Universal
                         Development Plan 2010-          Access)
                         2014 and MDGs 2015
                         targets
WSS Household Survey     Not available                   Operational and being used in the
Module                                                   initiative to strengthen WSS Data
                                                         Management in 3 pilot cities/districts of
                                                         West Sumatera Province
MoPW’s Regional          User requirements               Module’s initial design developed
Consultation Module      identified and analyzed
WSS Overlay Digital      Not available                   Overlay map developed, able to display
Map                                                      several information (location of WSS
                                                         vulnerable areas, location of STBM
                                                         program, location of PAMSIMAS program)
                                                         that resulted from data collaboration
                                                         between Nawasis and other
                                                         programs/projects
LG’s data-related        Not available                   Approximately 200 persons strengthened
capacity strengthening                                   in data-related capacities
Cross-system data        Initial effort to collaborate   Collaboration established with STBM

                                                                                                     5
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

collaboration             with PPSP               program, PAMSIMAS program, SHAW-
                                                  Simavi, and PPSP
WSS Data Survey           Done in Bangka          Done in 3 districts/cities: Pasaman
(collecting WSS data at                           Sijunjung, and Pariaman in West Sumatera
household-level)                                  Province


4     Development of the NAWASIS Info Instrument
Although the NAWASIS Info system is not yet able to provide data and information
systematically to effectively inform WSS policy and strategy (outcome 1 of this TA),
significant progress has been made towards consolidating the NAWASIS Info instrument for
application in WSS sector progress monitoring. Key progress and achievements are
described in the following sections.


4.1    General development

Since 2012, NAWASIS Info has been further consolidated. It currently consists of a database
and several application modules. The database functions as a place for storing data, while
the application modules process, analyse and present data or indicators from the outputs of
the data analysis. The basic principle of the system is quite simple. Data from various
sources, including data input directly by district/municipal governments and data that have
been collected through other monitoring and evaluation systems are consolidated and
stored in a single database. These data can then be used for various purposes, through
application modules that are specially designed to address the particular needs of NAWASIS
Info users. The simple diagram below shows how this works:




                                                                                             6
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658


Figure 1. NAWASIS Flow of Data and Information

                                                                 Tracking sector performance
                                                                (Sector Performance module,
                                                                      see section 4.2.4)


         LGs input data
                                                                 Estimating DAK allocation
          into Nawasis                                           (DAK module, see section
                                                                           4.2.2)



                                      WSS Sector                WSS overlay mapping module
       Shared data from
                                      Database                       (see section 4.2.6)

       other Information
            System
                                                                  Tracking household WSS
                                                                  access (see section 4.2.5)



                                                                Regional consultation module
                                                                     (see section 4.2.3)




Over time, it is expected that NAWASIS Info will expand with further input from key WSS
sector stakeholders. Therefore, a development path for NAWASIS Info is being developed, so
that at some point in the future, NAWASIS Info will grow into a WSS sector expert system, as
illustrated below:

Figure 2. NAWASIS as an expert system




      The generic MIS is an application whose main function relates to processing data
       into indicators (the central box in the preceding diagram).
      The Decision Support System (DSS) is an information system that is able to assist in
       the decision making process. Currently the NAWASIS module that can be
       categorised as DSS is the WSS Overlay Map module.



                                                                                               7
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

          The Executive Information System (EIS) functions to offer support to executives,
           presenting only highly strategic information. The WSS Sector Performance module
           falls into this category.
          The Expert System (ES) is an information system that is able to provide input or
           recommend what action would be most appropriate in the situation and condition
           facing the user.

Refinement of NAWASIS Info was implemented in response to WSS-WG needs. Further
details on the development of the various modules are described below:


4.2       NAWASIS Info module development

4.2.1      Modular data entry as a basic NAWASIS Info principle

The ‘modular’ data entry into NAWASIS Info is based on the principle that, at least in the
beginning, LGs will require some form of incentive to input data into the system. The current
NAWASIS Info basic data form includes 60 data fields needed to track progress towards
achievement of the MDGs and to monitor and evaluate WSS programme progress — this is a
lot of work for LGs, especially as it is expected to be done voluntarily. The modular approach
therefore tries to link the data input to ‘incentives’. In the case of the DAK (Special Allocation
Fund — Dana Alokasi Khusus) module, for example, if the user inputs relevant data, that
same user (in this case the district) would be considered for a DAK allocation, provided they
meet the required criteria. If they do not input data, they would lose the opportunity to be
considered to DAK.

Calculating the DAK estimates requires around 17 types of data. These 17 data types are
input into the DAK module. They are then processed into technical indices and estimates of
DAK allocations for each district/municipal that is eligible for a DAK allocation. The entire
input-processing-output process is carried out in the Water Supply DAK and Sanitation DAK
module.

4.2.2      Finalisation of the DAK Module

The relevant technical criteria and data variables in the DAK module have been updated, and
so far, the module has been used to: (1) receive data input by districts/municipalities; (2)
process the data input into water supply and sanitation technical indices; (3) sort
districts/municipalities that are eligible for DAK allocations, and; (4) estimate the Water
Supply DAK and Sanitation DAK allocations for each eligible district/municipality.

The DAK module has yet to be approved for use as an instrument to generate lists of regions
that are eligible for DAK allocations or the DAK allocations for each eligible region. While
there is agreement between BAPPENAS and technical directorates in the Ministry of Public
Works (MPW) (Directorate for Program Development, Directorate for Water Supply
Development and Directorate for Environmental Sanitation Development) on applying the
NAWASIS Info DAK module, the MPW Secretariat General has yet to approve use of
NAWASIS Info. It is hoped that further discussion will lead to eventual approval for
application of the module.




                                                                                                8
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

4.2.3   Regional consultation module

The NAWASIS team provided support to the draft design of the regional consultation
module (this module is related to the Medium Term Investment Development Plans —
RPIJM) negotiations, based on input from the MPW through a series of intensive meetings in
mid 2013. The main purpose of this module was to help MoPW in allocating its (limited)
budget for activities that came from the City Sanitation Strategies (SSK) and Sanitation
Program Memorandums (MPS), which is a breakdown of the SSK proposed activities. The
content of this module is quite limited, however, as it was abandoned following a Bappenas
instruction. Contents include: (1) list of activities from the MPS, (2) list of activities from
RPIJM – MoPW’s specific document as the basis for ministry’s budget allocation, (3)
recommended activities that came from the MPS and at the same time listed in RPIJM.


4.2.4   Development of the Sector Performance Module

The Performance Sector Module is divided into three sub-modules: National Performance,
Province Performance, and District/Municipal Performance. Initially, a Sector Performance
module was designed to track achievement of MDG targets.

With the MDGs coming to an end, and the upcoming implementation of the National
Medium Term Development Plan for 2015-2019, the Sector Performance module has been
adjusted to accommodate the 2015-2019 National Medium Term Development Plan target
of universal WSS access by 2019.

There are currently four main indicators, one for each sub-sector: drinking water, sanitation,
solid waste and drainage. Each indicator includes a series of data variables reflecting the
different types of access comprising the main indicator. This is illustrated in the diagram
below. At this stage, the Government has not formally agreed upon the indicators, thus the
sector performance module will be adjusted accordingly once the formal indicators are
agreed.




                                                                                              9
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

Figure 3. NAWASIS main indicators




4.2.5   Household WSS Access Survey Module

The Household WSS Access Survey module was developed as part of the facilitation of
improved WSS data management in a number of pilot districts/municipalities (see chapter
6). This module has several key features:
      Data input can be done manually or by uploading excel files;
      Raw data can be illustrated in table form;
      Data analysis and indicators can be shown in the form of tables and graphs;
      Reports can be generated according to user needs;
      A geo-tagging feature provides the coordinates of the locations of the
         data/information.

The sector performance module and the Household WSS module are more or less similar in
terms of type of data variables. However, the Household WSS module was developed to
accommodate the initiatives of LGs in collecting WSS data at household level (replicating and

                                                                                          10
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

adjusting of Bangka model, see chapter 6). The Sector Performance module requires data
aggregation at district/city level, while the Household WSS module focuses on data
collection at the individual LG level, and allows the LGs to add data variables if needed
(examples include in the case of Pasaman).


4.2.6   WSS Overlay Map

The WSS Overlay Map is a first step towards NAWASIS Info being a decision support system.
To develop the WSS overlay map, the NAWASIS team collaborated with numerous partners
including PPSP, the community led total sanitation (Sanitasi total berbasis masyarakat —
STBM) programme and the Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities
Project (Penyediaan Air Minum dan Sanitasi Berbasis Masyarakat— PAMSIMAS).

The WSS Overlay Map provides the following information:
     Water supply vulnerable areas;
     Sanitation vulnerable areas;
     STBM program intervention areas;
     PAMSIMAS program intervention areas;
     Other program intervention areas.


Figure 4. WSS Overlay Map




The functions of the WSS overlay map include:


                                                                                            11
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

          Showing water supply and sanitation vulnerable areas, including vulnerable areas
           where there is no or insufficient development program intervention
          Supporting program/activity prioritisation in general, particularly with regard to
           PAMSIMAS and STBM programs. By policy, villages that receive PAMSIMAS
           intervention should be those that have been triggered through the STBM program,
           but in reality, there are villages that have received PAMSIMAS intervention, but have
           not been triggered by STBM. The WSS overlay map can quickly show the relevant
           information.
          Showing the distribution of WSS sector development programs, including indications
           of over-concentration of development programs in certain areas.

Figure 5. Distribution WSS Program Map




4.3       Development of NAWASIS Info operationalization supporting documents

A number of guidelines and SOPs to support operationalization of NAWASIS services, in
particular NAWASIS Info, have been developed. These documents are important as a
knowledge sharing product, and they will also be of use to NAWASIS managers in the
administration and management of NAWASIS, and to others who want to implement similar
activities.

These guidelines, SOPs and capacity building modules are:
    Database management guidelines: provide guidance for NAWASIS Info managers,
       including for adding new data variables.
    Application module development guidelines: provide guidance on the development
       of NAWASIS Info application modules,
    Guidelines for using the water supply and sanitation DAK module: includes
       information on using the DAK module on inputting and presenting data, processing
       and presenting technical indices, and viewing Water Supply and Sanitation DAK
       allocation estimates.



                                                                                             12
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

          Guidelines for using the WSS Sector Performance Module: provide guidance on
           using the WSS sector performance module.
          WSS DSS module management guidelines: provide guidance for for the NAWASIS
           team in managing the WSS DSS module. This guideline was specially developed
           because in terms of substance and management, this module is rather different
           from the other NAWASIS modules.


5      NAWASIS Info integration and Consolidation
5.1       Indicator definition and data collection

Significant efforts were made to further consolidate the approach to WSS data and
information under this outcome 4, as well as to develop a common understanding of
indicators and the basic data needed to measure them. Currently, many WSS stakeholders
manage their own data for internal project monitoring, and although some agencies may
use the same indicators, they often have different operational definitions of these. A case in
point is the term 'latrine': STBM uses the term permanent latrine (jamban permanen) and
semi-permanent latrine (jamban semi permanen), but the National Statistics Agency (BPS,
Badan Pusat Statistik) does not use these terms. Another example is bottled water, which is
a term used in basic health research surveys, but is not a term used by MPW. Having
different operational definitions will affect data consolidation and publication. Data flow and
consolidation also differ from one agency to another, and even from one project to another,
as the following data flows for the BPN, MPW, and Ministry of Health (MoH) highlight:

Figure 6. Statistics Agency Data Flow

    National Statistics Agency (Set up
    National WSS Indicator along with Sector         Publish WSS Status per Province and District
    Ministry)




                Province Statistics Agencies (Data
                Collection WSS Indicators)




                District Statistics Agencies (Data
                Collection WSS indicators)               Coordination

                                                         Data Flow

                                                         Tools
     Statistics Agency Enumerators (Village Level)




                                                                                                    13
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

Figure 7. Ministry of Public Works Data Flow

    Ministry of Public Works: (Ministry WSS targets and indicators; including for projects,
                                       i.e.: PAMSIMAS)



  PAMSIMAS Central PMU: (WSS Project
  Progress and Data Consolidation)



        PAMSIMAS Prov. Management Unit:                      Provincial Public Works
        (Data compilation)                                   Agency




        PAMSIMAS District Management Unit:                  District Public Works Agency
        (Data compilation)


                                                           Coordination
                                                           Data flow
 WSS Project Indicators: (Village Level)                   Coordination



Figure 8. Ministry of Health Data Flow

  Ministry of Health (WSS MOH                   Min of Health Research and                    Release Basic
  targets and indicators; include               Development Agency                            Health Survey
  projects, ie: STBM)                           (Periodically held a basic health             (RISKESDAS),
                                                survey, includes WSS indicator)               includes WSS
                                                                                              indicator per
                                                                                              prov/dist
  STBM Secretariat (STBM
  Progress, Data Consolidation
  and Monitoring)



         Provincial Health Agency (STBM
         and WSS indicator )


                                                   Basic Health Survey Project
         District Health Agency (STBM
         and WSS indicator compilation)



  Sub-District Health Centre                                       Coordination
  (Puskesmas and Sanitarian), STBM                                 Data flow
  and WSS Data Collection                                          Tools




  WASH Indicators, (Village Level)




                                                                                                              14
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

For the purpose of WSS data consolidation, the NAWASIS team has been engaging with
stakeholders to come to an agreement on the main indicators for measuring WSS status.
NAWASIS Info's function is as a data portal, where users can track agreed WSS sector
development indicators.

To make sure data input is as agreed, at district level there is an assigned unit/person to
input data into NAWASIS Info. The assigned unit/person is given a username and password
to access the portal, but users can freely access whatever data they need. The Statistics
Agency, Basic Health Research and other surveys can use the consolidated data published by
NAWASIS as a control. The graphic below shows the consolidated data flow.

Figure 9. Expected WSS Data Consolidation by NAWASIS


                                NAWASIS                                                      National Statistics (BPS)

     MIS PORTAL
                                                                                         Basic Health Survey
                                                                                               Project


                                            Agreed Indicators for WSS




                                                         District (WSS Working Groups)




                                                                                                               Specific Surveys
   MPW                MOH                  Provinces


National Development                 NGOs, Donors,
Planning Agency                      Private              Sub- District
                                     companies, etc.

                        Other Ministries
                                                          Village


 User/Access data

 Data Flow (Input)
 Control/Comparison


In 2013, the National WSS Working Group took the initiative to gather together key WSS
sector stakeholders— participants included BAPPENAS, MPW, MoH, BPS and representatives
of programs/projects including SHAW-SIMAVI, STBM and PAMSIMAS, to discuss the issue of
indicator definition. The WSS stakeholders were aware that there are a variety of indicators,
each with their own operational definitions. They agreed that WSS sector raw data should
be a part of the data collected by BPS as the key data collection agency in Indonesia. The
Statistics Agency also agreed that not all the data that are needed are available, particularly
in the solid waste and drainage sub-sectors. However, BPS said it is ready to accommodate
the needs of the WSS sector and hoped that the relevant technical ministries could agree on
what raw data should be included in the next national census questionnaire and inform the
Statistics Agency as soon as possible.


                                                                                                      15
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

The key points to emerge from this discussion were:
 The main need in terms of national WSS data is access to sector processed data, but
    there is a need for other data from the ministries and programs or projects that are
    appointed to measure the performance and achievement of WSS development. Having
    these data from these ministries and programs / project is expected to support and
    supplement detailed data related to WSS.
 BPS has carried out WSS sector basic data measurements and surveys. Data users will
    undertake data management, including the ministries and program and project
    managers, to meet sector needs.
 BPS is prepared to accommodate WSS sector data needs, but needs prior input about
    definitions, operational indicators, and data collection methods that has been agreed
    between the ministries; specifically, clarification on definitions of:
    o 'Urban' and 'rural' (there are several definitions)
    o Piped and non-piped water supply
    o Water supply continuity
    o Scope of drainage in Statistics Agency calculations: to include just rainwater or other
        sources, such as grey water
    o Volume of water consumption and how to measure it
    o Journey time need to access water sources
    o Communal options to be included in the Statistics Agency National Census module
    o Landfill volume
    o Improved water supply (final applicable definition is urgently needed — will it be the
        same as previous management standards, with 25 water supply quality indicators
        (MOH), or the will it be based on adequate water supply minimum standards
        (Quantity, Quality and Affordability) as set by the Joint Monitoring Program (JMP).


5.2    Cross-system data collaboration

Aware of the many stakeholders who have information systems / monitoring and evaluation
systems, the NAWASIS team took the initiative to promote data collaboration / sharing
across information systems. The NAWASIS Centre now has data collaboration with the
STBM, PAMSIMAS and SHAW-SIMAVI programs. This is illustrated in the table below.

Table 4: Scope of NAWASIS Info data collaboration with other information systems

                                                                                       Level of
   Partner                         Scope of data collaboration                        Collected
                                                                                         Data
STBM            STBM program intervention locations (digital maps):                Village level
                 Triggered locations
                 ODF locations

                Technical data:
                 Improved latrines (Permanent and Semi Permanent)
                 Sharing latrine
                 OD (open defecation)
PAMSIMAS        PAMSIMAS program intervention locations (digital maps):            Village level

                Number of facilities constructed (water supply and sanitation)
SHAW-           Raw data relevant to the 5 pillars of STBM: improved latrines,     Subdistrict /
SIMAVI          handwashing facilities, household water management, household      village level
                solid waste management, and household wastewater management

                                                                                               16
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

PPSP             Availability of planning documents:                                      District /
                  White Books                                                            municipal
                  City/District Sanitation Strategic Plans                               level

                 District/Municipal Sanitation Index

Obstacles to implementing data collaboration include:
    Differences in " level of data collection". Some information systems collect data at
       village level, while others collect data at district/municipal level. In response to this,
       the structure of the NAWASIS database was designed to be able to accommodate all
       the various possibilities.
    Use of different number of Identify Location (IDs). At the moment there are IDs
       location issued by the Statistics Agency and ID Location issued by the Ministry of
       Home Affairs. ID Location is very important variable in the process of data
       collaboration across databases. NAWASIS addressed this by developing software
       that is able to synchronise both of these location ID definitions.
    Differences in definitions of basic / raw data in each of the information systems.
       When one information system manages data that is already processed, data
       collaboration with systems that manage raw data will be difficult. NAWASIS
       recommended that the WSS Working Group do advocacy with stakeholders to reach
       an agreement that each information system should use the most basic level of data
       (raw data).

The success of the data collaboration between the NAWASIS team and the STBM,
PAMSIMAS, PPSP and SHAW-Simavi programs proves that collaboration between the
different information systems is possible, provided that there is a consensus as to the aims
of the collaboration and that both parties benefit from this collaboration.

An outstanding issue with respect to data is also quality control. There is currently no quality
assurance mechanism in place. The general rule-of-thumb is the District / City WSS Working
Group is the final validator of data. Once the data is input into NAWASIS by the Working
Group, it is accepted as their data. However, in the medium-/long-term, various options are
being investigated to ensure data quality.

6      Strengthening Local Government capacity for WSS data
       management
The main activity implemented to achieve this outcome 2 has been the up-scaling of the
successful household (HH)-based WSS data management model developed in Bangka prior
to this current TA8. The NAWASIS TA used the successful experience from Bangka for
horizontal learning. This has served a number of purposes; it has helped to increase
knowledge and awareness of the importance of useful and reliable data generally while
simultaneously stimulating demand in other LGs for similar approaches. It has also helped to
create capacity for WSS sector monitoring. The activities are described briefly below.




8
  The Bangka experience and lessons learned is described in a WASPOLA facility document entitled ‘Lessons
learned Uji Coba Pengelolaan Data AMPL Kabupaen Bangka’ (Lessons learned from a pilot WSS data management
activity in Bangka district), no date.

                                                                                                       17
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

6.1   Identifying a Household–Based WSS Data Management Model

Well before NAWASIS Info was developed, between 2005 and 2008, a series of meetings and
workshops with national and regional stakeholders took place to build awareness of and
create demand for good WSS data management (this meeting was held under the auspices
of the WASPOLA facility). These meetings resulted in the development of a concept note on
regional WSS data management, which, based on consensus achieved through the meetings,
included:
    (1) Concepts, parameters, operational definitions, and the first draft of a questionnaire,
        for a household-based WSS data survey;
    (2) Further dissemination of the concept of WSS data management in regions;
    (3) The importance of support from regional for WSS data management;
    (4) The concept of regional WSS data management;
    (5) An action plan to trial regional WSS data management in pilot regions.

In 2008, the WSS Working Group and WASPOLA agreed to pilot the HH–based WSS data
management model in partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). After
considering the expressions of interest submitted by the regions, District Rote Ndao in East
Nusa Tenggara (with UNICEF support) and District Bangka (with WASPOLA support) were
selected as pilot regions for the HH–based WSS data survey model.

In 2009, the WASPOLA team began the pilot project in Bangka, sub-district Merawang, as
the first pilot location. The results of the pilot activities in Merawang sub-district were
disseminated at a National Workshop, with participants from several other regions in
Indonesia, including the province of West Sumatera. The experience in Bangka — the district
team succeeded in implementing a WSS data collection and management process that
produced a name and address database with WSS data — was well received by participants.
In 2010, Bangka district completed the collection of HH–based WSS data from all villages and
sub-districts. Meanwhile, in 2011, the WASPOLA team prepared a lessons learned report as
well as HH–based based WSS data management guidelines and capacity building guidelines.
The WSS Data Management Guidelines and WSS Data Management Capacity Building
Guidelines were published in 2012. This experience in Bangka was then used as the basis for
the NAWASIS TA to up-scale WSS sector monitoring at LG level to other LGs (see next
section).


6.2   Regional WSS data management horizontal learning

In 2013, the NAWASIS team implemented a workshop to share the Bangka WSS sector
monitoring experience — this workshop was at the request of the regions and was attended
by West Sumatra and West Java provinces, Sijunjung and Pasaman districts, with Sumedang
district as host. The horizontal learning process went as expected – the participants learned
not only what Bangka district WSS Working Group had done, but also about the pre-
conditions in each of the districts. Likewise, the participants representing the provinces
learned from the experiences of the districts.

Key to the horizontal learning approach is self-assessment to identify the existing condition
they want to improve. The process of exploring the existing condition of their data
management was a key agenda at the start of the workshop, because none of the districts
had done this before. Through this process of exploration, each district mapped its existing
data management condition and the desired condition, and what had been done and what

                                                                                            18
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

still needed to be done. The workshop combined peer learning and capacity building
activities, through training of trainers in data management (Figure 10 below illustrates this
process).

Figure 10: The learning and capacity building cycle




                                         Horizontal
            Capacity Building            Learning
            • ToT WSS Data               • Learning from the
              Management                   experiences of
            • Increased capacity           Bangka district
                                         • Increased confidence




The exploration of the existing condition of the regions' WSS data management produced
the following conclusions/observations:
    1. Data are managed by individual sectors (regional technical implementation units /
         regional government work units) and in general is not well coordinated and
         communicated, both at province and district levels.
    2. Require extra effort to collect data from different data sources, despite limited
         resources, which means they do not provide accurate information for policy making.
         Ultimately, the Statistics Agency data is the point of reference for WSS data.
    3. Funding for data management is insufficient: data management still is a part of
         routine activities.
    4. Regions would like to have the same data formats and indicators and consistency of
         WSS data that can accommodate the needs of each sector
    5. Regions need capacity building in data management, particularly in enumeration.
    6. Regions need easily accessible media to communicate data, and designated
         personnel to update data.


6.3   Data Management pilots in three districts/municipalities in West Sumatra
      province

Based on the experiences shared during the WSS data management horizontal learning
workshop discussed above, districts Sijunjung and Pasaman and West Sumatera province
requested support from the WASPOLA facility (financed by the current TA support) to
replicate the Bangka WSS data collection and monitoring activities; this included shared
responsibilities for activities and budgeting. So far (2014) the following activities that have
been carried out:
    (1) Preparatory meeting about WSS data management replication at West Sumatra
        development planning agency
    (2) WSS data management Training of Trainers (ToT) in West Sumatera province
    (3) Training of the Pasaman and Sijunjung district WSS working groups in preparation
        for the training of WSS data management supervisors and enumerators in each of
        the districts



                                                                                                  19
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

      (4) Training of WSS data management supervisors and enumerators in Pasaman and
          Sijunjung districts
      (5) Training in cleaning and tabulation of household based WSS data from Simpati sub-
          district in Pasaman and Koto Tujuh sub-district in District Sijunjung
      (6) Replication Data Management Workshop in Province West Sumatera
      (7) Data management and WSS data based advocacy training
      (8) Training in replication of household based WSS data management in West Sumatera
          province
      (9) Activities in Pariaman municipality, consisting of: (a) Household based WSS data
          management kick off meeting in Pariaman Municipality, (b) Training for household
          based WSS data management supervisors and enumerators in Pariaman
          Municipality, and (c) meetings to test the consistency of data collection of
          household based WSS data in Sub-District Pariaman Utara, Pariaman municipality.


6.4     Conclusions with respect to capacity building

Key conclusions from the WSS data management pilots include:
1. The experience of Bangka district confirms that HH–based WSS data management can
    be done by local governments using existing resources. In fact, there is now inter-
    operability of data between government work units in Bangka district. In 2013, using a
    horizontal learning approach, Bangka district inspired Sumedang, Pasaman and
    Sijungjung districts decided to adopt HH–based WSS data management, including
    revising their questionnaires and developing geo-tagging. In 2014, the experiences of
    Pasaman, Sijunjung and Pariaman districts have led to an increased demand for WSS
    sector monitoring9.
2. Districts/municipalities are willing and able to allocate a portion of their regional
    budgets to fund household based WSS access surveys. A key factor in this achievement
    is that the selection of pilot locations should be demand based. Through a series of
    activities, the NAWASIS team identified regions that are interested in improving WSS
    data management.
3. Concerns about "conflict" with the regional statistics agencies with regard to data
    collection activities (using a census) by the regional WSS working groups, were not
    sustained (there was in fact very little resistance). Involving the statistics agency in the
    preliminary phase was a crucial factor. All stakeholders – the WSS working group and
    statistics agency – were aware that although the Statistics Agency had agreed to be the
    point of reference for matters of a macro nature, it cannot be the basis for WSS
    development program and activity planning in detail (micro level).
4. Involving local data actors to ensure the continuity of the data management process is
    crucial: (1) integrated health post (posyandu) volunteers are trained as village
    enumerators, (2) midwives and sanitarians are data collection supervisors, (3) village/
    subdistrict heads play a role in supervision of the entire process, including in overall data
    consolidation and management, (4) WSS working groups had the role of supervisor the
    whole process.
5. Based on the experiences of Sijunjung, Pasaman and Pariaman districts, the household
    based WSS data management could be extended to other districts and in 2015 will be
    extended to four other districts/municipalities.



9
 The Chairman of the National Pokja has received requested for WSS monitoring support from eight additional
districts.

                                                                                                          20
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

6. Beside West Sumatera experience, districts in other region who already have data
   management system, either by themselves or with support from external sources, as
   having data management systems that could have WSS indicators inserted.


6.5       Key challenges with respect to capacity building and WSS sector monitoring

6.5.1      At the district/municipal government level

For Districts/municipalities that have implemented WASH data management:
     Continued implementation of HH–based WSS data management and collected data
        from all villages/subdistricts in their working area.
     Process the data collected into advocacy and communication strategies for the
        legislature and executive, WSS stakeholders, and the public, to ensure sustainable
        improvement in access to WSS services
     Local government work units and stakeholders related to WSS can follow up on the
        outputs of household based WSS data management with concrete programs that
        focus on promoting healthy and hygienic behaviours.

For Districts/municipalities that have not implemented WASH data management:
     Replicate the success of districts/municipalities in household based WSS data
        management

For districts/municipalities that have data management systems (not specific WASH)
     Collaborate and consolidate by integrating WSS indicators into existing systems.

6.5.2      At the provincial government level

          Facilitate cross district/municipality HH–based WSS data management capacity
           building activities, for districts/municipalities that have already adopted and will
           adopt household based WSS data management, and for districts/municipalities that
           have existing data management systems.
          Facilitate development of advocacy and communication strategies, for the
           legislature and executive, WSS stakeholders and the public, to ensure sustainable
           improvement in access to WSS services
          Facilitate capacity building for districts/municipalities in program implementation
           following collection of household based WSS data, in keeping with their needs,
           availability of resources, and authority.
          Facilitate replication in other districts/municipalities, in keeping with their needs,
           availability of resources, and authority.

6.5.3      At the national government level

          Develop SOPs for household based WSS data management that can be replicated by
           all other districts/municipalities in Indonesia
          Develop Communication and Information tools for household based WSS data
           management for replication by all other districts/municipalities in Indonesia
          Develop Horizontal Learning activities related to household based WSS data
           management through the development of peer learning centres, both through
           NAWASIS as capacity building centre and through learning units in locations across
           Indonesia.


                                                                                               21
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

7   Knowledge sharing and awareness building on WSS sector
    monitoring
The NAWASIS Info instrument has now been introduced to many key WSS sector
stakeholders including:
     All key ministries involved in WSS, including MPW, MoH, Ministry of Home Affairs
       (MoHA), etc;
     All WSS sector programs (STBM, SHAW-Simavi, among others);
     Up to 400 district / municipal governments — in 2013, the NAWASIS Info instrument
       supported the updating of human settlement infrastructure data for MPW, and was
       introduced to around 400 district/municipal governments through this process.

The NAWASIS Info instrument has also been presented to numerous provinces and LGs since
2012. One important opportunity for sharing the NAWASIS model has been during the
preparation of the 2015–2019 RPJMN — the National WSS Working group actively involved
the NAWASIS Info instrument in the planning process, presenting it as the WSS sector data
management instrument to provincial and district/municipal governments in five regions
(Central Java, East Java, West Nusa Tenggara, West Sumatera and South Sulawesi provinces).

Also, in the context of communicating WSS
sector targets in the 2015-2019 RPJMN (also
known as 2019 Universal WSS Access) and               The National WSS Working Group
securing buy-in from provincial governments,          launched NAWASIS as an instrument to
the National WSS Working Group organised              support achievement of universal WSS
an Indonesia-wide provincial WSS Working              access by 2019 to provincial WSS
Group Coordination Meeting from December              working groups across Indonesia
3rd to 5th, 2014 (Rapat Koordinasi Pokja AMPL
Propinsi). At this meeting, attended by
representatives of the 20 provincial WSS
working groups, the National WSS Working Group also introduced NAWASIS as an
instrument that can help WSS sector stakeholders in general, and provincial and
district/municipal government in particular, in achieving the target of universal WSS access
by 2019. Features of NAWASIS that support achievement of universal access include:
      A Universal Access Readiness Index: index that show the readiness of
          district/municipal governments to achieve the target of universal access.
      Universal Access Performance Module: data application module that functions to
          track progress towards the achievement of universal access at district/municipal,
          provincial and national level.
      WSS digital map: the WSS digital map can display overlays of various information
          including water supply and sanitation vulnerable areas and the location of WSS
          programs such as PAMSIMAS and STBM.




                                                                                           22
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

8   Future of NAWASIS
NAWASIS vision and mission
The NAWASIS Centre’s vision is to be a centre of excellence and the best facilitation centre
in Indonesia for providers of WSS services, particularly at the district/municipal level, to
support achievement of universal access by 2019.

The Centre’s mission is:
   1. To consolidate an integrated WSS sector data and information management system
       (Nawasis Info);
   2. To strengthen the capacity of WSS service providers, including institutional
       capacities and individual capacities, and;
   3. To continue to build and increase the commitment of key WSS sector decision
       makers at national and regional level to the universal access targets.


NAWASIS strategic targets to support achievement of the target of universal access are
improving the performance of district/municipal governments in the provision of WSS
services, by:
    1. Supporting the availability of accurate, reliable and comprehensive WSS data
    2. Facilitating development of data based plans/strategies for achieving universal
        access
    3. Supporting an increased WSS development budget towards universal access
    4. Promoting the creation of an enabling environment for the achievement of universal
        access

The role of the NAWASIS Centre in the WSS sector development framework, particularly
with regard to achievement of universal access by 2019, will be:

As a data and information portal/hub:
The NAWASIS data and information system (Nawasis Info) is a portal of WSS data and
information originating from district/municipal governments, provincial governments,
programs and projects, and other stakeholders.

As a WSS virtual market:
NAWASIS is a place where buyers of services can meet sellers of services. Services in this
context are information, facilitation, technical assistance, and access to knowledge products
such as guidelines, modules and so on related to achievement of the target of universal
access by 2019.




                                                                                           23
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

                 Figure 11: NAWASIS Strategic Framework 2015-2019



 Development       Universal Access to Improved Water Supply and Sanitation by
                                              2019
 Goal



 Intermediate     Improving the performance of district/municipal governments
 Outcome                         in the provision of WSS services




     Strategic Objectives
         Plans/strategies for
                                          WSS development           Policies/regulations to
          achieving universal
                                           budget for UA                  support UA
       access by 2019 Universal
             Access 2019




                                  Reliable and accurate WSS data




                                                                                              24
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

9     Conclusions, Key Issues and Recommendations
9.1    Summary of conclusions

While progress has been made towards achieving the expected outcomes under the TA, as
evidenced in the preceding text, there have been significant challenges as well. Good
progress was made towards the consolidation of NAWASIS Info as a potentially useful tool
for WSS sector monitoring; the key word here is ‘potentially’. Five specific purpose modules
have been developed and tested on the ground, and interest has been generated for using
and applying these modules. Manuals (SOPs and guidelines) exist to assist users who want to
use apply them.

Efforts have also been made to consolidate the approach to WSS data and information
collection; this includes trying to develop consensus on the main indicators for measuring
WSS status, promoting the concept of cross-system data collaboration, and generally
encouraging WSS sector information sharing to a much larger extent than is currently the
case.

Progress has also been made in developing the local government capacity for WSS
monitoring, with the up-scaling of the household-based WSS data management model.
Demand has been generated for improved WSS sector monitoring as a result of an increased
knowledge and awareness of the importance of useful and reliable data for decision-making.

At the national level, all key ministries have been exposed to NAWASIS Info, and there is an
increased understanding of and agreement on the need for a national WSS sector
monitoring system, in particular at the operation levels. All of the main WSS non-
government programmes are also aware of the system. Through participation in various
events over the past two years, the NAWASIS team has managed to present the system to
up to 400 district / municipal governments.


9.2    Key issues and recommendations

Acceptance of NAWASIS Info as a national WSS sector monitoring tool
Despite the extensive efforts undertaken during the course of this TA, formal acceptance
and approval of NAWASIS Info as a national WSS sector monitoring tool is pending.
Stakeholders continue to use indicators and operational definitions that are appropriate to
their own scope of work, including the targets and goals for which their institutions are
responsible. While this is due to a number of reasons, the most relevant is that monitoring
continues to be seen as a ‘sector’ responsibility, and the philosophy promoted by NAWASIS,
of having a monitoring system that is cross sector, collaborative and based on open sharing
and easily accessible information, is still a relatively new concept that will require some time
to be fully accepted.

Experience during the implementation of the NAWASIS TA indicates that the raw data
needed to measure the various WSS indicators actually has many similarities. The success of
data collaboration between the NAWASIS team and the STBM, PAMSIMAS and PPSP
programmes also demonstrates that collaboration is possible, particularly when there is
agreement on the objective of collaboration and there are benefits to all parties involved in
the data sharing. Therefore further efforts are needed to generate consensus on WSS sector
raw data. All key stakeholders need to agree on what raw data need to be collected by each


                                                                                             25
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

WSS sector stakeholder. If all stakeholders collect the same data, each stakeholder can
process the data into indicators that meet their own needs, while the need for data
consolidation to monitor and evaluate overall sector performance is also met. While the
NAWASIS team has worked on promoting this approach, the time period of doing so has
been relatively short; introducing new ways of thinking and innovative approaches is always
a challenge that can take years of efforts.

Clearly, continued effort will be needed to shift NAWASIS Info from a ‘potentially’ useful
instrument to one that is actively and broadly applied throughout the country to generate
useful and accurate WSS monitoring data. Further efforts are needed to generate interest in
using the system, in particular at the national government level. A crucial aspect of this is
continuing to demonstrate the utility of the system to an increasingly larger audience —
generating increased ‘buy in’ from both government and other partners (ie: donors).

Capacity building and awareness building
While local governments in particular have received substantial support in developing their
capacity for WSS sector monitoring, Indonesia is a large country with many local
governments, and the TA efforts, given the scale of the task at hand, have been relatively
limited. Continued and concerted efforts will be needed to ensure that the good progress
made to date is sustained.

Institutional anchorage
Institutionally, in the short term, NAWASIS should remain under the umbrella of the
National WSS Working Group. Given the broad nature of the sector and the many
stakeholders involved, being within the structure of the National WSS Working Group
Secretariat will makes it easier for NAWASIS to get the recognition /acceptance of WSS
working group members at national, provincial and district/municipal levels. Also, NAWASIS
will be able to receive public funding support from the budget allocation for the operation of
the National WSS Working Group Secretariat.

In the longer term, however, NAWASIS could become a separate legal entity to ensure its
continuity as an institution. Also, in terms of finance, this would allow it to generate its own
income, which at the moment it cannot do because of its institutional status.

Operational issues
Operationally, NAWASIS is managed by a team that is reporting to the head of the National
WSS Working Group Secretariat. Because NAWASIS is within the structure of the National
WSS Working Group Secretariat, it follows the operational mechanisms of this secretariat,
including in regard to funding activities. A frequent issue during the implementation of the
NAWASIS TA has been delays in the disbursement of funds, which meant that activities
could not be implemented as scheduled.

One of way of addressing this issue is to give more attention to cash flow for funding
NAWASIS activities. Also, efforts need to be made to securing funding from other sources,
particularly for particular activities. Other funding sources could include working group
partners and / or donors.

Human resources management
Experience has shown that during the course of implementation of NAWASIS TA, there has
been a high turnover and/or mismatch of competencies of personnel/experts, in particular
those funded by the RE-WASPOLA Facility. This is very likely due to the shortcomings in

                                                                                              26
Strengthening of the Indonesian National Water and Sanitation Information Services Center
P133658

employee contracts. At the moment, NAWASIS is funded through the RE-WASPOLA Facility
budget, which is managed by government. This means that NAWASIS personnel can only be
given annual (12-month) contracts, which do not offer NAWASIS personnel enough security.
As a result, NAWASIS has had difficulty attracting/recruiting competent and professional
human resources.

One option could be to offer higher rates of remuneration. However, limits could apply to
the amount of remuneration that could be given if government financial standards are used.
Thus, in the medium term, if may be necessary to consider the recruitment of NAWASIS
personnel through National WSS Working Group partners (donors or other partners). Using
this mechanism would allow for higher rates of remuneration to be given and might help to
attract the best of candidates.

Although the current TA was designed to further develop WSS sector monitoring on exactly
the many critical issues mentioned above, one of the key lessons learned is that developing
a clear understanding of WSS sector monitoring and how to best achieve it is a long process
that requires a great deal of patience, repetition and time.


9.3   The sustainability of NAWASIS

The National WSS working group has had significant support over the last decade or more,
not just from the current TA but also from the WASPOLA programme, and a major challenge
will be to ensure that the sustainability of the many activities initiated under this support is
ensured. The Government views NAWASIS as an exit /sustainability strategy for various WSS
program and project initiatives — the idea is that NAWASIS would continue, in some form or
another, to provide the needed support, in particular with respect to WSS sector monitoring,
in the coming years. A basis for this has been created with a range of promising initiatives
that have the potential to ensure the buy-in and take-up of various sector stakeholders
involved. To make it work, however, a concerted effort with high-level support is needed for
the NAWASIS Centre to fulfil its mission. In view of the Government’s universal access
targets of 2019, the need for improved data information remains crucial, which can be the
key driver for a well-functioning NAWASIS Centre.




                                                                                             27
