Report No: ACS15163




                      Shifting into Higher Gear
   Recommendations for Improved Grain Logistics in Ukraine




                                      August 2015



                               Agriculture Global Practice
                            Transport and ICT Global Practice
                         Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova Country Unit
                             Europe and Central Asia Region
    Standard Disclaimer:

.

    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
    findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
    Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
    data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
    do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
    or acceptance of such boundaries.

.

    Copyright Statement:

.

    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
    may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
    encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
    Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
    4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
    World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................. 1

I. UKRAINE’S GRAIN PRODUCTION, EXPORTS AND LOGISTICS ................................................................. 6

    I.)     UKRAINE’S IMPRESSIVE GROWTH OF GRAIN PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS ....................................................... 6
    II.)    THE DUAL CHALLENGE OF UKRAINE’S GRAIN LOGISTICS: PRESENT-DAY COSTS AND FUTURE CAPACITY ................ 8

II. ADDRESSING A DUAL CHALLENGE: REMOVING INEFFICIENCIES AND INCREASING CAPACITY .......... 14

    I.)     GRAIN LOGISTICS REGULATIONS ............................................................................................................ 14
    II.)    RIVER TRANSPORT ............................................................................................................................... 15
    III.)   RAIL TRANSPORT ................................................................................................................................. 18
    IV.)    ROAD TRANSPORT ............................................................................................................................... 21
    V.)     STORAGE ........................................................................................................................................... 22

III. PRELIMINARY INVESTMENT PACKAGES ............................................................................................... 25

    PACKAGE #1: Improvement of river infrastructure ................................................................................ 25
    PACKAGE #2: Optimization of railway tariffs as incentive for private investment ............................... 26
    PACKAGE #3: Improvement of storage infrastructure ........................................................................... 28

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................................... 30




                                                                                i
LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1. Ukraine: Grain Production volumes and Year-to-Year Variability (million tons, 1992 – 2013) ..... 7
Figure 2. Ukraine: Grain Production forecast (million tons, 1992 – 2023) ................................................... 8
Figure 3. Ukraine: Export Growth forecast (million tons, 2014 – 2036) ....................................................... 8
Figure 4. Wheat Logistics Costs: selected countries (US$/ton, 2010) .......................................................... 9
Figure 5. Farm Gate vs. World Prices of Wheat and Maize: selected countries......................................... 10
Figure 6. Shares of various transport modes in grain exports .................................................................... 11
Figure 7. Grain transport costs in Ukraine (US$/ton) ................................................................................. 12
Figure 8. Seasonality of railway grain transportation in Ukraine (2013, million tons) ............................... 12
Figure 9. The current navigation ban and grain transport volume on railways ......................................... 17
Figure 10. The extension of profitability of road transport through increased load .................................. 22

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1. Overview of reform and investment recommendations ................................................................ 5
Table 2. SWOT analysis of River Transport in Ukraine ................................................................................ 16
Table 3. SWOT analysis of Rail Transport in Ukraine .................................................................................. 19
Table 4. SWOT analysis of Road Transport in Ukraine ................................................................................ 21
Table 5. SWOT analysis of Storage Infrastructure ...................................................................................... 23
Table 6. Overview of the first investment package: river transport ........................................................... 25
Table 7. Overview of the second investment package: rail transport ........................................................ 27
Table 8. Overview of the third investment package: storage infrastructure ............................................. 28
Table 9. Summary of the three investment packages ................................................................................ 29
Table 10. Suggested reforms for river transport and ports ........................................................................ 31
Table 11: Suggested reforms for rail transport........................................................................................... 32
Table 12. Suggested reforms for road transport ........................................................................................ 33
Table 13. Suggested reform for storage infrastructure .............................................................................. 34
Table 14. Suggested reforms for regulatory environment and administrative performance .................... 35




                                                                     ii
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AGP           Agriculture Global Practice
BCR           Benefit/Cost Ratio
CTS           Center for Transport Strategy
ECA           Europe and Central Asia
ERR           Economic Rates of Return
EU            European Union
FAO           Food & Agriculture Organization
GoU           Government of Ukraine
GDP           Gross Domestic Product
GHG           Greenhouse Gas
ICT           Information and Communication Technologies
LPI           Logistics Performance Index
MoAPF         Ministry of Agricultural Policies and Food
MoI           Ministry of Infrastructure
NGLC          National Grain Logistics Council
NGLS          National Grain Logistics Strategy
NPV           Net Present Value
SFGC          State Food and Grain Corporation
SOE           State-Owned Enterprise
UZ            Ukrzaliznytsia, the State-owned Rail Company




                                     iii
BACKGROUND

This study was conceived on the basis of a request by Ukraine’s Ministry of Agricultural Policies
and Food (MoAPF). In 2013, the MoAPF explored the World Bank’s interest for investing in grain
hoppers, following a deficit of hoppers and concerns about related difficulties for grain transport.
In response, the World Bank secured resources from the Multi Donor Trust Fund for Trade and
Development (TF016693) to carry out a review of grain logistics in Ukraine in order to better
understand the challenges facing the sector. The objectives of the present study are to assess the
functioning of the grain logistics system, identify bottlenecks and put forward practical
recommendations for investments and reform. The study intends to inform the policy dialogue
between the World Bank and the Government of Ukraine and to help identify priority
interventions along the grain value chain.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The study was prepared by a team led by Maurizio Guadagni including Maria Claudia Pachon,
Aliya Karakulova, Oleg Nivyevskiy, Kairat Nazhmidenov (FAO), Anatol Gobjila, Mzia Giogobiani,
and Marko Bucik. It is based on two background analyses prepared by the Center for Transport
Strategy (CTS, http://en.cfts.org.ua) and APK-Inform (http://www.apk-inform.com/en). Kairat
Nazhmidenov developed the preliminary investment packages, with support from Dmitry
Prikhodko (FAO), who also contributed to the APK-Inform report, in particular to the section on
grain storage.

Peer reviewers were: Baher El-Hifnawi, Heinz-Wilhelm Strubenhoff, Martha B. Lawrence, Sergiy
Zorya and Virginia Tanase. The study was completed under the leadership of Dina Umali-
Deininger as the Practice Manager for Agriculture Global Practice, Juan Gaviria as the Practice
Manager for the Transport and ICT Global Practice, Tamar Sulukhia as the Program Leader and
Qimiao Fan as the Country Director.




                                                 iv
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Ukraine has established itself as one of the leading global exporters of grains and forecasts
project continued growth.1 By 2014, Ukraine had become the third largest global exporter of
maize and barley, the sixth largest exporter of wheat and one of the most important global
producers of sunflower seeds and oil. Within the last decade alone, the total production of grains
has increased by over 50% and reached 79 million tons in 2014, while exports of grains and
related processed products have grown by 250% and totaled 35 million tons. Looking ahead,
Ukraine could be producing up to 90 million tons of grain per year and exporting up to 50 million
tons per year within the next two decades. However, forecasting is made challenging due to
pronounced inter-annual variability and the risks associated with the ongoing crisis.

To realize its potential, the grain sector in Ukraine needs the support of an efficient and
competitive logistics system. At present, this is not the case. The logistics costs for moving grain
from Ukrainian farms to the Black Sea ports are approximately 40% higher than costs for
comparable services in France and Germany, and about 30% higher than costs in the United
States.2 As a result, farmers in Ukraine receive lower shares of world market prices and shoulder
the costs of inefficiencies in logistics that, according to different estimates, result in foregone
revenues in the range of US$600 million to US$1,600 million each year, or 20-50% of the current
volume of bank loans to agriculture. This has important negative implications for investment and
competitiveness of the sector.

The objectives of this report are to assess the functioning of the grain logistics system, identify
bottlenecks and put forward practical recommendations for investments and reform. Research
points to five key drivers of current high logistics costs: (i) lack of regulatory clarity and sub-
optimal management of public assets that create barriers to private investments;
(ii) underutilization of river transport, (iii) underinvestment in rail transport; (iv) inefficiencies in
storage management, and (v) excessive use of road transport. However, there are two important
limitations of the report that should be taken into account. First, the ongoing crisis remains a
source of uncertainty. It has so far had limited impact on grain production and logistics, yet access
to finance has become more difficult and other impacts might arise in the future. Second, there
are two areas that the report does not address: customs and ports. Both are important elements
of logistics costs and deserve a comprehensive analysis in the future.

Grain logistics in Ukraine face a dual challenge in the form of present-day high costs and
insufficient capacity to cope with future growth. High costs are diminishing the competitiveness
of Ukraine’s grain production and reducing the revenue flows to farmers, with negative impacts

1
  Throughout the report, the term ‘grain’ is used to encompass a selection of most important (and statistically
relevant) grains and oilseeds: corn (maize), wheat, barley, and sunflower seeds.
2
  Throughout the report, the term ‘logistics costs’ includes costs related to transportation, warehousing, storage,
cleaning, drying, handling, document processing, duties, packaging, security, and any fees, tariffs and duties
associated with the export of grain.


                                                        1
on sector investment – much needed to raise productivity. The limited capacity of logistics, on
the other hand, is projected to become an important bottleneck to future growth, unless
addressed in time. This dual challenge calls for a holistic investment and reform agenda.

        PROVIDING REGULATORY CLARITY AND GOOD GOVERNANCE
As other sectors of the economy, grain logistics would benefit from a clearer and predictable
regulatory environment and good governance. There are three key practical aspects that can
stimulate the much needed private investment in the sector: (i) rules should be transparent and
reflect a public policy objective; (ii) rules should be enforced; and (iii) public institutions and
State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) should perform their functions and manage public assets
responsibly and transparently. At present, some rules are complex (e.g., issuing of export
documents), some opaque (e.g.; allocation of grain hoppers), while others are not enforced (e.g.,
axle load limitations for trucks). Recent investigations and reports3, including those targeting the
State Food and Grain Corporation, showed corruption and mismanagement among public
institutions and SOEs. The current Government has made progress in reducing compliance costs
(e.g., by cancelling certification of grain quality and storages, switching to voluntary issuance of
quarantine certificates), but a lot more needs to be done.

Apart from improving governance, the key issue for the Government of Ukraine is defining the
role of public institutions and SOEs involved in grain logistics. The case of three SOEs involved
in grain marketing and logistics – the State Food and Grain Corporation, the “Agrarian Fund of
Ukraine” and the Public Joint Stock Company “Agrarian Fund” – is a telling example: they all suffer
from an unclear mandate and lack of transparency, yet hold significant assets, have important
liabilities, and continue to drain public resources. While managing food reserves may be a public
objective, storage and trading of grain is a private activity. Competition in grain trading is strong,
with several national and international private operators such as Nibulon, Topfer International
(ADM), Louis Dreyfus, Kernel Trade, Serna Glencore, Sundrate (Bunge Ukraine) sharing the grain
export markets in relatively similar quotas. Therefore, public investments in grain trade where a
healthy competition exists might be considered as a public encroachment on private activities.
Instead, the option to privatize or liquidate the State Food and Grain Corporation should be
considered.

        STIMULATING INVESTMENT IN RIVER TRANSPORT
The importance of river transport in Ukraine has diminished dramatically since independence
and today represents a big untapped potential. In 1990, 66 million tons of goods were
transported on rivers, by 2013 only 4 million tons. Merely 3% of exported grain is at present
moved on rivers, yet these, especially the longest among them, the Dnipro River, represent a

3
 For instance, the State Security Services of Ukraine “detected of embezzlement of almost US$0.5 million dollars
of budget funds by the officials of the “State Food and Grain Corporation of Ukraine”
http://www.sbu.gov.ua/sbu/control/en/publish/article;jsessionid=F085BA0AFECD6676A48FD46F7C75D11F.app1?
art_id=140154&cat_id=140089.


                                                       2
formidable opportunity to transport bulk agriculture products reliably and at low cost. There is a
set of four key public interventions that would stimulate competition and private investment in
river transport, both vessels and river infrastructure (e.g., elevators and port storage):
(i) dredging of Dnipro’s shallow bed to eliminate physical bottlenecks; (ii) the alignment of the
winter navigation closure with real weather conditions to allow for a longer navigation period
during the key period for grain transport (November – March); (iii) reforming the system for
pilotage, lock passage and opening of moveable bridges; and (iv) attracting foreign vessels to
Ukraine’s inland waterways by lowering the burden of the entry permits requirement and
changing the port fee structure for intercoastal and international navigation.

       LIBERALIZING RAIL TRANSPORT
Railways are currently the means of choice for grain transport accounting for more than 60%
of volume moved each year, yet they severely lack investment. The rolling stock of grain
hoppers owned by Ukrzaliznytsia (UZ), the state-owned rail company, is old and in need of
renewal. Without greater private sector participation, the financial burden will fall exclusively on
UZ, if the wagons’ capacity is to match the increasing volume of grain exports. Three regulatory
measures are key: (i) the tariffs for accessing railway infrastructure should be set through a
transparent, market-based and non-discriminatory process that will remove existing barriers to
private investments in grain hoppers. Charging an “empty run” fee only to privately owned
hoppers (and not to those owned by UZ) is discriminatory and creates obstacles to private
investments in hoppers; (ii) access to hoppers owned by UZ also needs to be more transparent;
and (iii) seasonal tariffs for the use of infrastructure could be considered, as they would give
incentive to better distribution of demand throughout the year and stimulate investment in
storage. Seasonal tariffs for the use of grain hoppers are not discriminatory: UZ needs to invest
in infrastructure to store grain hoppers and locomotives when these are not used. A more evenly
distributed use throughout the year would reduce storage costs and lead to increased UZ
efficiency.

There is an additional challenge that the Government needs to address: transforming UZ from
a vertically integrated de-facto monopolist to a commercially-oriented company that provides
fair access to private companies. At present, UZ manages rail infrastructure, as well as provides
freight services. Models of functional division introduced elsewhere, most notably in the
European Union, show that separation of infrastructure management from freight services
provision leads to increased competition for freight transport services – something that would
be beneficial for Ukraine’s grain logistics. UZ and the railway sector more widely are currently
undergoing major reform that introduces significant governance changes, and most importantly,
outlines access to railway infrastructure services and facilities on a non-discriminatory basis. If
successfully implemented, the reform would stimulate investment in grain hoppers.




                                                 3
       IMPROVING ROAD ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INVESTING IN ACCESS ROADS TO PORTS
Road transport is an essential element of grain logistics, as it provides the necessary flexibility
and carrying capacity. However, the growth in its share in Ukraine − currently around 36% of all
grain transported − has been secured not only through the growing profession alism of the
industry, but also through the practice of truck overloading. Overloading has three effects: (i) it
makes road transport more competitive on longer distances; (ii) it leaves room for traffic police
corruption; and (iii) it causes road damage, pollution and a decrease in traffic safety and flow. In
response, stricter enforcement of axle load rules is essential, yet it should be implemented
simultaneously with other measures, the combination of which would lead to a structural shift
towards more transport by railways and river. In addition, targeted investments in access roads
to ports deserve attention, as these would improve traffic conditions around ports, especially in
congested urban areas.

       MODERNIZING STORAGE EQUIPMENT AND INCREASING STORAGE CAPACITY
Storage facilities are a key weakness of grain logistics in Ukraine. While there are numerous
storage providers, many facilities are old and the drying, loading/unloading, weighing, as well as
testing equipment is energy-intensive and time-consuming, resulting in higher storage-related
costs. For example, it can currently take up to 10 days to load a full train (54 grain hoppers) with
older equipment, while modern storage facilities and equipment can complete it within a single
day, speeding up turnover time of wagons and trucks. Reforms and investment in other areas of
logistics (e.g., river, rail and road transport) will create incentives for new investment in storage,
leading to important efficiency gains (e.g., faster loading/unloading, lower grain losses, energy-
efficient drying), but also enabling farmers to time their sales with higher prices. In addition,
investments in new storage capacities are needed to account for the projected growth in grain
production. These could be stimulated by deregulating the system of construction permits and
by streamlining regulations for operating grain storages.

The scale and number of challenges require a holistic reform and investment agenda to
improve grain logistics. Above all, the Government should focus on creating a regulatory
environment in which the private sector is eager to invest and where consequently logistics costs
are progressively lowered and revenue of farmers increased. Most importantly, the regulatory
changes should be coordinated. For example, a stricter enforcement of axle load limitations on
its own might increase the price of logistics further, not lower it. However, if done in parallel with
the reforms in rail and river transport, it will achieve the set goals.




                                                  4
                    Table 1. Overview of reform and investment recommendations

             Issue / Area                             Reform / Investment Recommendation
 REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
  Limited coordination among           1. Create a National Grain Logistics Council
   various ministries                   2. Improve documents processing utilizing ICT
  Complex certification procedures     3. Ensure key agencies (certification, laboratories and customs)
  Outdated Documentation                  are working 24/7 during the peak season of grain exports
   Management
RIVER AND PORTS
 Limited navigation period             1. Finalize the Law on Inland Water Transport including:
 Obstacles to foreign vessels’ entry        (a) Flexibility in the calendar of river navigation
  onto Ukraine’s inland waterways            (b) Facilitate obtaining permits for foreign vessels
 Costly pilotage services                   (c) Change the structure of port fees for coastal and
 Dnipro’s shallow river bed                     international navigation
 Limited river storage capacities           (d) Reform the system of pilotage, locks, and moveable
  and river fleet                                bridges tariffs.
 High sea-port costs                   2. Improve navigation conditions on Dnipro (e.g., through
                                           dredging, use of groins and sills)
                                        3. Expand capacity of port railway stations and improve access
                                           to road transport
                                        4. Remove obstacles to expand river fleet
                                        5. Introduce competition in port management
RAILWAYS
 Non-transparent access to grain       1.   Set transparent, market-based, non-discriminatory rail fees
  hoppers during peak season            2.   Consider introducing seasonal tariffs for grain shipment
 Non-transparent tariffs for private   3.   Improve transparency of access to grain hoppers
  hoppers                               4.   Improve the track and trace system
 Highly seasonal demand                5.   Replacement of grain hoppers at end of service life or
 Old age of grain hopper fleet              extension for additional 15 years with major maintenance
ROADS
 Truck overloading and related         1. Improve axle load controls (automatic weighing stations,
  damage to public roads                   weigh-in-motion)
 Poor access roads to ports and        2. Improve the track and trace system
  roadside services                     3. Consider introducing a system of toll roads
                                        4. İmprove the Road Asset Management System
STORAGE
 Outdated and insufficient grain       1. Support private sector investments in grain storage
  storage                               2. Consider privatizing or liquidating the State Food and Grain
 Excessive state involvement in           Corporation and the Agrarian Fund
  grain markets                         3. Develop a regular survey to monitor storing capacity and
 Lack of information on storage           quality




                                                       5
I.      UKRAINE’S GRAIN PRODUCTION, EXPORTS AND LOGISTICS

        i.) UKRAINE’S IMPRESSIVE GROWTH OF GRAIN PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS

Exceptional natural endowments and a favorable
                                                           Supported by exceptional natural
geographical position have provided the
foundation for Ukraine’s expansion of crop                    endowments and impressive
production. One third of the world’s stock of the               growth rates, Ukraine has
most fertile black soils is located on its territory and    established itself as one of the
is coupled with favorable temperatures and leading global exporter of grains.
precipitation regimes – a unique combination that
facilitates large-scale production of crops. Large fertile agricultural plains dominate the landscape
over much of Ukraine’s territory, providing livelihood to more than five million rural people and
generating value added equal to 10% of Ukraine’s GDP.4 Ukraine’s geographical position is also
key: its exporting opportunities are facilitated by the access to key markets in the Middle East
and North Africa through the Black Sea.

Over the last 15 years, Ukraine has established itself as one of the world’s top pr oducers and
exporters of grains, yet has made limited progress in higher value-added agricultural products.
Supported by high growth rates since 2000, Ukraine has become the third largest global exporter
of maize (17.6 million tons in 2014) and barley (4.2 million tons), and the sixth largest exporter
of wheat (10.5 million tons).5 In parallel, Ukraine has also emerged as one of the most important
global producers of sunflower seeds and oil, with global market shares of 23% and 26%
respectively in 2012.6 Within the last decade alone, the total grain and oilseed production has
increased by 56% and reached a record-breaking 79 million tons in 2014. During the same period,
exports of grains, oilseeds and their processed products have grown by 250% and totaled 35
million tons in 2014, notwithstanding the tumultuous events that began to engulf Ukraine at the
beginning of that year. However, the agricultural sector remains dominated by the production of
grains, while higher value-added livestock and horticulture represent a much smaller share of the
sector.

The developments over the last year and ongoing crisis in Ukraine has affected grain production
and logistics, yet its impacts remain limited. The areas affected (Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk
Oblasts), account for around 10% of Ukraine’s total grain production and regions bordering on
Russia are important for grain transport and transit and host storage facilities. However, grain
transit from Russia has started decreasing substantially in 2008/2009 and has dropped from 2.3


4
  Sources: ILO, World Bank.
5
  Source: UN Comtrade.
6
  Source: FAOSTAT via Eastagri (http://www.eastagri.org/sector_detail.asp?id=9).


                                                        6
million tons in 2008 (around 7% of exports) to less than 0.4 million tons in 2013 (around 1% of
exports). The loss of storage capacity due to the events of 2014 and ongoing crisis is estimated
at 10.7% (Crimea: 3.5% of Ukraine’s total storage capacity; Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts: 3.7%
and 3.5% respectively).7

    Figure 1. Ukraine: Grain Production volumes and Year-to-Year Variability (million tons, 1992 – 2013)




          Source: FAOSTAT.


Despite the significant year-to-year volatility, the growth in production and exports is expected
to continue. Due to variable weather conditions, the volume of grain production fluctuates
significantly from one marketing year to another. However, yields in Ukraine remain about half
of those in the most agriculturally developed countries within the European Union and those in
the United States, despite benefitting from comparable (or better) agro-climatic conditions –
fueling the expectations of continued improvements in productivity. If these were to materialize,
Ukraine could be producing between 80 and 90 million tons of grain per year (Figure 2). With
domestic consumption remaining largely unchanged, exports of grain are projected to increase
significantly over the next two decades, from approximately 32 million tons to 50 million tons
(Figure 3).




7
 For a more comprehensive review of the impact of the crisis, in particular on eastern regions of Ukraine see:
European Union, United Nations and The World Bank (2015) Ukraine: Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment –
Analysis of crisis impacts and needs in Eastern Ukraine.


                                                      7
                Figure 2. Ukraine: Grain Production forecast (million tons, 1992 – 2023)




       Source: OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2014-2023.

                 Figure 3. Ukraine: Export Growth forecast (million tons, 2014 – 2036)




        Sources: OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2014-2023 (until 2023, in green); own calculations; Ukrainian Grain
        Association (for potential).

       ii.) THE DUAL CHALLENGE OF UKRAINE’S GRAIN LOGISTICS: PRESENT-DAY COSTS AND FUTURE CAPACITY

Despite significant recent growth, the grain sector in Ukraine continues to suffer from
inefficiencies along the supply chain. In fact, due to sub-optimal transport and storage
infrastructure and operation, as well as regulatory burdens, the grain logistics costs in Ukraine
are unjustifiably high when compared to those in other major grain producing economies. As a
result, Ukrainian farmers receive a smaller share of export prices, with significant implications for
their revenue and investment capacity.


                                                           8
                    Figure 4. Wheat Logistics Costs: selected countries (US$/ton, 2010)




       * as % of the cost in Ukraine
       Sources: ISU extension service; open sources.


In part, high costs are the result of poor logistics. The
World Bank 2014 Logistics Performance Index (LPI) for High costs of logistics undercut
Ukraine is almost 30% lower than the value of the top        farmers’ revenue by an
performer, Germany (2.98 vs. 4.12).8 Poland, Ukraine’s    estimated US$600 million per
neighbor, outperforms Ukraine in all components of the        year and impact their
LPI. In practice, the costs of moving grain from
                                                              investment decisions.
Ukrainian farms to the Black Sea ports are
approximately 40% higher than costs for comparable logistics in France and Germany, and 30%
higher than costs in the United States (Figure 4).


As a result, farmers in Ukraine receive lower shares of world market prices and thus shoulder
the costs of inefficiencies in logistics estimated at US$20 per ton. With an annual export of 30
million tons, this causes an overall annual forgone revenue to farmers of US$600 million. A
different approach provides an even higher estimate. If Ukrainian farmers could get the same
farm gate prices of US farmers, they would earn additional US$1,600 million more per year for

8
  The LPI consists of both qualitative and quantitative measures, which allows for comparisons across 160 countries.
The components analyzed in the International LPI are: (i) the efficiency of customs and border management
clearance; (ii) the quality of trade and transport infrastructure; (iii) the ease of arranging competitively priced
shipments; (iv) the competence and quality of logistics services — trucking, forwarding, and customs brokerage;
(v) the ability to track and trace consignments; and (vi) the frequency with which shipments reach consignees within
scheduled or expected delivery times.


                                                         9
wheat and maize alone (Figure 5). With gradual reform and investment part of these potentials
can be exploited.

                    Figure 5. Farm Gate vs. World Prices of Wheat and Maize: selected countries




Sources: OECD (Farm Gate Prices); World Bank (World Prices, FOB); own calculations.



These estimates deserve explanation. The first estimate – with forgone revenue of US$600
million – is estimated on the basis of the higher logistics costs in Ukraine as compared to France
and Germany. The estimated loss of US$20 per ton is caused by inefficiencies in logistics and
natural factors such as the distance from ports and the fact that Ukrainian grains require more
drying than France and Germany because of climatic conditions. The second, larger, estimate –
with forgone revenue of US$1,600 million – is calculated on the basis of the price differential
between world prices and farm-gate prices in Ukraine and USA.9 In this case, the price received
by farmers is affected by several other marketing and reputational factors (in addition to the
logistics costs included under the first estimate) such as reliability of supply, reputational risks,
business environment, uncompetitive market structures, price transfers, and other. For instance,
the pronounced annual variability of production affects the reliability of Ukraine’s grain delivery
and this in turn affects negatively producers’ capacity to get the best prices. However, a thorough
analysis of these numerous factors is beyond the scope of the present study, which is focused on
logistics. The estimates should serve as guidance on the potential increase in revenue to farmers
that is realistic, taking into account that not all of the increase will reach farmers, as there will be
a re-distribution along the supply chain. Although these potential savings are large in absolute
amounts, they are less impressive in relative terms. To put things into perspective: if 50% of
inefficiencies would be eliminated, a saving of US$10 per ton (out of theoretically possible US$20
per ton) would increase revenue along the supply chain of US$300 million per year. While US$300
million might appear small, representing approximately 4% of the total value of grain production,


9
 The price differential between world prices and farm-gate prices in Ukraine and USA is estimated at US$75 per ton
of wheat and US$50 per ton of corn (averages for the 2009-2012 period). When multiplied by 10 million tons of
wheat exports and 17 million tons of corn exports, the price differential results in forgone revenue of US$750 million
for wheat and US$850 million for corn, or US$1,600 million for both crops.


                                                            10
it represents 21% of the annual capital investments in agriculture in 2014. Indeed, the $1,600
million estimated foregone revenue is more than the total amount of investments in agriculture,
estimated at around $1,400 million in 2014.

The costs of logistics are affected by the underutilization
of river transport, inefficiencies in rail transport, high Expected increases in grains
share of road transport, deficient storage management                production and exports
and high port fees. At present, most of the grain is                   volumes might soon
transported by rail (61%), followed by road (36%), while                overload Ukraine’s
river transport only accounts for a marginal share (3%).
                                                                         transport system.
Yet, river transport is the most cost-efficient method for
transporting bulk agriculture products. The Mississippi river system in the United States is a
telling example: it delivers more than half of all US grain exports to the ports in the Gulf of Mexico
at a low cost, ensuring that logistics expenses are contained. Much like Mississippi, the Dnipro
River in Ukraine flows through the country’s key grain producing regions and thus represents a
great navigation asset that has been put to good use in the past. In addition, high logistics costs
are partly also caused by inefficiencies in rail transport: limited access to grain hoppers and tariffs
that deter private investments. Poor storage management is also a source of inefficiencies: scarce
storage volumes, inadequate weighing capacity, outdated drying, loading/unloading and testing
equipment are all contributing to increasing logistics costs. Finally, sea port fees in Ukraine are
2-3 times higher than in the EU or the United States – a hardly justifiable gap.10

                       Figure 6. Shares of various transport modes in grain exports




                    Source: Ukrainian State Statistics Service; United Soybean Board11.




10
   The present report does not include an extensive review of port fees. However, the international comparisons
show that this remains an important area for future research.
11
   America’s Locks & Dams: A Ticking Time Bomb for Agricultu re, Report prepared for United Soybean Board by the
Center for Ports and Waterways, Texas Transportation Institute and Texas A&M University (December 2011).


                                                           11
                          Figure 7. Grain transport costs in Ukraine (US$/ton)


                        18
                         16
                         14
                         12
                         10
                          8            16.4
                           6
                           4                             10.5
                           2                                               8.9
                           0

                                    Road
                                                        Rail
                                                                        River


                        Note: The cost is calculated for the route Kremenchug – Mykolaiv.
                        Source: Nibulon.


The extensive use of road transport is in part driven by its flexibility, but also by the lax
application of road freight rules. Ukraine’s road network is well developed, while truck operating
companies provide grain producers with a sizeable truck fleet. Most importantly, the use of roads
is highly subsidized and there is insufficient enforcement of weight controls. In fact, due to poor
enforcement of controls (e.g. lack of appropriate weighting stations and corruption) truck
overloading in excess of 50% above the maximum allowed is common. This lowers the cost per
unit and increases the range of profitability. However, overloading damages the road network,
and thus shifts part of the cost on the taxpayer. In addition, road transport is also a source of
pollution and reduced traffic safety.

         Figure 8. Seasonality of railway grain transportation in Ukraine (2013, million tons)




                Sources: Ukrzaliznytsia; CFTS calculations.




                                                          12
In addition to annual variability, grain logistics in Ukraine face pronounced seasonality (Figure
8). Barley and wheat are harvested in July and August, sunflower and corn between September
and November. As a result, most of the transport takes place in autumn and winter, with June
and December representing the two yearly extremes: the volume of grain transport in June
amounts to merely 0.5 million tons, while the December volume is seven times larger at 3.5
million tons. Such pronounced variability of transport demand throughout the year has important
implications for the investment and operation of logistics and its overall costs.

Yet the difficulties facing grain logistics in Ukraine extend beyond the present-day high costs.
Projections of growth in production and exports outline a future where Ukraine’s transport and
storage capacity will soon be inadequate to manage increased volumes of grain. The current
storage capacity of 41 million tons was sufficient to handle production and exports in 2014, yet
it was insufficient to enable farmers to align selling dates
to best market prices – with increased volumes the                 Without appropriate
pressure on faster turnaround and immediate sales will          investment, poor logistics
only increase. Similarly, rail infrastructure was able to      will become a bottleneck to
process the 2014 volumes, yet outdated grain hoppers           sector development, rather
will need to be substituted or rehabilitated to avoid
                                                                  than a vehicle of trade
shortages in the future. Without appropriate
                                                                       facilitation.
investment, poor logistics will soon become a bottleneck
to sector development.




                                               13
II.    ADDRESSING A DUAL CHALLENGE: REMOVING INEFFICIENCIES AND
       INCREASING CAPACITY

Grain logistics in Ukraine therefore faces a dual challenge. On the one hand, present-day costs
are undercutting farmers’ incomes and hurting investment. On the other hand, projected future
volumes of grain production and trade will overload the capacities of the current logistics
infrastructure, if these remains unchanged.

While no silver bullet is readily available, there is a number of achievable reforms and
investments that could drive a positive change. Five key components of a balanced package of
reforms and investment would put the sector on a sustainable path: (i) improved regulatory
environment (ıı) greater use of river transport; (iii) the removal of inefficiencies in rail transport
and increase of its capacity, (iv) effective road asset management and investment in access roads
to ports; and (v) increased storage volume and operational performance.

       i.) GRAIN LOGISTICS REGULATIONS

Grain storage, handling, and trading regulations were recently simplified, also thanks to World
Bank Group support. Specifically: (i) the mandatory requirement to register export contracts
with the Agrarian Exchange was eliminated in October 2012; (ii) certification of grain quality and
grain storage services was made voluntary and without an expiry date, and obligatory grain
certification for inland shipments was cancelled in April 2014; and (iii) issuance of plant
quarantine certificate for domestic movement from one quarantine zone to another became
voluntary in March 2015, while the time to issue the quarantine certificate (for domestic
movement) and phytosanitary certificate (for exports) was reduced from 5 days to 24 hours after
loading the transport vehicle. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) estimates that the
above simplifications will generate an annual cost compliance saving of almost US$160 million.

       a. Complex certification procedures

Work is undergoing to improve the Law on Plant Quarantine. This will: (i) introduce risks analysis
for adopting phytosanitary measures; (ii) bring phytosanitary inspections to production sites (i.e.
at the farm); (iii) introduce traceability; and gradually (iv) outsource phytosanitary controls to the
private sector; (v) eliminate import quarantine permits, and (vi) focus domestic measures to the
requirements of the importing country. The World Bank Group is supporting this work.

       b. Outdated documentation management

The use of Information Technology for processing documentation in Ukraine is scarce, making
the handling of paper transport documents costly and time consuming. For instance, railway


                                                 14
grain shipments are accompanied by electronic copies of documents in addition to original
papers. However, sea ports require original hard-copy papers to receive grain from hoppers,
which requires additional time for the administrative process to be completed. Paper-less
electronic interchange of data between railways, customs, transport operators/freight-
forwarders, ports, and other stakeholders, could be further developed to collect, process, and
exchange data and permits.

           c. Perception of corruption

Addressing corruption is a key challenge for Ukraine. According to the Transparency
International’s Corruption Perception Index, Ukraine ranked 142nd out of 175 countries in 2014.
Reducing the compliance costs by simplifying grain logistics regulations would also reduce the
opportunities for corruption. The Government of Ukraine is addressing this problem and the two
ministries directly involved in grain logistics – the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Ministry of
Agricultural Policies and Food – have been ranked as the two public institutions most open to
reform.12

           ii.) RIVER TRANSPORT

The quantity of commodities transported on inland waterways in Ukraine has dramatically
diminished since independence. If 66 million tons of goods were transported on rivers in 1990,
by 2013 the amount dropped to a meagre 4 million tons. There is a set of reasons why such a
drastic drop has occurred, but at present the most important task is to assess the potential of
river transport to meet current and future needs of Ukraine’s agriculture and other industries.




12
     The ranking of 19 ministries/public institutions was conducted by a platform of organizations (VoxUkraine, Kiev
     School of Economics, Index of Monitoring Reforms, Reanimation Package of Reforms, and the Reform Support
     Centre) in March 2015, after the new Government’s first 100 days in office. The ranking is based on a mix of public
     perception and experts’ opinions.


                                                           15
                         Table 2. SWOT analysis of River Transport in Ukraine

                   STRENGTHS                                           WEAKNESSES

• Lowest unitary cost                                • Unclear public/private roles
• Old tradition                                      • Outdated infrastructure and management
• Environmental efficiency                           • Challenging organization
                                                     • Due to freezing, navigation is prohibited in
                                                       winter, when demand is highest

                OPPORTUNITIES                                             THREATS

• Potential to increase efficiency                   • Outdated infrastructure requires significant
• Change in tariffs technically relatively simple      investments
• Improved regulation can improve quality of         • Tariffs and operations create obstacles to private
  services even without significant investments        sector investment


The increase in river transport is key to a sustainable grain logistics mix of the future. As
mentioned earlier, despite river transport being the least expensive option, currently only 3% of
grain are delivered to ports by barges. A number of obstacles remain in the way of increasing the
volume moved by rivers, the most important ones are outlined below.

       a. Limited navigation period on the Dnipro River

Because of freezing, the navigation on Dnipro River is currently prohibited in winter months.
The upper river locks are closed from November to the end of March, while navigation in the
lower part is closed from December to beginning of March. Coincidentally, the period of
navigation closure is also the period with the strongest grain transport demand, when 55% of
annual grain are transported by rail. Yet, recent trends in winter average temperatures show that
navigation in winter could be extended, or managed according to real weather conditions.
According to companies operating on the Dnipro River, the navigation period of the 2014-15
winter could have been extended by almost two months.




                                                    16
                Figure 9. The current navigation ban and grain transport volume on railways




               Note: The shaded part marks the months during which the navigation ban is in effect on the Northern part of
               Dnipro River (million tons of grain per month, 2013).
               Sources: Ukrzaliznytsia; CFTS calculations.


           b. Limited availability of barges

The existing stock of barges capable to transport grain is limited. The main company that offers
river transport in Ukraine is the Joint Stock Shipping Company (“Ukrrichflot”) with declared
capacities to move 0.6 million tons per year – not enough to transport even 1% of the grain
harvest in Ukraine. The company Nibulon, one of the largest domestic producers and exporters
of agricultural products, runs its own fleet of barges and declares the transportation of 1.3-1.5
million tons per year. However, Nibulon only transports its own cargo.

           c. Obstacles to foreign vessels’ access to Ukraine’s inland waterways

The access of foreign vessels to inland waterways of Ukraine is hampered by the requirement
that foreign vessels need to obtain a permit every single time they enter river ports of
Ukraine.13 In addition, the structure of port fees does not favor the use of special “river-sea”
vessels (i.e., smaller vessels that can navigate both sea and rivers). These could be used to bring
cargo from Ukraine’s inland to the interior of some destination countries (e.g., inside Egypt
through the Nile river). These type of vessels can be very efficient in the Dnipro-Nile River
Corridor or similar ones. However the port fees that vessels need to pay is fixed (i.e., unrelated
to the vessel size). Since river-sea vessel have small tonnage, their port fee per unit of cargo
becomes prohibitive. These, and similar, obstacles in practice prevent the foreign fleet from
operating on inland waterways in Ukraine. Since there is de facto no domestic river fleet, this
protective measures damage traders without any benefit.

13
     Depending on the vessels type, a one-time permit may cost between US$300 and US$600.


                                                             17
         d. Sub-optimal provision of pilotage services

There are dangerous navigation areas along the Dnipro River where piloting is necessary to get
the vessels safely through. At present, pilotage services on inland waterways are only provided
by a single state-owned company. Its clients report problems due to rigid service provision and
high tariffs.

         e. Dnipro’s shallow river bed

Dnipro’s river bed has not been properly maintained and is in some locations unfit for safe
navigation. There are currently at least five spots on the Dnipro where the river bed is too shallow
for barges/vessels with a carrying capacity of more than 3,000 tons. Navigation conditions need
to be improved by dredging or other engineering interventions (groins/sills).14

         f. Poor public infrastructure and provision of public services

There are six locks and two movable bridges along the Dnipro that are in poor technical
condition and would require repair. Poor maintenance of locks hampers navigation and
constitutes an environmental risk. In addition, movable bridges open at a prohibitive costs that
range between US$1,000 and US$2,000 for a single passage. In additional to lowering the fee, a
fixed schedule for openings should be considered, as this would facilitate planning and lower
costs.

         g. Limited river elevator and storage capacities

Since river transport has become of marginal importance, little investment has been made into
river elevators and storage infrastructure. As a result, only 3.8% of the total storage capacity is
at present connected to the river transport network.

         iii.) RAIL TRANSPORT

Railways are currently the most widely used means for grain transport, yet considerable scope
for improvements remains. Ukraine has the 13th largest railway network in the world that can
easily absorb the transportation of grains to sea ports and across land borders. The main


14
   Groins and sills are both hydraulic structures that alter the pattern of river flow (or sea movements). When man-
made, groins are usually constructed from wood or stone in order to limit the impact of currents and waves on the
coast, preventing erosion and opening the coastal area to multiple-use. Sills are river (or sea) bed barriers that also
limit the strength of waves or currents and thus limit water movement and prevent erosion and siltation.


                                                          18
challenges ahead of the sector are the renewal and expansion of the fleet, as well as the
liberalization of infrastructure.
                             Table 3. SWOT analysis of Rail Transport in Ukraine

                   STRENGTHS                                                 WEAKNESSES

 • Low unitary cost15                                 • Lack of competition in railways freight services
 • Good rail network                                  • Organizing and managing a large network of railways
 • Large market share for grain at 61%                  with several purposes is challenging
 • Established tradition                              • Tariffs do no create incentives for private investment
                                                      • Seasonal demand for infrastructure

                OPPORTUNITIES                                                  THREATS

 • Potential to increase efficiency and hence         • Outdated infrastructure requires significant
   modal share through non-discriminatory               investment
   and transparent pricing                            • Slow pace of reforms


         a. Hindered access to grain hoppers

During the months when most grain is transported, there is a shortage of supply of grain
hoppers operated by the State Administration of Railways Transport of Ukraine (Ukrzaliznytsia
or UZ). Delays are common and allegedly sometimes unofficial payments are required. This is
accentuated by inefficient loading/unloading infrastructure next to railways, resulting in slower
loading/unloading operations. Outdated loading equipment can load/unload around 5 hoppers
per day − while modern equipment can manage more than 50 – and long turnover time increases
grain hoppers shortages.

         b. High average age of an obsolete grain hopper fleet

The UZ fleet is old and in need of renewal or rehabilitation. The average age of grain hoppers in
is 27 years, while the standard operation period is 30 years. According to the UZ plans, 82% of
the current fleet is to be disposed during 2014-2019, unless major capital investments are
undertaken. There are other private providers, but these control a much smaller fleet (17% of
the total volume available). Because of limited access to UZ grain hoppers, private owners
expanded their fleet during 2013-2014 by adding almost 1,400 new grain hoppers, yet a much


15
  Railway shipments are normally used on longer transportation legs – when the transport distance is shorter than
200 km, the cost of rail transport in Ukraine start to become similar to those of road transport. However, due to
truck overloading, these division lines are blurred, as the costs of road transport can be competitive even within a
range of 600 km, if weight rules are broken. The difficulty to use rail transport has gradually increased the share of
grain transported on road and the distance when trucks are used.


                                                         19
larger expansion is required to meet future needs and renew the obsolete fleet. These private
sector investments have emerged largely due to the difficult and non-transparent access to UZ
hoppers, as mentioned above, and poor service provided by UZ.16

         c. Tariffs discourage private investments in grain hoppers

The current railway tariffs for private hoppers are higher than those for UZ-owned hoppers.
Tariffs for the use of private hoppers are US$3-7/ton higher than for UZ hoppers and thus
discourage further expansion of the private fleet. According to economic logic, the tariff pricing
should be reversed: the tariff paid to UZ for transport service using private fleet should be lower
than the tariff to use UZ-owned hoppers.17 However, until the tariff-setting process is market-
based, transparent, and non-discriminatory, it remains difficult to draw conclusions on the
current disparities. The new draft of the Railway Law gives reason for optimism, as it requires
non-discriminatory access to railway infrastructure and facilities.

         d. Lack of tariff flexibility

Grain transport tariffs are fixed for the entire year. However, the amount of grain transported
throughout the year varies considerably: the transported volume in December is usually seven
times larger than in June. Introducing “seasonal” tariffs that would account for these differences
could create incentives for a more evenly distributed use of the infrastructure and for
investments in storage. Flexibility can also facilitate tariff negotiation: for instance, reducing the
January-June tariff by 20% while increasing it by 10% during July-December would generate the
same annual revenue for UZ, yet create incentives to transport more during the low season, when
railways infrastructure is underutilized.

                            Box 1. The ongoing reforms at Ukrzaliznytsia (UZ)

 Ukrzaliznytsia (UZ) is the State Administration of Railways Transport of Ukraine and transports
 approximately 260 billion ton-km of freight and manages around 450 million passenger trips each year.
 The Ukrainian railways are the world’s 6th most densely operated railway, measured as the sum of ton-
 km and length of passengers travel. UZ is also the largest employer in Ukraine with about 350,000 staff.

 UZ is subordinated to the Ministry of Infrastructure and is the managing body for state owned entities
 engaged in provision of railway transport services and infrastructure in Ukraine. There is significant
 underinvestment, with 70% of the rolling stock purchased in the 1980s and urgently needing


16
   Private investment in grain hoppers occurred despite the fact that tariffs for private hoppers are higher than tariffs
for UZ hoppers.
17
   The tariff for private hoppers is reportedly higher because it includes the charge for the “empty run”, while UZ
hoppers are exempt from it.


                                                           20
 replacement. Railway transportation tariffs are relatively low as they are state controlled, and
 passengers’ tariffs are subsidized at expenses of freight tariffs.

 The Government of Ukraine (GoU) has embarked on a major reform to modernize UZ. The reforms seek
 to increase railways efficiency through automation, right sizing of assets, restructuring of assets and
 reorganization of service delivery. A Reform Law for the Railway Sector was adopted by Parliament in
 2013 enabling the creation of a joint stock company for public railway transport. GoU has developed a
 three-stage reform plan. The first stage, which is currently ongoing, involves a massive restructuring
 whereby the six current regional units of Ukrzaliznytsia will be merged into one legal entity along with
 80 support enterprises including medical, educational and other support units. The new entity will be
 constituted as a state owned Joint Stock Company.

 With respect to non-core assets, UZ has almost completed the transfer of over 100 medical facilities
 from UZ to GoU, with only about 10 profitable hospitals and clinics remaining under the control of UZ.
 The focus is now shifting to the ownership, operation and management of non-profitable regional
 passenger services and overall sectoral/corporate governance. In order to maintain its important role
 in grain logistics and to increase rail share of grain transport, the UZ needs to evolve into a
 commercially-oriented company providing reliable and high quality services.


            iv.) ROAD TRANSPORT

Due to its flexibility, grain road transport has been increasing significantly. Ukraine has a dense
network of roads, which are paved to a very large extent (95%). Road transport remains key in
the first stage of transport (from field to first storage), yet it is also able to compete on longer
distances, partly due to poor enforcement of road freight rules. The main challenges of road
transport call for improved management of public roads and targeted investment into new
infrastructure.
                          Table 4. SWOT analysis of Road Transport in Ukraine

                   STRENGTHS                                             WEAKNESSES

 • Good road network                                  • High unitary cost
 • Developed truck industry                           • Modern, larger trucks require modern supporting
 • Flexible management of trucks                        infrastructure (e.g. longer weighing stations)
 • Simple small investments                           • Relatively high maintenance costs for roads
 • Free infrastructure (good for users, bad for the   • Old truck fleet
   public purse)

                 OPPORTUNITIES                                              THREATS

 • Potential to increase efficiency                   • Long-term damage to the road network
                                                      • Poorer road safety and greater environmental
                                                        impact


                                                      21
                                                 • High interest rates and persistent budgetary deficit
                                                   make constant investments challenging


       a. Truck overloading and related damage to public roads

Truck overloading is common, since enforcement of axle-load limitations is lax. As a result,
excessive load is damaging public roads, while also extending the competitiveness of road
transport to longer distances than would be the case if rules were strictly applied (Figure 10).

       b. Poor access roads to ports and roadside services

Access roads to several river and sea ports are in poor condition. There is also a shortage of
parking/waiting space and rest areas for trucks near the ports. In the absence of bypasses of
towns in several routes, grain truckers traverse through urbanized areas, which has its impact on
time and cost, but also on road safety, social and environmental issues.



          Figure 10. The extension of profitability of road transport through increased load




       v.) STORAGE

Insufficient and outdated storage facilities are a key weakness of grain logistics. While there
are numerous providers, most of the facilities are outdated, particularly in terms of
complementary infrastructure such as loading and unloading facilities, drying, weighing stations,
and testing. They are also insufficient as they can accommodate only about half of the annual
grain production.




                                                 22
                             Table 5. SWOT analysis of Storage Infrastructure

                    STRENGTHS                                               WEAKNESSES

 • Network of 1,200 warehouses distributed across • Storage capacity in place only for half annual
   the country                                        production
 • 27% of these are independent                     • Large share (46%) of obsolete flat/floor storage
 • Overall competitive service provision (with some • Outdated complementary infrastructure:
   localized exceptions)                              loading/unloading and drying equipment, testing
 • High turnover in private elevators                 equipment and weighing stations
                                                    • Excessive State involvement in grain markets
                                                    • Low turnover in state-owned elevators

                  OPPORTUNITIES                                                THREATS

 • Production increase will drive the need for           • Limited private sector investment capacity
   quality storage                                       • Low rate of return, especially in facilities close to
 • High rate of return in ports create incentives for      production
   the development of port infrastructure                • Some localized monopolies may drive storage
                                                           costs up


        a. Outdated storage facilities

Many storage facilities have been designed and built 50 years ago or more. As a result, (i) they
are unable to accommodate modern large-sized trucks, (ii) they often consist of floor storage
(46% of total storage in Ukraine) that undermines quality and increases costs, (iii) they are
equipped with old and energy inefficient dryers, as well as with outdated weighing, sampling and
testing equipment. To put things into perspective: modern loading/unloading equipment can
load a train of 54 hoppers in one day, while most facilities need up to 10 days to load the same
train. In practice this means that 54 hoppers are blocked unnecessarily for 9 days, increasing costs
and contributing to hoppers deficits during peak demand times.

        b. Insufficient capacity to time sales and accommodate increased grain production

The current capacity of grain warehouses is about 41 million tons which represented around
56% of the 2013 total grain production in Ukraine. The challenge in this case is twofold. First,
due to a lack of storage, the timing of sales is more difficult – if storage was easily available (and
affordable), producers could time their sales better to get the best price for their grain. At
present, they simply sell as soon as the grain is ready for export. Second, future projections show
that the current storage volume (and the type of facilities) will become a significant bottleneck if
capacity is not increased.




                                                        23
        c. State involvement in grain markets

Two State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) play an important role in grain marketing and logistics:
the State Food and Grain Corporation and the Agrarian Fund of Ukraine18 (also called the
Intervention Fund). Both of them suffer from an unclear mandate, lack of transparency, which
contributes to the perception that pervasive state involvement in grain marketing fuels
corruption. Both SOEs own significant assets (10% of certified storage facilities, 12% of port grain
terminals), have important liabilities, and continue to drain public expenditures.

The appropriateness of public sector investments through the SOEs to address the
inefficiencies outlined above, is questionable. Rather, the public sector could strengthen the
incentives for private sector investments. Storage facilities are not a public good where the
rationale for public intervention would be justifiable.19 Therefore, private sector investments are
likely to be more efficient − this particularly holds for Ukraine where the private sector is quite
strong and the public sector suffers from important institutional weaknesses.

        d. Lack of information on storage facilities

At present, there is no system to monitor quantity and quality of grain storage in Ukraine.
Before April 2014, the government administered a system of storage registration that had a
partial database of storages authorized to provide services to third parties (i.e. excluding those
storages not authorized to provide third parties services). Following reforms adopted in April
2014, the system has been abolished, but policy-making would benefit from regular surveys.




18
   At the moment there are two Agrarian Funds of Ukraine: (i) the State Joint Stock Company ‘Agrarian Fund of
Ukraine’ and (ii) the State Budget Agency ‘Agrarian Fund of Ukraine’. Only the ‘Agrarian Fund of Ukraine’ is
functioning at the moment, while the State Budget Agency is virtually bankrupt and will be liquidated. For simplicity
of discussion, we do not distinguish in this paper between the two enterprises.
19
   A public good is defined in economic terms as both non-rival and non-excludable.


                                                         24
III.     PRELIMINARY INVESTMENT PACKAGES

A preliminary evaluation of investment options to improve grain logistics was undertaken for three key
areas20: (i) river infrastructure; (ii) grain hoppers for railways; and (iii) grain storage facilities and
equipment. These preliminary estimates are not based on site-specific investments and only provide a
first level of approximation whose main conclusion is that Economic Rates of Return (ERR) for all three
packages are solid. The packages include estimates for the main economics costs and benefits, however,
not all costs and benefits have been quantified. A more detailed economic analysis should be carried out


The packages were developed in order to respond to an earlier request by the Ministry of Agriculture to
invest in grain hoppers and because of diverging opinions on the importance of various bottlenecks.
While the estimates show that the needs are higher for storage than river and railways, the ERR for the
three packages are similar.21 This implies that all main components of grain logistics face challenges and
attempting to address only one of them will not be sufficient to address the problem in its complexity.


         PACKAGE #1: Improvement of river infrastructure

The first package is based on the premise that shifting greater volumes of grain towards river
transport would help the profitability of the sector and relieve some of the pressure from roads
and railways. The rehabilitation and improvement of river infrastructure can lead to an increase
of river transportation volume of export grain from the current 1-1.5 million tons per year to 7
million tons by 2022. The investment plan is built on the following assumptions: (i) the use of
road transport services, and to a lesser extent rail, will decrease; (ii) the grain loading/unloading
capacities next to rivers will require strengthening; (iii) cabotage shipping of grain on the river
will increase; (iv) traffic on roads to river ports will increase.

                      Table 6. Overview of the first investment package: river transport
                                              RIVER INVESTMENTS
                                    Activity                                           Amount            Public / Private
                     22                                                          US$10 million         Public or Private
River bed dredging
New or improved river ports with grain terminals                                 US$270 million        Private
New river barges and tugboats23                                                  US$300 million        Private
Repair / construction of roads leading to new or existing river terminals        No estimate
Cargo handling infrastructure for sea to river vessels loading/unloading         No estimate


20
   The chapter was drafted by Kairat Nazhmidenov of FAO
21
   The economic rate of return (ERR) takes into account all economic benefits and costs for the whole economy
(society) of the country while the internal rate of return (IRR) takes into account only the financial benefits (revenues)
and costs for a concrete enterprise or investment project. ERR usually includes IRR, but with deduction
22
   The assumption in this case is that works will start in 2017, gradual increase in freight traffic on the river will begin
in 2018 and that the full economic benefits will be achieved in 2022.
23
   The cost of a barge is estimated at US$1 million and a tugboat at US$4 million. The assumption is that 100 barges
and 50 tugboats will be required to handle the transportation of additional 5.5-6 million tons of grain.


                                                            25
Lower navigation tariffs                                                  No estimate
Total                                                                     US$580

                  ECONOMIC BENEFITS                                        ECONOMIC COSTS
Increase in river transport by 5.5-6 million tons of grain Increased costs for maintenance of those roads facing
at lower rates than road or rail by 2022 (about US$38 growing use due to transport from field to river terminals
million per year)                                          (no estimate)
30% reduction in costs associated with road damage by Less longer-distance road transport will result in
2022 (about US$28 million per year)                   economic costs for operators and unemployment – likely
                                                      mitigated by the increase in demand for shorter-distance
                                                      transport
15% reduction in load on the railway infrastructure by
2022 and thus associated costs, due to lower volume of
grain transported by rail (estimated at about US$0.5
million per year)
Mitigation of grain hoppers deficits in peak months will
lead to reduction in costs associated with delays
Spillover benefits from river infrastructure investments
to other economic areas
Local (pollution) and global (GHG emission reduction)
environmental benefits due to shifting the transport
mode from roads to railways


The preliminary economic assessment of the first investment plan shows that it would yield a
good economic return. The ERR is estimated at 21% − well above the discount rate of 12%, the
Economic Net Present Value (NPV) at US$241 million over a 20-year period and the Benefit/Cost
Ratio (BCR) at 1.7 in the “base case”. However, in case the navigation period on Dnipro River is
extended allowed in November and in March (increasing river grain transportation of grain by
another 2 million tons), the overall return would be even better, as the ERR would increase to
24%, the NPV to US$337 million and the BCR to 1.9.

        PACKAGE #2: Optimization of railway tariffs as incentive for private investment

The second investment package assumes that a new system of railway tariffs would be put in
place whereby tariffs would be market-based, transparent and non-discriminatory and would
lead to private sector investment in the purchase of 8,500 new hoppers.24 The share of grain
transported by rail would grow from the current 61% to about 75% by 2022. In this case, it is
assumed that the share of cargo flow on the roads will be reduced from the current 36% to about
22% by 2022. The volume of grain exports transported by private grain hoppers/railway


24
  The estimated number of hoppers required would be lower if better utilization of hoppers during the summer
season is achieved.


                                                           26
companies will grow from the estimated 3 million tons/year to about 10-11 million tons/year by
2022. It is assumed that the volume of grain moved by UZ grain hoppers will increase by about 3
million tons (from current 12 million tons to 15 million tons by 2022).

                    Table 7. Overview of the second investment package: rail transport

                                               RAILWAY INVESTMENTS
                                  Activity                                       Amount           Public / Private
Investments in the purchase/construction of about 8,500 grain hoppers       US$640 million      Mostly private
Repair/construction of some roads leading to the railway terminals used     No estimate         Mostly private
by private railway companies.
Some volume of investments in the construction of new and               No estimate             Mostly public
expansion/improvement of existing railway stations/terminals to enhance
access to the railway by the private railway companies.
Some volume of investments in the development of loading /unloading         No estimate         Public/private
infrastructure that takes loads from the railway in seaports.
Optimization of UZ tariffs for grain transportation.                        No estimate
Overhaul (maintenance) of existing grain hoppers.                           No estimate         Public
Total                                                                       US$640 million

                  ECONOMIC BENEFITS                                          ECONOMIC COSTS
The volume of grain transported by railways by private Some increase of railway traffic will lead to an increase in
grain hoppers increases from the current 3 million tons the cost of railroad repair and maintenance.
to 10-11 million tons by 2022
Reduction of road repair and maintenance costs due to The decline of grain transported by road will negatively
lower volume of grain transported by about 1 million affect some truck companies and increase unemployment
tons (i.e. from the current 9 to 8 million tons by 2022). among drivers
Increase of the availability of grain hoppers and
optimization of their turnover, which in turn will lead
to the growth of revenues of grain traders and
producers due to more timely deliveries
Growth of general economic activity due to
improvement in road conditions
Local (pollution) and global (GHG emission reduction)
environmental benefits due to shifting the transport
mode from roads to railways


The preliminary economic analysis of the second package focused on railways shows that it
also has a potentially solid ERR. The estimated ERR in this case is 21%, well above the discount
rate of 12%, while the economic NPV is US$177 million over a 20-year period. The BCR estimate
is greater than one.




                                                          27
        PACKAGE #3: Improvement of storage infrastructure

An important conclusion emerging from the background studies is that storage capacity in
Ukraine is insufficient. For example, the necessary storage capacity is at the level of 64.6 million
tons (2013 estimate), however the capacity of the existing certified storages was only 52%
contained within more than 1,200 elevators/grain storages with a total capacity of more than 41
million tons. Floor storage warehouses, with a low level of mechanization and automation,
account for approximately 46% of the total grain storage capacity. The third package thus
considers the investment in the improvement of existing elevators/grain storages and
construction of new ones in order to improve storage operations and capacity.

               Table 8. Overview of the third investment package: storage infrastructure

                                             STORAGE INVESTMENTS
                                 Activity                                       Amount           Public / Private
Construction of new elevators/grain storages for a total capacity of newly US$1,500 million    Mostly private
constructed elevators of 6.4 million tons. Improvement of existing
elevators in terms of loading and unloading facilities, weigh stations,
testing, and drying facilities. The share of the flat/floor storages will be
reduced from current 46% to 25% by 2022.
Repair / construction of the roads leading to the upgraded and new         No estimate         Public/private
elevators/grain storages.
Construction of new and expansion/improvement of the existing railway      No estimate         Public/private
stations/terminals.
Total                                                                      US$1,500 million
                 ECONOMIC BENEFITS                                           ECONOMIC COSTS
Reduction of grain losses (1% losses in new elevators     Increase of costs on repair and maintenance of some
compared with 15% losses in flat/floor storages). Up to parts of the roads due to increased volume of cargo
0.6 million tons of grain will be saved every year thanks transportation to the new and improved grain elevators.
to these investments
Economic and environmental benefits to increased
energy efficiency for grain drying
Improvement of the quality of stored grain as a result
of application of improved technologies for drying and
storing grain


The preliminary estimates of the third investment package focused on storage result in an ERR
of 24%, economic NPV of approximately US$485 million and a positive BCR of 1.6.

The three packages chosen for preliminary assessment all produce similar estimated economic
rates of return - ranging from 21% to 24%, in all cases higher than the discount rate of 12%. The
economic NPV for all scenarios is positive and the BCR is well above one. It is important to note


                                                         28
that these are not mutually exclusive, but complementary packages and their simultaneous
implementation would bring the best outcomes.

                            Table 9. Summary of the three investment packages

                           Package #1                       Package #2                         Package #3
                      Improvement of River           Investment in Grain Hopers          Improvement of Storage
                         Infrastructure                                                      Infrastructure
                Shifting transportation from         Shifting transportation from   Reduction of grain losses under
                road/railways to river from 1.5      roads to railways from 3       storage (from the current 15% to
Direct benefits million tons per year to 7 million   million tons to 10 million     1%) in 6.4 million tons of new
                tons by 2022 would save              tons by 2022 would save        elevators. Up to 0.6 million tons of
                resources and reduce costs           resources and reduce costs     grain saved every year
                                                      Base Case
                           US$580 million                US$640 million                     US$1,500 million
                  rivers dredging                  grain hoppers                   grain elevators
   Necessary      river grain terminals (private)  public incentives: e.g.,        public incentives: tax
  investments     river tugboats and barges         tariff optimization, tax         exemptions
(public/private)  public incentives: e.g., river    exemption
                   tariff optimization, tax
                   exemption
     ERR                       21%                                22%                              24%
     ENPV                 US$241million                    US$177 million                     US$485 million
     BCR                        1.7                               1.5                               1.6




                                                          29
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The production and exporting of grains in Ukraine have made significant progress over the
recent years. Ukraine has become a leading global exporter of maize, barley, wheat, as well as
sunflower seeds and oil. Ukraine is a major supplier to countries in the Middle East, North Africa
and even Asia. So far, the negative impacts of the events of 2014 and the ongoing crisis have
been limited and projections of future growth of grain exports remain high.

Despite the overall positive headline achievements, the grain sector in Ukraine continues to
suffer from inefficiencies along the supply chain. As a result, Ukrainian grain producers receive
a much lower share of the market price than their counterparts in the US, Canada or even
Kazakhstan. Estimates of foregone revenue that grain producers have to cope with range from
US$600 million to US$1,600 million per year. Diminished incomes on such a scale have important
negative implications for investments in the sector and therefore its future performance and
competitiveness.

Logistics is an important cause of these inefficiencies. There are several important drivers of
high costs facing grain producers: (i) regulatory measures that increase transport costs;
(ii) underutilization of river transport; (iii) poor management of rail transport; (iv) high share of
road transport in the overall mix; and (v) sub-optimal storage management. These require a
holistic response in order to preserve positive growth, stimulate investment and remove
inefficiencies.

In addition to present-day costs, the limited capacity of the transport and storage systems is
projected to become an important bottleneck. In fact, forecasts of growth in production and
exports outline a future where Ukraine’s transport and storage capacity will soon be inadequate
to manage increased volumes of grain. The current storage capacity was sufficient to handle
production and exports in the boom 2014 production, yet it was insufficient to enable farmers to
align selling dates to best market prices. Similarly, rail infrastructure was able to process 2014
volumes, yet outdated grain hoppers will need to be substituted or rehabilitated to avoid
shortages in the future.

These challenges call for a comprehensive and balanced reform and investment agenda that
will improve public infrastructure and remove barriers to investment. Research points to five
key areas that would improve grain logistics and put the sector on a sustainable path through a
combination of investments and regulatory changes. The main goal of the proposed Action Plans
of reforms and investment is to develop a multimodal transport infrastructure which does not
focus only on railway and roads, but also taps the potential of river transportation and
implements regulatory improvements.



                                                 30
        i.) GREATER USE OF RIVER TRANSPORT

At present only 3% of exported grain is transported on rivers, yet rivers in Ukraine offer a
formidable opportunity to transport bulk agriculture products reliably and at low cost.
Investments in river dredging, additional barges and tugboats, as well as in river terminals would
contribute to gradually increasing the share of river transport. An overall policy that stimulate
river transport requires at least two key regulatory changes. First, the winter navigation ban on
Ukraine’s main inland waterway, Dnipro River, should be reviewed and made more flexible in
order to reflect real climatic conditions – this would increase navigation opportunities during the
key period for grain transport (November – March). Second, the regulatory obstacles on the entry
of foreign vessels onto Ukraine’s inland waterways should be relaxed.

                       Table 10. Suggested reforms for river transport and ports

SHORT-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
1. Finalize and adopt the Law on Inland Water Transport that is currently under discussion. Such law
   could foresee the following:
   (a) Allow flexibility in the calendar of river operations → base the river infrastructure closure in
       the winter on the actual risk of freezing, such as the number of days with temperatures below
       freezing thresholds, rather than rigidly implementing the current automatic 5-month ban. In
       addition, the possibility to utilize ice-breakers should be considered.
   (b) Facilitate access of foreign vessels to Ukraine’s inland waterways → facilitate long term, multi-
       entry permits for foreign vessels to enter river ports in Ukraine. Base port fees on tonnage, with
       tariffs to attract foreign sea-river vessels.
   (c) Reduce the tariffs for pilotage, lock passing, and the opening of moveable bridges → Current
       high tariffs create disincentives to river transportation and ultimately reduce the revenue of the
       public enterprise Ukrvodshliakh. Consider fixed schedules for the opening of moveable bridges.
2. Review the process of setting sea port fees → At present the port fees in Ukraine appear
   unjustifiably high – higher than comparable fees in the EU and the US. The fees in Ukraine should
   be set by a market-based, transparent and non-discriminatory process.
SHORT-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
3.   Improve navigation conditions on the Dnipro River → deepen specific spots where river bed is
     currently too shallow to allow passage of river-sea vessels and barges at full load. Private companies
     have expressed their readiness to invest and the Ministry of Infrastructure should proactively look
     at possibilities to set up Private-Public Partnerships in this area.
4.   Expand capacity of port railway stations and improve access to road transport → such investments
     could increase the amount of trains and trucks accepted at ports and reduce turnaround times (e.g.,
     Odessa-Port station, Chornomorska station of the Yuzhniy port, Mykolaiv-Vantazhniy station of the
     Mykolaiv sea port, and Zhovtneva station of the Nika Tera sea grain terminal close to Mykolaiv port)
LONG-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS




                                                    31
5.   Consider the liberalization of port management → international examples show that the
     liberalization of port management results in important efficiency gains and lowering of costs, even
     if the political economy of change is challenging.
LONG-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
6.   Develop outdated river infrastructure → large investments are required to modernize the outdated
     river infrastructure. The role of public and private sector should be clarified.
7.   Expand sea ports capacity to increase cargo flow → port projects with total additional loading
     capacity of 28.3 million tons are estimated to cost between US$1.5 and US$1.7 billion. Authorization
     of projects by Ministry of infrastructure and other regulatory bodies are mandatory and time
     consuming.
8.   Expand river fleet → this investment should be carried out by the private sector once proper
     conditions have been established.


        ii.) REMOVING REGULATORY INEFFICIENCIES IN RAIL TRANSPORT AND INCREASING ITS CAPACITY

Railways are currently the most widely used means of grain transport and improving their
management would result in considerable savings. Three measures are key. First, the access to
grain hoppers owned by the largest provider, the state-owned Ukrainian Railways Administration
(Ukrzaliznytsia or UZ) needs to be ensured on equal terms – at present, certain intermediaries
have preferential access due to favoritism and alleged unofficial payments. Second, the railway
tariffs should be set through a market-based, transparent and non-discriminatory process to
stimulate private investments in grain hoppers. Finally, the aging stock of hoppers requires
rehabilitation or substitution to cope with increased volumes of grain exports.

                             Table 11: Suggested reforms for rail transport

SHORT-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
1. Ensure market-based, transparent and non-discriminatory railway tariffs → at present the economic
   logic behind higher tariffs for the use of private grain hoppers is unclear. Transparency is essential to
   stimulate further private sector investment in grain hoppers. The new draft railway law currently
   under consideration requires non-discriminatory access to railway infrastructure and facilities.
2. Introduce seasonal tariffs for grain shipment → given the seasonality of grain transport, seasonal
   differentiation of tariffs will create incentives for a more evenly distributed use of the infrastructure
   and for investments in storage.
3. Improve the transparency for grain hoppers allocation → such change would allow increasing the
   number of freight forwarders and thus increase competition.
4. Improve rail scheduling and notification systems into silos, stations, and ports → this could reduce
   train queueing, increase of train throughput, and decrease of downtimes.
5. Use a reliable trace and tracking system→ this will reduce delays and increase train throughput.
SHORT-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS



                                                    32
6. If the replacement of the grain hoppers at the end of the service life is impossible due to budget
   constraints, extend its economic life to maximum possible → the normal economic life of a grain
   hopper is 30 years, the current average age in Ukraine is 27. If full replacement is not possible, a major
   overhaul (rehabilitation) is essential and needs to be urgently budgeted to avoid shortages during
   2014-2019.
LONG-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
7. Develop and implement a railways modernization plan → this would cover rail transport in general,
   not only grain transport.
LONG-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
8. Expand railway grain hoppers fleet → this investment should be carried out by the private sector
   once proper conditions have been created.


       iii.) IMPROVING ROAD ASSET MANAGEMENT AND INVESTING IN ACCESS ROADS TO PORTS

Road transport is an essential element of grain logistics, as it provides the necessary flexibility
and carrying capacity. However, its excessive use (and abuse) leads to important external costs:
road damage, pollution and decrease in traffic safety and flow. A key challenge for the future of
grain logistics is therefore to achieve a sustainable balance between the various modes of
transport in favor of less expensive and more efficient transport mode like the river. In this
respect, enforcing stricter axle load controls an essential element. However stricter enforcement
of existing regulations by itself will negatively affect grain producers and traders, who would have
less access to road transport as a flexible mechanism. Such action should be implemented
simultaneously with other measures, the combination of which would lead to a structural change
toward more transport by more efficient and less expensive railways and river. In addition,
targeted investments in access roads to ports deserve attention, as these would improve traffic
conditions around ports, especially in congested urban areas.

                             Table 12. Suggested reforms for road transport

SHORT-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
1. Enforce axle load control, including automatic weighing stations (weigh-in-motion) to reduce
   human flexibility and reduce the risk of corruption → the free use of roads, as opposed to paid
   railway/river transport, represents a public subsidy to road transport, the least efficient and least
   environmentally friendly means of transport. Yet, tolerance of overloaded trucks represents an even
   more distorting public subsidy, as the repair of damaged roads is shouldered by the public purse. A
   stricter enforcement of axle load control, including with the use of automatic weighing stations to
   reduce human flexibility, could also contribute to the reduction of corruption risks. If axle load
   enforcement is not feasible, consider setting up a system for legal payment for limited truck




                                                     33
   overload → this is not ideal, yet it may be pragmatically preferable to a system with very limited
   enforcement, which favors corruption.
2. Encourage private sector investments to adopt improved truck scheduling and notification for
   storage and ports.
SHORT-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
3. Identify and improve access roads/parking facilities around ports → some are currently in poor
   condition or traverse urban centers thus creating traffic issues, which contribute to cost and time
   inefficiencies.
LONG-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
4. Consider introducing a system of toll roads → to reduce distorting subsidies to road transport.
5. İmprove the Road Asset Management System (RAMS) → in order to maintain the road network in
   appropriate condition and improve maintenance (this may require small investments for the creation
   of RAMS unit and procurement of software and hardware).
6. Create incentives for the private sector to invest in higher capacity trucks → the use of larger trucks
   (such as B-doubles and B-triples in Canada and Australia) has less impact on the road per ton of
   product transported.
LONG-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
7. Support local governments’ program for funding local, secondary roads critical in the grain supply
   chain → this would improve road freight efficiency.


       iv.) INCREASING STORAGE VOLUME AND OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE

The current storage infrastructure in Ukraine is technologically outdated and its capacity
insufficient. Old drying, loading/unloading, weighing, as well as testing equipment is energy-
intensive and time-consuming, resulting in higher storage-related costs. The example of the
loading/unloading equipment is telling: while it can currently take up to 10 days to load a full
train (54 grain hoppers), modern storage facilities and equipment can complete the same task
within a single day. Investments in storage capacity would thus lead to three further main
improvements: (a) they would increase the efficiency of grain hoppers and trucks; (b) they would
allow grain producers to better time their sales; and (b) they would reduce post-harvest losses
thus making more grain available.

                         Table 13. Suggested reform for storage infrastructure

SHORT-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
1. Establish regular surveys to monitor storing capacity and quality → the collected information would
   provide basic information to inform the policymaking process.




                                                   34
SHORT-TERM INFRASTRUCTURE/CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
2. Support private sector investments in grain storage → grain storages requires significant investment
   to be modernized, including replacement of floor storage, improving energy efficiency of grain drying,
   loading/unloading and testing equipment
LONG-TERM REGULATORY IMPROVEMENTS
3. Consider privatizing or liquidating the State Food and Grain Corporation and the Agrarian Fund →
   given the lack of clear public role, and the stained image of corrupt institutions, the liquidation or
   privatization of these institutions would allow redirecting public investments in areas where the role
   of the public sector is clearer.


       v.) IMPROVING THE OVERALL REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PERFORMANCE

In addition to sectoral reforms and investment, overall regulatory environment and
administrative performance require attention. Above all, interventions in this area should focus
on policy coordination, better governance, transparency and simplification.

      Table 14. Suggested reforms for regulatory environment and administrative performance

SHORT-TERM REGULATORY/INSTITUTIONAL IMPROVEMENTS
1. Create a National Grain Logistics Council (NGLC) → the NGLC would be composed of representatives
   of the Ministries and key stakeholders responsible for planning the National Grain Logistics Strategy,
   setting its targets and overseeing its implementation. The NGLC would be set up as a partnership
   between the private and public sector, providing leadership in the industry, advising Government,
   and promoting improvements. The role of the NGLC would be strategic in nature, to propose the
   Strategy based on users’ and Government’s input collected from across the country, as well as to
   review Grain Harvest Management Schemes and consider continuous improvements in grain supply
   chain efficiencies. The NGLC could report to the Transport and Agriculture Commissions of the
   Parliament and would not fall under the authority of any specific ministry.
2. Prepare and implement the Grain Harvest Management Scheme → the scheme would assist industry
   in complying with limit regulations in the transportation of grain off farms into receiving silos. This
   would lead to increased transparency, as well as to reduced corruption risks.
3. Set up clear and fast procedures for the issuing of required documents → this measure should cover
   quarantine documentation, veterinary certificates, GM-content certificate and other documents
   related to exporting grain. This would lead to reduction in time losses, as well as corruption risks.
4. Improve documents management → the system of document management within and between
   institutions involved in grain exporting should be improved, so as to decrease waiting time.
5. Ensure key agencies (certification, laboratories and customs) are working 24/7 during the peak
   season of grain exports (September-January)
6. Assess the needs in certain grain logistics professions → to improve labor market information and to
   facilitate the matching of skills and needs, as well as to define professional standards and
   training/certificate programs for the identified professions.


                                                   35
Tentative investment packages simulated for the purpose of this report indicate solid economic
rates of return ranging between 21% and 24% for the largest investments. If the regulatory
environment will provide the right incentives, most of these investments will attract private
sector participants. Rather than investing directly (as in the case of the State Food and Grain
Corporation) the public sector should focus on removing the barriers to investment and look at
possibilities to form Public-Private Partnerships.25

Above all, any set of measures needs to take into account the complexities of grain transport
and promote inter-modality. Isolated measures, such as a stricter enforcement of axle-load
restriction, could lead to an additional increase in costs to grain producers, while not necessarily
improving logistics or best protect public goods. Similarly, simply lowering tariffs for rail
infrastructure use might not achieve as much as differentiated tariffs that would account for
seasonality. In fact, lower tariffs in early autumn and higher tariffs during the peak grain transport
demand time in winter could provide incentives to invest in storage and thus enable better timing
of sales.

Some of the recommendations in the report are supported by comprehensive research, while
others (e.g., railway tariffs structure, port fees and customs) would merit further detailed
analysis and should only serve as indications of policy options available. At present, the
imperative is to recognize the challenges facing grain logistics in Ukraine and agree on a
comprehensive agenda of reform and investment that would address them. The World Bank
Group stands ready to assist the Government of Ukraine in this endeavor.




25
  In some cases, the private sector in Ukraine is already investing. Private companies such as Nibulon and Hermes-
Trading are investing in river terminals and barges. In the past two years, a variety of private companies has
purchased almost 1,400 grain hoppers (MTK, Ukrtransleasing, TH Zapadny, Estate Global, Krukiv RCP, Cargill , etc.).
Several private companies are investing in modern storage facilities. However, the pace of these investments is not
sufficient to counter the aging infrastructure and the increasing needs indicated by production and export forecasts.


                                                         36
