Report No: ACS11158




Jamaica
Jamaica PFM Enhancement




November 13, 2014




GGODR

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN




                              1|Page
Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:




This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                  2|Page
Document of the World Bank
Table of Contents

1.      INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................. 5
2.      ACTIVITIES SUPPORTED UNDER JAMAICA PFM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT
        6
     2.1.      Component 1: Strengthening Public Investment Management System .................... 6
        i)     Development of the First Phase of the PIM Information System .............................. 7
        ii)       Development of a Draft of the PIM Guidelines ....................................................... 7
        iii) Development and Dissemination of the Public Sector Investment Program Policy
        Paper 7
        iv)       Institutional Assessment of the Readiness for Implementation of the PIM System
                  8
        v)        Establishment of the Public Investment Management Committee ........................ 8
        vi)       Establishment of the Public Investment Management Secretariat ........................ 8
     2.2. Component 2: Strengthening Budget Preparation Process and Result Based
     Budgeting ................................................................................................................................. 10
        i)     Development of a Budget Calendar ............................................................................ 10
        ii)       Development of a Virement Policy .......................................................................... 11
        iii)      Technical Assistance for Medium Term Results Based Budgeting ..................... 11
3.      NEXT STEPS ...................................................................................................................... 12
4.      TEAM COMPOSITION .................................................................................................... 14
5.      ANNEXES (in separate files) ............................................................................................. 15




                                                                                                                                   3|Page
Document of the World Bank
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CARTAC                  Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre
DFID                    Department for International Development
FAA Act                 Financial Administration and Audit Act
GOJ                     Government of Jamaica
IFMIS                   Integrated Financial Management Information System
IMF                     International Monetary Fund
MDAs                    Ministries, Departments and Agencies
MoFP                    Ministry of Finance and Planning
MTRBB                   Medium Term Results Based Budgeting
NLTA                    None Lending Technical Assistance
OECS                    Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
PEFA                    Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PFM                     Public Financial Management
PIM                     Public Investment Management
PIMC                    Public Investment Management Committee
PIOJ                    Planning Institute of Jamaica
PPP                     Public-Private Partnership
RBB                     Results Based Budgeting
TF                      Trust Fund




                                                                             4|Page
Document of the World Bank
1. INTRODUCTION

Public sector modernization and public financial management reforms are important areas of
focus for Jamaica, particularly because of the impact that fiscal and budget-management
practices and policies have on growth. Although the Government of Jamaica (GOJ) has
undertaken several initiatives during the past few years aimed at strengthening management of
its public finances, several fundamental issues continue to affect its fiscal performance. Fiscal
management in Jamaica has been guided by a set of rules that does not support strategic
approaches necessary for addressing its existing challenges. Budget planning is fragmented,
especially for capital expenditures. Systems for ensuring that public investment allocations are
clearly prioritized and aligned with strategic development plans and programs are inadequate.
The weak link between government priorities, planning, and budget contributed to inefficient
monitoring of public spending. The recent PEFA Assessment conducted in late 2012 confirms
these conclusions. Addressing these impediments is the basis for the support provided by the
current program.

This NLTA was designed to support the GOJ in implementing its ongoing public sector
modernization agenda. Specifically, the Project aimed for public financial management (PFM)
enhancement in Jamaica by strengthening the public investment management system, the budget
preparation process and results based budgeting. The GOJ was already aware of the limitations
of its PFM systems and was pursuing an ambitious reform program to strengthen PFM in support
of its overall public sector reform and fiscal consolidation with a growth perspective. The PFM
agenda is consistent with the recently enacted FRF/FRL which ultimately targets prudent fiscal
management through a series of amendments to the Financial Administration and Audit (FAA)
Act and the Public Bodies Management and Accountability (PBMA) Act. The Program focused
on strengthening sequencing and ownership in the areas of public investment and budget
management; this in order to help the GOJ maximize and leverage the overall benefit of its PFM
reforms.

The Program was separated from a DFID financed trust fund (TF) – Jamaica Enhancing
Institutional Capacity and Communication – into a child fund at the beginning of 2013. The
DFID TF was initially signed between the World Bank and DFID in December 2010, but was
amended in March 2012 to include two new technical assistance (TA) areas: (i) implementation
of medium-term budgeting, and (ii) prioritization of public investments that were implemented
under the Jamaica Public Financial Management Enhancement Project (P146170).

These two areas are closely linked and were expected to support the GOJ in linking budgeting
with government policy priorities and long-term development goals through a gradual transition
from annual expenditure planning to a medium-term and a results-based expenditure framework.
It was reasoned that implementing Results Based Budgeting (RBB) and management processes
in service delivery ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) will enhance service delivery
information flows, and, thereby, benefit the prioritization of projects/programs and their
appraisals. Doing this should also strengthen the accountability of managers in designing,
appraising, selecting, and implementing projects and programs in these MDAs. In addition,
implementing the RBB with the medium-term or strategic approach should assist in putting a
focus of the longer-term funding requirements of programs. MDAs will be able to formulate
clear sector policy objectives, and thus to develop comprehensive and realistic policies/strategies
                                                                                        5|Page
Document of the World Bank
with clear short and medium term objectives and projections for budget spending. Longer budget
time horizons will improve the integration of capital expenditures and maintenance funding
requests of the projects. It will demand a pipeline of programs with increased information about
their economic impacts and benefits in order to develop priorities for a strategic development of
capital budget.

Therefore, the interventions coupled with this Project aimed to enhance public financial
management (PFM) by supporting efforts to improve strategic budget processes and public
investment management through the provision of policy advice, technical assistance, and
knowledge generation and dissemination. By doing that, it was intended to alleviate some of the
PFM-based constraints, distortions and factors limiting growth such as inefficient budgeting
processes, insufficient control over public investment planning process, and weak links between
government priorities, planning, and budget.

2. ACTIVITIES SUPPORTED UNDER JAMAICA PFM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT

2.1. Component 1: Strengthening Public Investment Management System

Public investment planning in Jamaica has been treated and managed differently according to
funding source. Projects were classified by Capital A (central government resources), Capital B
(donor funded) and Public Bodies. As a result, investment planning was fragmented, and
involved numerous agencies, conflicting procedures and differing motivations, limiting the
capacity of the GOJ to have an overall view of its public investment goals. All these elements
created a challenge to strategically plan and prioritize public investments for the best mix of
investment projects for Jamaica. Additionally, the diversity of procedures made it difficult to
follow up with the results and government performance in achieving the goals guided by the
National Development Plan and the long term vision. In order to improve public investment
planning, a more unified treatment of all public investments was needed, so that planning could
be done in a more managed and consistent manner. In order to address these issues in part, the
primary objective of this activity was identified as strengthening the overall public investment
management (PIM) system, which includes all public investment projects from the
Consolidated Fund, donor funds, public bodies, and PPPs.

Towards this objective, a Public Investment Improvement Action Plan was developed together
with the counterpart in a workshop in June, 2013 to guide implementation of the measures which
were submitted for Cabinet’s consideration and approval. The Cabinet Submission to unify these
procedures was drafted and approved by the Cabinet on October 2013. In March 2014, based on
this approval and in line with the Action Plan, a new section was added to amend the Financial
Administration and Audit Act, effective from April 2014, to establish the Public Investment
Management System which ‘provides a common framework for the preparation, appraisal,
approval and management of public investments in Jamaica, irrespective of source of funding or
procurement and implementation modalities’. This Act is the backbone of the new PIM System.

So far, the reform process has mainly concentrated on designing the framework, by fixing some
basics, of a sustainable PIM System which will be completed under the World Bank Strategic
Public Sector Transformation Program (see Annex 1: Amendment to the Financial

                                                                                      6|Page
Document of the World Bank
Administration and Audit Act for the governance framework of the new PIM System of Jamaica
and Annex 2: Amend the Public Bodies Management and Accountability Act).

In addition to the technical support provided to the GOJ in designing the PIM System, the World
Bank’s engagement in moving critical components of the PIM System concentrated on the
following outputs:

i)      Development of the First Phase of the PIM Information System

The first phase of developing the PIM information system focused on the creation of a project
database. This database is a web-enabled system that will serve as the repository of information
on all public investment projects at the various stages of the project cycle (inclusive of concept,
feasibility, approval, implementation and evaluation), thereby allowing access for the tracking of
status and performance information on all projects as they move through the project cycle. The
database is operational.1 The main output of the database is monitoring reports that are used to
inform the budget process of the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MoFP). During
implementation of the World Bank Public Sector Strategic Transformation IPF, this database
will be migrated to a more robust platform to manage all information about public investments
across the project cycle and linked to the budgeting and financial systems of the country
(expected to be integrated into IFMIS).


ii)     Development of a Draft of the PIM Guidelines

The PIM Guidelines are the rules, procedures and requirements for governance of the entire
public investment management system (inclusive of concept, feasibility, approval,
implementation and evaluation). Technical assistance (TA) was provided inputs to draft PIM
Guidelines, which will be further developed and finalized by a working group that will be
comprised of key stakeholders that will manage the PIM process in the GOJ (see Annex 3: PIM
System Guidelines). These Guidelines will then be approved by Cabinet and circulated to all
Ministries. Related to this, a template and guidance for the Concept Note and Checklist in
Jamaica for all capital projects has been prepared. This template is intended to serve as a Pre-
Screening document to be used by all MDAs and Public Enterprises – regardless of funding
source or means of implementation, including PPP.

iii)    Development and Dissemination of the Public Sector Investment Program Policy
        Paper

The PSIP Policy Paper is the Cabinet-approved overall strategy that the PSIP will follow to
achieve the short and medium term macroeconomic and development goals. This Paper includes
the macroeconomic framework and expected impact that the overall PSIP (size and composition
of the entire public investment portfolio) might have on growth. The PSIP Policy Paper will be
tabled annually with the Budget documents and will include the past year’s public investment
performance, the current year’s plans and projections and the medium term profile. The

1
  Operationalization of the interim PIMS database was picked up by the IMF at the fourth review under the extended
fund facility.
                                                                                                      7|Page
Document of the World Bank
preparation of the 2014/15 PSIP Policy Paper was led by the Planning Institute of Jamaica
(PIOJ) and the working group established by the GOJ. The World Bank team provided key
inputs for this pivotal instrument. Going forward, it is critical that the development of the Policy
Paper will need to be incorporated in the work function of the PIOJ, which has legislative
responsibility for the preparation of the Paper. This activity was also included into the IMF’s
fourth review under the extended fund facility. The FY2014/15 – FY2018/19 version of the PSIP
Policy Paper was submitted to and approved by the Cabinet in September, 2014 (see Annex 4:
Policy Paper for the Government of Jamaica Public Sector Investment Program for Fy2014/15 –
FY 2018/19).

iv)       Institutional Assessment of the Readiness for Implementation of the PIM System

As a critical part of the support to the GOJ, TA was provided to complete an institutional
assessment for the implementation of the PIM System. The assessment provided the following:

         Overview of the current roles of involved institutions;
         A structure to implement PIM system effectively;
         The roles of specific institutions;
         The specific roles and action plan of the PIM Committee and PIM Secretariat;
         Integrating public-private partnerships into the overall PIM System.

v)        Establishment of the Public Investment Management Committee

The PIM Committee (PIMC) is a key body in the governance framework of the new PIM
System. This committee, the membership of which will be appointed by the Cabinet, has the
responsibility of screening investment proposals for feasibility and consistency with
government’s strategic objectives; reviewing all projects for technical, financial, economic and
environmental feasibility; prioritizing projects for financing and recommending to Cabinet their
inclusion in the PSIP; and reviewing project performance, monitoring risks to the achievement of
objectives and continued relevance to government’s policy priorities. Technical assistance was
provided to the GOJ in order to draft a Terms of Reference of the PIMC which included key
information such as rational and general features of the Committee, inputs for its decision
making, institutional support to the Committee; and its membership, operational procedures and
outputs (see Annex 5: Terms of Reference – Public Investment Management Committee). The
PIM Committee is expected to be fully operational by April 2015, coinciding with the new fiscal
year.

vi)       Establishment of the Public Investment Management Secretariat

The PIOJ has been a vital part of the PIM system for many years. It operates under the Ministry
of Finance and Planning. It is still central to processes involved in Public Investment
Management with functions such as:
•      The development of policies, plans and programmes for the economic, financial and
physical development of Jamaica
•      Collaboration with external funding agencies in the identification and implementation of
development projects

                                                                                         8|Page
Document of the World Bank
•      The development of the National Development Plan
•      Commissioning Economic, financial and technical feasibility studies for new
development projects
•      Co-ordinating the implementation of development projects

The role of the PIOJ overall will be most affected by the new PIM System. In addition to the
current roles that they will retain, the PIOJ will house the new PIM Secretariat. The Director of
the PIM Secretariat Director will ensure that the PIM Secretariat fulfils all its statutory roles and
meets the working requirements of its stakeholders that include, amongst others, all of Jamaica’s
MDAs and PEs. The Director will also supervise the efficient functioning of the entire PIM
system in Jamaica and ensure that the PIM Committee is provided with accurate, objective and
concise information to allow the Committee to present rational and responsible recommendations
to the Cabinet.

The PIM Secretariat is another central body in the new PIM System governance framework and
will be established in the PIOJ as a gatekeeper. This will be a small unit of highly skilled and
knowledgeable technicians who will support the PIMC and undertake independent reviews of
project proposals presented for screening, appraisal, and, provide technical advice to the PIMC to
facilitate its decision making process. The Institutional Assessment made recommendations on
the organizational structure and the required skills, knowledge and abilities that will be necessary
to support an effective and efficient unit. The Director position of the Secretariat has been
advertised and is to be filled in the upcoming period. The Secretariat will be fully functional to
support the PIMC once the funding needs are met through the Jamaica Strategic Public Sector
Transformation Project; however, these functions are being undertaken by the Planning Institute
of Jamaica in the interim.

Figure 1: PIM System – Matching Process Steps with Responsible Entities: Project Idea to
Approval

               Develop and
 Process                                Pre-Screening     Proceed with no   Preparation and                                  Consideration by   Recommend for
              Submit Project                                                                                 REVIEW                                             Cabinet Approval
  Step                                     Review            Objection         appraisal                                     PIM Committee          PSIP
                  Idea




                                                                              MDA, GBE,
                   MDAs                PIM Secretariat                                                                                          PIM Committee
Responsible                                                                     Donors,                    PIM Secretariat   PIM Committee
               GBEs (with or           (with assistance   PIM Committee
  Entity                                                                    Consultants, DBJ              (with PEX, PED)
              without Donors)         from DBJ if PPP)
                                                                               (for PPP)

                           More work/info                                                     More work



                                            Reject                                                              Reject




The new PIM System, in order for it to work effectively, needs to match processes with
responsible entities or institutions. Roles and responsibilities must be made clear if these are to
be embraced by those institutions. Since a PIM System relies on the effective functioning of all

                                                                                                                                                            9|Page
Document of the World Bank
the parts, this is a critical input to the design of the overall PIM system. The structure for
approving (or rejecting) implementing and monitoring PIM projects that would allow the PIM
arrangements to evolve into a ‘system’ is shown in Figure 1 (See Annex 6: ‘Institutional
Capacity Assessment of Government of Jamaica’s Readiness to Implement the PIMS’ for a
narrative for institutional roles in the new PIM System).

2.2. Component 2: Strengthening Budget Preparation Process and Result Based Budgeting

The GOJ’s current PFM reform program dates back to as early as 2010, when reforms to
strengthen discipline and responsibility in budget management were enacted. On the one hand, a
PMES was established at the Cabinet Office to ensure that medium term planning and budgeting
were synchronized (the Strategic Business Plan). On the other hand, the 2013 PEFA assessment
identified several weaknesses in the country’s PFM system, including inter alia the weaknesses
in results-based budgeting. In response to the latest PEFA Assessment, the GOJ has promulgated
its own PFM Action Plan which seeks to address the multiple and inter-connected PFM
weaknesses, including multi-year results-based budgeting.

Past efforts at results-based budgeting have not succeeded because of structural weaknesses
inherent in PFM policies. The underlying political dynamics of the budget process also
undermined past efforts. The introduction of earlier reforms suffered mainly due to failure to first
address PFM basics, such as ensuring credibility of the budget by, for instance, limiting
adjustments to the budget during the budget execution phase2 or reconnecting the budget process
to priority setting and policy making.

The primary objective of this Component was to support the GOJ in linking budgeting with
policy priorities through a gradual transition from annual expenditure planning to medium-term
and a results-based expenditure framework. The activities supported in this area focused on
addressing PFM basics and preconditions for successful implementation of medium-term results
based budgeting. The Component was structured around providing TA in three main sub-
activities: (i) development of a permanent budget calendar; ii) development of a virement policy;
and (ii) providing TA for medium-term results based budgeting.

i)        Development of a Budget Calendar

The absence of a binding budget calendar along with weak internal controls and inadequate
policy framework to limit virements and supplementary estimates are important constraints that
led to the failure of the MoFP’s earlier pilot programs to reform the budget process for the
2011/2012 fiscal year.

Under this sub-component, the NLTA assisted the GOJ in taking the necessary step to approve a
detailed interim budget calendar for FY14/15. Additionally, permanent binding budget calendar
(envisaging budget approval prior to the fiscal year, starting with the budget for FY2015/16) was
approved by Cabinet in May 2014. These items were triggers for the Economic Stabilization and


2
 By imposing strict rules for the transfer of funds within the budget and constraining ex-post regularization of
unbudgeted spending through supplementary budgets.
                                                                                                        10 | P a g e
Document of the World Bank
Foundations for Growth Development Policy Loan (P145995) that was being prepared and, in
addition, were picked up by the IMF as structural benchmarks.




ii)        Development of a Virement Policy

Virement is the term used to describe the reallocation/reorganization of the approved budget of a
MDA during the course of a financial year with the changes being regularized in subsequent
parliamentary approval of supplementary budget estimates. Virement has been undesirable in
Jamaica due to the fact that it changes spending relative to legislative intent; they do not receive
the same scrutiny as regular appropriations; and they can change the budget baseline by
substituting recurrent expenditures for one-time items. MDAs have faced limited restrictions on
using virement within a head category. This has created fragmentation between budget planning
and budget execution, and undermined the credibility of the budget as a planning tool to achieve
the targeted fiscal balances under the fiscal rules.

In order to limit the use of virement, with cabinet level endorsement, the Financial Secretary
issued instructions in October 2014 setting limits on Virement (See Annex 7: Changes to
Virement Policy). The limiting of virements will reduce the ad-hoc increase of employee
compensation, which had been the trend, as well as other recurrent spending, and encourage
MDAs to engage in more careful budget planning.

iii)       Technical Assistance for Medium Term Results Based Budgeting

Implementation of medium term results based budgeting (MTRBB) was a key element of the
GOJ’s public financial management reform action plan.

The World Bank and the MoFP have jointly adopted a model of good practice for identifying
gaps in the budget process of the GOJ. The core elements of such a model include:

       •     Medium term fiscal policy setting being applied “top-down” to guide the budget
             process.
       •     Linkages between development planning, PSIP and budget decision making.
       •     Use of rolling forward estimates to simplify the budget process and ensure that
             attention in the budget process is focused on the most appropriate suite of spending
             initiatives, savings options and revenue measures that together deliver development
             and policy goals within fiscal constraints.
       •     Enhance top-down priority setting processes, such as the Cabinet Retreat, that enable
             policy makers to engage earlier in the budget process to set policy priorities – having
             regard to the political dimension as well as technical policy analysis and information
             on past performance. This political level engagement is designed to shift the budget
             away from, what is currently, a largely bargaining approach towards one of stronger
             collective decision making at Cabinet level
       •     A performance management framework, which entails measuring performance
             against outcome targets, set in the budget as well as program evaluation and
                                                                                        11 | P a g e
Document of the World Bank
           performance audit, in order to assist all stakeholders to identify opportunities to
           improve the efficiency of government spending – thus improving the overall
           effectiveness of the budget process. Managing performance in the context of the
           overall development planning, management, reporting and accountability framework,
           as well as the budget, is designed to give broader relevance to performance
           management – recognizing that this is not simply a feature of good budgeting.

In this regard, substantial progress has been made by the NLTA in developing a medium term
fiscal framework, including changes to the FAA Act that require publishing of a Fiscal Policy
Paper with the Budget (see Annex 1). A planning framework was developed under the guidance
of the Cabinet Office to integrate MTRBB in a results based management framework. A Cabinet
retreat is now part of the annual budget cycle and, under the coordination of the PIOJ, this
exercise creates linkages between development planning and budget planning early in the budget
process.

Capacity building efforts for the introduction of rolling forward estimates were also supported
under the NLTA. A pilot workshop focusing on Forward Estimates was conducted with selected
MDAs. The workshops conducted sought to build capacity in the areas of: (1) the overall budget
reform program, (2) aligning policies and programs, (3) improving capacity for costing
programs, (4) capacity for identifying and addressing funding shortfalls as well as (5) the
concept of rolling forward estimates. These workshops were overall useful in building an
understanding of results based budgeting for the participants.

An action plan has been developed for the MoFP on the next steps in implementation of
medium-term results based budgeting. Having regard to local capacities (including in line
agencies), appropriate sequencing and necessary support for change management, the full
implementation of MTRBB will need to take place of a number of successive budget cycles and
be supported by follow-on technical assistance.

3. NEXT STEPS

Based on the progress achieved through this Project, as well as on the request of the Client,
follow up activities related from these two Components have been included into the new Loan
signed between the Government of Jamaica and the World Bank; 'Jamaica Strategic Public
Sector Transformation IPF'. This is in order to complete reforms in the areas of PIM and
medium-term results-based budgeting. The DFID is going to co-finance these two Components
under the Loan. The IPF has been effective since October 27, 2014.

It is expected these two areas in particular are of interest for Client demand and Bank support in
the region. As a matter of fact, some OECS countries have raised interest in these areas.
Implementation has already started, especially in the budgeting area in some countries such as
Belize, St. Lucia, and Dominica through SEMCAR and/or CARTAC Programs. Also,
introducing strategic budgeting tools, rolling forward budget estimates and multiannual budget
ceilings, has been recognized as key elements for laying the foundations of better fiscal
management. These areas have even been included as a part of the Regional Partnership Strategy
of OECS under the public sector modernization component. Based on this experience, it is

                                                                                      12 | P a g e
Document of the World Bank
expected that Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis, and Grenada will, with support from the
Bank, gradually introduce program budgeting.




                                                                                   13 | P a g e
Document of the World Bank
4. TEAM COMPOSITION

  Name                              Title
  Component 1
  Diego Dorado                      Sr Public Sector Specialist
  Murat Vardal                      Public Sector Specialist, TTL
  Helen Martin                      PPP Expert, GCPDR
  Martin Darcy                      Consultant
  Sophia Whyte Givans               Consultant
  Cristine Angella Clarke           Consultant
  Maria Fernanda Cortes Garzon      Consultant
  Sylfhen Ruiz Mcleod               Consultant
  Angela Ann Marie Bedward          Consultant
  Dena Ormelia Spence               Consultant
  Joshua Jermey Rowe                Consultant
  Dunstan Earl Bryan                Consultant
  Jaime Alberto Osorio Sandoval     Consultant
  Component 2
  Davide Zucchini                   Public Sector Specialist, TTL
  Murat Vardal                      Public Sector Specialist, TTL
  Kris Kauffmann                    Consultant
  Victor Zafra                      Consultant
  Overall support
  Marcelo Buitron                   JPA
  Richard Sutherland                JPA
  Brianna Rojas-Elton               Program Assistant

Peer reviewers were Jay-Hyung Kim (Adviser, GGODR) and Rohan Longmore (Economist,
GMFDR). The team received also valuable guidance from Kathy Lalazarian (Acting Country
Representative) and Francisco Galrao Carneiro (Program Leader, LCC3C).




                                                                           14 | P a g e
Document of the World Bank
5. ANNEXES (in separate files)

Annex 1:       Amendment to the Financial Administration and Audit Act for the governance
               framework of the new PIM System of Jamaica
Annex 2:       Amendment to the Public Bodies Management and Accountability Act
Annex 3        PIM System Guidelines
Annex 4:       Policy Paper for the Government of Jamaica Public Sector Investment Program
               for Fy2014/15 – FY 2018/19
Annex 5:       Terms of Reference – Public Investment Management Committee (PIMC)
Annex 6:       Institutional Capacity Assessment of Government of Jamaica’s Readiness to
               Implement the PIMS
Annex 7:       Changes to Virement Policy
Annex 8:       Proposals for Strengthening GOJ’s Public Sector Investment Management System
Annex 9:       User’s Manual – Public Sector Investment Project Database




                                                                                  15 | P a g e
Document of the World Bank
