    Report No: ACS2740


    Republic of India
    IN eGovernance in the North East
    Reducing Public Administration Constraints (PACs) to Improve Service Delivery: Options and
    Recommendations to Support Reform Planning of the Government of Assam
.
    June 2, 2014
.
    SASGP
    SOUTH ASIA




.
.




\
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The
    World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this
    work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on
    the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemina-
    tion of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
    Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                            2
I.     INTRODUCTION
1. The Government of Assam (GoA) is engaged in a process of improving services to
   citizens. The focus on better services to citizens is in line with the National e-Government
   Plan (NeGP), with a number of existing and anticipated Union Acts, and with recently passed
   Acts in Assam, especially the Assam Right to Public Services Act of 2012. The approach of
   the Government of Assam focuses on digitization of data bases, provision of “time-bound”
   services, improving connectivity across the State, provision of an increasing number of
   services as “e-services”, rolling-out of Citizen Service Centers (CSC’s) and rolling-out “e-
   districts” from the present two pilot Districts to all 27 Districts.

2. The GoA is fully aware that progress on service delivery will require attention to both
   vertical and horizontal connectivity, and it intends to develop a Strategic Action Plan
   which focuses on these critical elements. While vertical connectivity relates to specific
   Departments and services (i.e., digitization, improvement of front-end and back end processes
   related to particular services), horizontal connectivity cuts across administrative structures and
   processes and addresses administrative practices in general. The horizontal public
   administration reform issues are the subject of this report. The World Bank Group
   contributions are intended as inputs into a draft Strategic Action Plan to be discussed with the
   Government of Assam.

3. The policy dialogue with the Government of Assam and review of relevant documents
   reveal general agreement on main public administration constraints (PAC’s) to service
   delivery. In particular, two reports from Assam Commissions were reviewed in detail: the
   Report of the Assam Administrative Reforms Commission (2005) and the Report of the
   Assam 2008 Pay Commission (published October 2009). The two reports contain valuable
   analysis of the situation, and many useful recommendations, for instance, in the areas of
   revamping service delivery and staff motivation. On the whole, however, the comprehensive
   reform recommendations could only be partially implemented and may have required a
   stronger adaptation to the context.

4. The current report proposes a gradual reform approach, with a focus on searching for
   improvements that can be accomplished with a reasonable effort. Experience of public
   administration reform processes suggests that progress on public administration reform is
   most likely to occur in a gradual and experimental fashion, taking small steps and then
   assessing them and learning from experience. In turn, comprehensive reform efforts involving
   rapid changes often fall short of their objectives. The approach pursued in this note, therefore,
   is aimed to identify a provisional set of manageable actions that could be considered for
   inclusion in a Strategic Action Plan to be agreed among stakeholders in Assam. The note
   provides a large menu of possible actions, from which a more limited set could be selected for
   inclusion in the Strategic Action Plan.


5. The present report is structured as follows. Chapter II, "Public Administration Contraints
   (PAC’s)", provides a detailed diagnostic of constraints identified in Assam, groups them under
   five headings, and proposes actions to address each of the constraints. Chapter III, "The Way


                                                 3
      Forward" proposes a process leading to the preparation and adoption by the Government of
      Assam of a Strategic Action Plan to address to address selected PAC's.

II.        PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONSTRAINTS (PAC’S)

6. The diagnostic identifies a variety of Public Administration Constraints (PAC’s). The
   PAC’s are grouped under the 5 headings. Following a brief discussion of the PAC’s under
   each of the five headings, concrete actions to address each of them are presented in table
   format at the end of each section. The headings are:
      a.   Policy, Legal, and Administrative Framework for Delivery of G2C
      b.   Personnel Capacity and Performance
      c.   Citizen Interface
      d.   Organization and Functions of District Offices
      e.   Administrative Issues

PAC’s Group 1: Policy, Legal, and Administrative Framework for Delivery of G2C

7. Assam has designed a comprehensive system for leading and managing the effort to
   improve service delivery, especially e-service delivery. To manage this system, Assam has
   set up a State Level Implementation and Monitoring Framework. The top three layers of the
   framework are designed to deal with horizontal, cross-government issues, as seen in the table
   below.

       Policy Making & Supporting                          Role & Responsibilities
                  Body
       State E-Gov Council headed    Policy approval, guidance, political consensus and funding support
       by Chief Minister

       NeGP     Apex     Committee   Strategy direction, intra departmental coordination & overseeing
       headed by Chief Secretary     implementation.


       IT Department                 Policy making & implementation & monitoring. Guidance to State
                                     MMP and Co-ordination.



8. This institutional structure constitutes a robust framework for policy-making and
   implementation. It recognizes the need for top-level political direction and leadership (Chief
   Minister), top-level administrative coordination (Chief Secretary), and a working level focal
   point for policy development, operational management, and monitoring. Given the
   Government’s additional focus on PAC’s, the AR&T Department could join the IT
   Department in performing the management and monitoring tasks. Such joint working is at
   present the preferred model, but would depend on keeping the two Departments under the
   same Principal Secretary. The diagnostic suggests that it could be desirable to maintain the
   structure whereby both the AR&T and the IT Departments report to the same PS. For such a
   system to be optimally effective, concrete arrangements and procedures would have to be
   articulated. The following areas could be considered for improvement.

                                                       4
Political and Top Administrative Support to E-Governance Agenda

9. Addressing horizontal issues that cut across organizational units within the
   administration requires commitment and drive from the highest political and
   administrative levels. To be effective, such commitment and leadership must be on-going.
   Without commitment, Departments may move at their own pace or face interference from
   other Departments. This is a particularly risk in Assam, where the very large number of
   Departments that presently exist renders it more challenging to achieve a unified action.1
   Further, the need to complete the legal framework and agree on common procedures across
   the administration, including a framework for effective for monitoring and reporting, requires
   top level engagement.

10. The focus at political and top-level administration levels to support dedicated service
    delivery models and undertaking a comprehensive e-governance agenda could be
    strengthened. The IT and AR&T Departments, being on an equal level with other
    Departments, would benefit from higher level commitment and drive to be able to drive the
    necessary horizontal reforms. The Action Plan could, therefore, consider addressing the
    issues related to building commitment, and direct involvement of the Chief Minister, the
    Cabinet, and the Chief Secretary in developing, agreeing, and pushing forward the agenda.

Legal Framework

11. There is a growing body of legislation (both Union and Assam) to improve services to
    citizens and provide the legal basis for e-delivery. It would be beneficial for reforms to
    ensure that the legal framework is comprehensive and also well understood and implemented.
    A “User Guide” to the relevant acts might be considered. Accordingly it could be useful to
    conduct a review of all the legislation (including secondary legislations, formal rules, etc.) to
    identify gaps or possibly contradictions between the various documents. The review could
    result in a comprehensive picture of the legal situation and provide specific recommendations
    for supplementing or revising legal documents to ensure completeness and consistency of the
    legal basis for a reformed service delivery system. The review might also be used to provide
    input for the development of a User Guide to the legislation for use by management and staff
    delivering e-services. Under the present NLTA, the World Bank team is preparing the initial
    background document2 that might guide the work on the legal framework. The results of this
    work will be shared with the Government of Assam.




1 Reduction of the number of Departments through rationalization and amalgamation has been proposed by previous
Commissions, but is not addressed in this note, since this is considered to be beyond the scope of the present reform
effort.
2 See NLTA working note entitled "Operational Requirements for Public Service Delivery Laws for the Govern-

ment of Assam"

                                                          5
Process for Identifying and Prioritizing Services under Right to Public Services Act (RTPS) and
Electronic Service Delivery (ESD) bill

12. The Assam RTPS Act (2012) does not appear to specify a process or criteria for
    identifying or prioritizing services for inclusion under Section 4 of the Act. Section 4 of
    the Act merely notes that the Government of Assam “may, from time to time notify services”
    to be included under the Act. It has been confirmed that the process for identifying services to
    be notified is presently facing challenges, and cannot necessarily ensure that the services
    selected are the most important or most urgent for time-bound delivery. In addition to the
    services identified already for “time-bound” delivery and e-delivery, it could be important to
    have a process in place for identifying and prioritizing services for notification on an on-going
    basis.

13. Departments deliver many services, and only some of them are suitable for time-bound
    delivery and notification. It may be useful to design a process whereby all Departments are
    required to review their services and to list all the services that could potentially be listed
    under the RTPS, even if not immediately. Based on such a list, and using pre-agreed criteria, a
    forward looking plan could be devised for notifying additional services over a given period,
    for instance 5 years. Such a 5-year plan, if agreed, could also be presented to the public, and
    could be given an enforceable status through a government instruction. Some of the criteria
    that might be considered in prioritizing services are:

      How important is the service to the population?
      How widespread is the use of the service?
      Are there currently challenges with delivering this service?
      Is the service ready in terms of back-end processes and data base (s)?
      Is the service delivered differently in different parts of the State?
      Which services have been chosen (and successfully delivered) in other States?
      How heavy is the work load of the Department concerned? (There may be a need to pace changes
       if many of the services fall under the responsibility of one Department.)
      Is the service specifically mentioned in a Citizens Charter?

   Meaningful application of many of these criteria may require extensive consultations and
   interface with citizens.

14. Services under the responsibility of more than one Department may require a different
    approach. It has been pointed out that services that require joint cooperation and engagement
    of more than one Department are more difficult to notify, even where such services may be a
    priority for other reasons. This issue could be specifically addressed in the 5-year plan to
    identify and prioritize services, by including timelines for each of the Departments. Once the
    Citizens’ Charters are completed, their content could also be a consideration in the selection
    and prioritization process. This type of process could also facilitate the operation of the
    Innovation Fund proposed for the Project Preparation Advance.

15. Some of the same issues have been identified under the E-Service Delivery Bill (“ESD”)
    bill, which has been approved by the Union cabinet and is expected to pass in the Union

                                                 6
     parliament. The bill requires that within 5 years (with a possible 3-year extension)
     governments should deliver all services electronically unless it is impossible to do so, or
     unless the service is otherwise excluded. Assam would benefit from a process to identify all
     the services currently delivered, for categorizing them under one of these three categories, and
     for ensuring that the services are indeed delivered electronically where it is required.3 This
     could result in a 5-year (or 8-year) plan, and would further require a mechanism to ensure and
     monitor progress.

16. Plans could benefit from public comments. In the case of plans for both the RTPS and the
    ESD, once the plans are drafted, they could be put out for public comments. In particular,
    citizens could be invited to comment on the selection of services and the standards for
    delivery. Consideration could be given to combining the RTPS and ESD plan into one
    comprehensive plan.

Process for Prioritizing Business Process Reengineering (BPR)

17. It is suggested to develop a BPR Policy that outlines the methodologies for process
    improvements, including adoption of best practices from elsewhere. Citizen feedback
    could be a critical component to include in the process, ensuring the BPR results in
    improvements which have value to the citizens. This section will be developed further as part
    of the World Bank team’s work on a roadmap for BPR.

ICT Plan Development

18. The absence of a comprehensive ICT Plan was identified by Assam officials as another
    constraint. It was noted that there is currently no common framework for service delivery,
    including a strong and supporting ICT infrastructure. A common ICT Plan could be
    developed addressing legacy issues, infrastructure bottlenecks, horizontal connectivity, wide
    area networks and data centers, ICT strengthening, standards and interoperability; and future
    growth and scalability model in terms of technologies and usage. Each Department could be
    required to make an ICT Plan covering the services, back-end requirements, requirements of
    horizontal connectivity, capacities and could be encouraged to adopt from a central bouquet of
    applications that would help in improved efficiencies and better accountability.

Monitoring, Reporting, and Adjustment Processes

19. Monitoring and reporting, with a view to improving the implementation of the e-
    governance agenda, could be another priority. The need for a good monitoring system,
    both to ensure performance, but equally importantly to facilitate learning from experience and
    course correction, is universally recognized and accepted. A critical pre-condition for good
    monitoring is a plan that is specific and concrete enough to be monitored, including clearly
    defined outcomes and measurement indicators, specifically assigned responsibilities, and clear
    timelines for delivery. The Strategic Action Plan to be agreed for addressing selected PAC’s

3The three categories are: (i) services to be delivered electronically, (ii) services that cannot be delivered electronically, and (iii)
services that can be delivered electronically, but are otherwise excluded (based on the process determined in legislation).



                                                                   7
   could include all of these elements. A scheme for such an Action Plan is presented in the
   Annex to this note.

20. A strong monitoring body could strengthen results. The monitoring and reporting system
    could gain from the assignment of clear authority to the monitoring body to enforce
    standardized reporting, to conduct ongoing monitoring and periodical evaluations, and to
    propose revision of the plan, as needed. Other bodies (Departments, Deputy Commissioners
    of District Offices) responsible for delivering specific actions within the Plan would be
    required to provide information in the agreed form.

21. To be successful as a monitoring body for the Action Plan, the AR&T and the IT
    Departments could work in close ongoing consultation with all other bodies involved.
    The role of the monitoring body could include:

      Enforcing standardization of reporting
      Assisting in co-ordination of items in the Action Plan that cut-across the responsibilities of
       more than one organization
      Building inter-departmental and inter-institutional cooperation
      Carrying out evaluation of specific e-Governance projects
      Acting as “helpful fixer” of problems as they arise




                                                 8
  PAC’s Actions Table Group 1: Policy, Legal and Administrative Framework for Delivery of
                                            G2C

PAC                 Possible Initiatives for        How         Comments                   Include in Action
                    Inclusion in the Action         feasible?                              Plan?
                    Plan                            (initial                               (M, S, C. W)
                                                    estimate)
                    1. Prepare a policy             High        This policy statement
                    statement for adoption by                   could ideally form the
Political and Top   Cabinet including Mission,                  opening pages for the
Administrative      Vision, Objectives and                      Strategic Action Plan
Support to E-       Goals for Service Delivery                  proposed here.
Governance          Reform
Agenda                                                          (See more detail in
                                                                ANNEX 2).
                    2. Provide regular progress     High
                    briefings to Chief Minister
                    and Chief Secretary

                    3. Seek direct involvement      Medium      This could be
                    of the Chief Secretary in                   specified in detail in
                    implementation and                          the policy document.
                    monitoring


                    4. Include improved             Medium      This would also
                    service delivery in the                     increase direct
                    regular Appraisal of Senior                 involvement of the
                    Officials, e.g., Principal                  Chief Secretary.
                    Secretaries and DC’s

                    5. Conduct review of gaps       High        Part of this work will
                    and overlaps in legislative                 be done by the NLTA.
Legal Framework     framework (primary and
                    secondary) for better
                    service delivery


                    6. Agree plan for               Medium
                    completing the legal
                    framework

                    7. Develop “user guide to       Medium
                    the legislation and the rules

                    8.Develop a requirement         Medium      There is clearly a
                    that Departments prepare,                   possibility to get lists
Process for         by a certain date, a                        from other States who
Identifying and     comprehensive list of all                   have notified services
Prioritizing        the services that are                       already.
Services under      suitable for time-bound
RTPS and ESD        delivery under the RTPS                     Is there a multi-year
                    and can potentially be                      process established in
                    notified                                    any of the States? If

                                                           9
                                                                so, can Assam learn
                                                                from it?




                   9. Agree a set of criteria      High
                   for prioritizing services for
                   notification


                   10. On the basis of Actions     Medium       The 5-year plan could
                   9 and 10, agree a 5-year                     include a plan for BPR
                   plan for notifying all the                   as required for the
                   services, including annual                   notification.
                   notification targets, and
                   monitoring and reporting                     The 5-year plan could
                   system                                       be subjected to public
                                                                consultation before it
                                                                is finalized.
                   11. Agree a process for         Medium       Could be combined
                   selecting services to be                     with the RTPS plan.
                   listed under the ESD
                   12. Prepare a comprehen-                     The plan could be
                   sive list of services for                    subjected to public
                   electronic delivery over a                   consultation before it
                   5-year period, including a                   is finalized.
                   monitoring and reporting
                   system


                   13. Prepare a BPR Policy Medium             A draft policy could be
Process for        document to be adopted by                   circulated.
Prioritizing BPR   the stakeholder department
                                                               The BPR plan could be
                                                               linked to the 5-year
                                                               RTPS notification plan
                                                               and to the ESD plan.


                   14. Provide for review of       Medium
                   the service processes at
                   least once a year for the
                   initial period of 5 years.



                   15. Seek feedback from          High         This could be specified
                   citizen on how to make the                   in detail in the policy
                   processes more efficient or                  document.
                   convenient.

                   16. Include a process for       Medium       This could also
                   adoption of best practices                   increase visibility of
                   in service delivery from                     good practices of the
                   other departments/                           Departments and

                                                          10
                  governments                               provide motivation to
                                                            improve further.
                  17. Prepare an ICT policy     High        This work will be done
                  for G2C service delivery                  as part of the main
Comprehensive     and associated backed                     World Bank project.
ICT Plan          systems requirements,
                  horizontal connectivity
                  and training for each
                  Department with a 5 year
                  roadmap

                  18. Assess the need for       High        To be carried out under
                  data digitization and                     Innovation Fund.
                  prepare for delivery of
                  Across the Counter
                  Services (ACS) for each
                  Department

                  19. Take up migration of      Medium      To be carried out under
                  legacy systems/ and or                    Innovation Fund.
                  Proof of Concepts/ Pilots
                  for immediate positive
                  impact on service delivery

                  20. Take up processes for     High        To be carried out under
                  G2G interactions and                      Innovation Fund.
                  improvement of internal
                  efficiencies by adopting a
                  basket of common
                  application stack for the
                  Department
                  21. Draft the Action Plan     High        The model in the
Monitoring,       in a form that ensures that               ANNEX could be
Reporting, and    it can be monitored (see                  modified in
Adjustment        example in ANNEX)                         consultation with
Processes                                                   Assam officials.

                  22. Draft mandate of IT       Medium      The mandate could be
                  and AR&T Departments to                   approved at a high
                  manage and monitor the                    enough level, and
                  implementation of the                     clearly publicized to all
                  Action Plan                               bodies concerned.
                  23. Ensure adequate           High        This can be assisted by
                  resources for management                  the World Bank main
                  and monitoring the                        project.
                  implementation of the plan



 PAC’s Group 2: Personnel Capacity and Performance

 22. Issues related to personnel capacity and performance were raised repeatedly. This
     challenge appears to be pervasive, and is a concern at all levels and in the different types of
     organizations, Departments and District Offices. The items below deal with what appear to be

                                                       11
   the main issues raised during the discussions with authorities, and also by the various studies
   and reports reviewed.

23. In addition to the specific activities listed in Table 2, there are numerous benefits of
    conducting a survey of Assam Government employees. To improve performance, it is
    important to go to the field and engage employees in expressing the issues that they see as
    problems. A survey could also be useful in bringing performance-related problems to the
    attention of senior management and politicians, and for discovering innovative ways to move
    forward. A Government of India report on a Civil Services Survey (2010) includes a wealth of
    useful information on issues related to staff capacity and motivation, e.g., chapters on
    “Learning and Development”, “Commitment and Integrity”, and “Working with External
    Stakeholders and “Improving Service Delivery”. Such information based on Assam conditions
    might be extremely useful for designing corrective actions to improve performance. To be
    useful, such a survey in Assam would need to include in the sample not only All India and
    Assam civil servants, but also employees in Departments and District Offices. See more
    details in Annex 3.

Level of Motivation

24. The issue of staff motivation is generally recognized as one of the most central
    constraints on improved performance. Over the years, there have been suggestions that
    Assam could introduce a financial incentive linked to performance. Most recently, the Assam
    pay commission (2008) proposed the introduction of a financial incentive based on
    performance, which they called “Increment Based on Performance” (IBOP).

25. The Commission recommended that the Annual Increments to be given to Government
    employees should comprise two components: a Fixed Rate of Increment and a Variable
    Performance Linked component. The fixed Component would be 1% of the basic pay of the
    employee, and would be paid to all. The variable component would be between 0% minimum
    and 2% maximum and would comprise the IBOP Component. These percentages are on the
    low-end of performance bonuses that are paid in other countries, but might be an interesting
    way to start in India. The Assam Pay Commission indicated that in proposing this increment it
    was following the recommendations of the Sixth Pay Commission of the Government of
    India, which had also endorsed a Performance Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS) for the
    Central Government employees.


26. Nevertheless, the introduction of financial increments based on performance may not be
    practical in Assam at this time. This leads to the question of whether there are other forms of
    incentives which are more realistic and likely to be introduced. The Assam Administrative
    Reform Commission (2005) noted such a possibility. Positive incentives could be non-
    monetary, linked to individual performance, in the form of recognition, e.g., appreciation
    letters signed by the Secretary/ CS/ CM, etc., which inspire others and encourage the
    individual to keep doing well. These could be based on explicit criteria made known to all
    concerned well in advance so that expectations could be set and performance measured
    periodically over the year through a participatory appraisal system. As noted by the
    Commission, there could only be achieved through a better performance appraisal system.

                                                12
27. One of the main challenges related to better performance appraisal and motivation may
    be the lack of clear lines of reporting and along with lack of a sense of belonging and of a
    team spirit among employees. In fact, many employees appear to feel that they are just
    moved around and not actually a part of distinct organizational units, without clear lines of
    management and defined responsibilities. This appeared to be a problem particularly in the
    District Offices, but this may be a problem elsewhere. Clearer Organization Charts and
    established management and reporting systems would also allow for better work planning and
    delegation of responsibility to well-performing employees. Accordingly, this might go some
    way to contribute to better motivation, regardless of financial rewards.

Staff Capacity

28. Training is critical to capacity building, especially at a time of change, and the
    introduction of new service delivery procedures. Given the restrictions on incentives and
    promotion, good training policies and programs are one of the best approaches to improving
    performance. According to the Results Framework Document (RFD) of the AR&T
    Department, two of the Department’s six objectives are concerned with training: (1)
    Designing, developing and implementation of training programs for capacity building of civil
    servants; and (4) Strengthening of State training institutions.

29. The AR&T department has passed circulars requesting Departments to devote 0.5% of
    their budget to training. A draft “Training Policy for Assam” also contains many other good
    suggestions. Significantly, the draft proposes training for all. Equally important, it proposes a
    decentralized approach to training, whereby every Department shall adopt a Systematic
    Approach to Training, which would include a training needs assessment, planning, design and
    delivery of training, and also evaluation and assessment. Attention is also given in this draft to
    the need to reach the Districts. But implementation remains uncertain. A suitable monitoring
    mechanism to supervise implementation of the training policy could be set up to strengthen
    training.

Recruitment

30. The personnel working in the Assam administration consist of the following: about 120
    IAS, about 1100 ACS, about 400,000 employees (well over half of the employees are in the
    District offices). In addition, there are about 50,000 contractual employees (mostly in the
    District Offices). Data provided by the government indicates the vacancy rate per department
    is about 12-15%, with the ACS rates somewhat higher than employee rates. Vacancies in
    contractual employees are not included in these numbers.

31. Estimates indicate that the performance of staff could be enhanced. Most observers
    indicate that a high proportion of government employees are not performing well (with as
    many as 30-40% are not performing as expected). In a system where there are limited tools for
    improving the performance of existing staff because job security and seniority are important
    principles, recruitment of high quality new staff is important for improving the overall quality
    of the workforce over time. There appear to be some challenges in achieving optimal levels of
    recruitment in Assam, although the issue of what stands in the way of recruitment may require

                                                 13
   additional analysis. It appears that few Department or Districts recruit and hire immediately
   upon availability of an open position. Oftentimes, positions are open for years.

32. It is likely that in any Department/ District the reason for not recruiting is a combination
    of factors. These could include litigation, financial considerations, blockages caused by
    Service Rules (reserved posts, promotion posts), political considerations, and others.
    However, fiscal restrictions on hiring were lifted in 2012, and Departments are free to go
    ahead and fill vacancies (except grade 4, where there is an effort to reduce and also contract
    out).

33. The Public Service Commission (“PSC”) recruits all Assam Civil Service (“ACS”), but
    also senior ranks of “employees” in certain State Services. Recruitment is not fully
    standardized. Each District Office and each Department does its own recruitment, and has
    somewhat different criteria for recruitment (as per their own “Service Rules”).

Service Rules

34. The Assam Pay Commission (2008) noted that in many Departments, there are no
    Service Rules. Personnel administration was carried out through some Executive Orders.
    Even in Departments where Service Rules are in existence, they are often found to be
    incomplete. In some cases, the Service Rules do not cover all the employees of the
    Department. In other cases, it was found that the Rules are not modified to accommodate
    changes that have taken place in practice. The result is that many Departments are involved in
    court cases related to promotions and filling up of vacancies.

35. Challenges related to the Service Rules were raised extensively during the missions. It
    was noted that many of the Service Rules are out of date, that they are not consistent across
    Departments and across District Offices. There may also be rigidity in designation of
    positions as either “recruitment positions” or “promotion positions”. Although the Personnel
    Department initiated some work on revising the general principles for preparing Service
    Rules, this process is ongoing and needs further work and decisions.




                                               14
                 PAC’s Actions Table 2: Personnel Capacity and Performance

PAC              Possible Initiatives for     How         Comments                          Include in
                 Inclusion in the Action      feasible?                                     Action
                 Plan                                                                       Plan?
                                              (initial
                                              estimate)                                     (M, S, C,
                                                                                            W)
Overall Staff    1. Conduct a survey of       Medium      This survey could ideally
Performance      employees to identify                    cover many aspects related to
                 issues and possible                      personnel performance in
                 improvements                             general, including specific
                                                          proposed actions in this
                                                          Table.
                 2.Provide financial          Very low    Probably not practical at this
Motivation       bonuses along the lines of               time. However, the GoI has
                 IBOP                                     recently introduced a policy
                                                          on performance bonuses.
                 3. Design a new Appraisal    Medium      Teamwork and personal
                 System                                   performance      could       be
                                                          recognized.


                 4. Develop clear and         Medium      Knowing where you belong
                 realistic Organization                   in the organization is critical
                 Charts and reporting lines               to motivation and
                                                          performance.



                 5. Develop “team work”       Variable    Depends on clear and
                 and delegation within                    realistic organization charts
                 teams

Staff Capacity   6. Implement Training        High        Consider the need to adopt
                 Policy of Assam                          the policy and target at the
                                                          level of the cabinet.


                 7. Introduce Action Plan     Medium      Specify monitoring
                 and Time Lines for                       mechanism capable of
                 Implementation of training               enforcing the policy.
                 policy

                 8. Ensure Implementation     Low         This may require financial
                 of the Plan by all                       resources and a monitoring
                 Institutions                             system.

                 9. Conduct a “training       Medium
                 needs assessment” for
                 staff at all levels, with
                 focus on skills needed for
                 e-governance and e-
                 delivery


                                                     15
Recruitment       10. Carry out detailed      High
                  assessment of recruitment
                  “bottle necks” and make
                  recommendations for
                  reducing them


                  11. Reduce recruitment      Variable    Depends on the kind of bottle
                  “bottle necks”                          necks identified. An
                                                          intermediate step may be to
                                                          choose one or two as a start.

                                                          May require financial
                                                          resources.
Service Rules     12. Develop policy for      High        A draft revised service Rules
                  revision and upgrading of               was prepared by the
                  Service Rules                           Personnel Department about
                                                          a year ago, but is still in draft.

                                                          It is not clear if it addresses
                                                          all the major roadblocks
                                                          created by the current Service
                                                          Rules.
                  13. Agree process for       Medium      The use of Service Rules is
                  implementing revision of                mandatory, but not all
                  Service Rules across                    departments adopted them.
                  Departments and District
                  Offices

                  14. Upgrade Service Rules   Low
                  across institutions




 PAC’s Group 3: Citizen Interface

 36. Citizen interface is critical to improving services at all phases of the process. In order to
     ensure that services are actually improved from the perspective of the citizen, citizens would
     need to be consulted at all phases of the process, from the formulation of general policy, to the
     selection and actual delivery of services, and during monitoring and evaluation. The initiatives
     being implemented and planned in Assam require continuous consultations and feedback over
     time. By its nature, engaging the public cannot be done centrally, by a designated agency, it
     has to be carried out by all who design and deliver services, which means most Departments
     and all District Offices.

 Framework for Citizen Charters

 37. Citizen Charters will become a requirement under the Union Act on “Right to Time
     Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Grievance Redress”. The Act is not yet passed,
     but Assam has reported that “departments are requested to prepare Citizen Charters, which

                                                     16
   will include details about Designated Public Servants, Appellate Authorities, Reviewing
   Authorities, Time Limit, User Charge, Eligibility Criteria, and other pertinent information. For
   the awareness and greater benefit of citizens, the Citizen Charter will be displayed in the
   offices of Designated Public Servants and other important places.”

38. The Government of India has published a detailed Handbook on how to prepare Citizen
    Charters, how they are to be structured, publicized and evaluated. It includes many
    valuable suggestions and examples. There is also a compendium of Charters which, as of 2011
    (last update) includes 729 examples of Union and State Charters (two from Assam).

39. Reviews carried out over the years of the experience in India and elsewhere with Citizen
    Charters confirm that a central purpose of Citizen Charters is to improve services
    through transparency and public empowerment. Along these lines, the main challenges
    related to Citizen Charters are a lack of sufficient citizen consultations at the front end and
    lack of adequate publicity (“hanging it on the wall is not enough”) once the Charters are
    ready. In fact, there is a risk that the Charters become “pro forma” exercises, with little or no
    impact on the lives of citizens. In addition, there is an agreement in Assam that there is a
    strong need for mechanisms in place for continuous citizen feedback on performance, in
    addition to the instrument of grievances or complaints.

40. There are opportunities to enhance the process of preparing, publicizing, and
    monitoring Citizens Charter in Assam. One measure could be to agree a cross-
    departmental policy and system for preparing and approving Citizen Charters, including a
    common template/format, as well as a process for monitoring and reporting their
    implementation on a continuous basis.

Public Information and Consultation

41. Assam has been engaged in a number of projects to improve public services through e-
    delivery and other means. The plan is to intensify these efforts, e.g., through notification of
    services under the RTPS and ESD, roll out of E-Districts, Citizen Service Centers, expansion
    of Citizen Charters, and other means. Taken together, this effort is significant but its success
    depends, to a large extent, on the use made by citizens of all the new possibilities. The
    information provided to the public about this reform could be more comprehensive and
    effective.

42. In particular, there is a need for “citizen friendly” information, going beyond formal
    guidelines and pronouncements. For this, it could be beneficial to utilize widely used media,
    such as newspapers, radio, and television, and possibly direct meetings with citizens and
    citizen groups in various locations across the State. Experience teaches that a good approach
    for reaching a large proportion of the population could be to develop and adopt a
    communications plan, based on conditions in Assam, which would be prepared by
    communication experts, possibly from outside the administration.


                             PAC Actions Table 3: Citizen Interface


                                                 17
PAC                 Possible Initiatives for       How         Comments                         Include in
                    Inclusion in the Action        feasible?                                    Action Plan?
                    Plan
                                                   (initial                                     (M, S, C, W)
                                                   estimate)
Common              1. Develop an Assam            High        This could be based on the
Framework for       Guide to Citizen Charters,                 extensive existing guidelines
Citizen Charters    including how to prepare                   for India or some States.
                    and monitor



                    2. Develop training for        Medium
                    public officials, especially
                    frontline officials, on how
                    to conduct interface with
                    citizens
Public              3.Engage communications        High        There is an opportunity to
Information and     professionals to prepare a                 “lead the way” with activities
Engagement          communications plan for                    proposed elsewhere in this
                    Assam improved services                    document, e.g., with respect
                    initiative                                 to the RTPS and ESD 5-year
                                                               Action Plans and the BPR
                                                               process.

                                                               The plan could include a
                                                               management process and
                                                               budget for its implementation
                                                               and monitoring.




 PAC’s Group 4: Complex and Unclear Organization and Functions of District Offices

      43. The structure, functions, and capacity of the District Office (Deputy Commissioner’s
          Office) were identified as an area requiring additional support. The insufficient
          organizational and personnel capacity in the offices of Deputy Commissioners and the
          subordinate offices, given the huge burden of governance which continues to grow, was
          noted, as well as the differences of personnel numbers and workload between the various
          District Offices. The challenge is also noted often by reports about public administration
          in India and Assam. As the frontline office for many of the services being reformed, the
          functioning of these offices is of critical importance. In fact, it would be difficult to
          improve services significantly without strengthening the performance of the District
          Offices which act as the point of interface with citizens on many of the services under
          consideration. For example, the India Second Administrative Reform Commission (in its
          15th Report on “State and District Administration”, April 2009) noted the following
          problems, among others:

             Lack of clarity in functional allocation and subjects and mapping them to specific
              institutions within the DC Offices.


                                                          18
            Multiple accountability lines exist within and across the DC office, line departments,
             other agencies and local bodies.
            Lack of coordination between various structures and convergence in service delivery
             functions in the regions.

    44. The Commission also made a number of recommendations on structure and
        functions of the District Offices, including:

            There is a need to realign the functions of the Deputy Commissioners/District
             Collector so that he concentrates on the core functions such as land and revenue
             administration, maintenance of law and order, disaster management, public
             distribution and civil supplies, excise, elections, transport, census, protocol, general
             administration, treasury management and Coordination with various agencies/
             departments.
            Steps should be taken to ensure that the Collector plays an effective coordination role
             in activities and programmes of other Departments at the district level.

    45. The organization charts of District Offices illustrate their functions.4 The documents
        indicate that the Deputy Commissioner has many constitutional and legal responsibilities.
        It was indicated, however, that some of the DC functions are not constitutionally required,
        possibly including development activities. The DC also chairs many Committees, and
        there have been recommendations by the various Reform Commissions that the number of
        Committees could be significantly reduced.

    46. Many line Departments of the State have personnel in the regions, with complex
        reporting lines to the department and the DC. A typical District Office employs about
        10,000 persons, of which about 15% are lowest level (drivers, office help, etc.), and about
        80% level 2 and 3 who do the case work. These personnel are organized in Branches, and
        many of them have dual reporting, both to the DC and to line Departments (e.g., Revenue,
        Rural development).

    47. The diagnostic revealed a number of challenges. Reports reviewed, as well as
        interviewees noted that the District organizations are difficult to manage, the management
        system is limited, and the DC himself is seriously overloaded. This challenge can be
        exacerbated by the lack of delegation of authority to lower levels, so that many issues
        (including issues of minor importance) are required to rise to the top for decision.

    48. Restructuring the organization and functions of the District Offices could be critical
        to the success of the reform. One approach for analyzing institutions in terms of
        mandate, structure, resources, capacity, and overall functionality, and for proposing
        specific recommendations in these areas, is to conduct Functional Reviews. Assam could
        consider the idea of undertaking a Functional Review of the District Offices. There are a
        number of options for proceeding, for example it would be possible to begin with a small
        number of Offices rather than doing them all at once. Including the Panchayats in the

4The team was provided with a couple of organization charts of a typical Deputy Commissioner’s Office in hard
copy.

                                                       19
         Review is a possibility, as it would create a cohesive approach to front-line delivery
         reform, but this merits a discussion about the status of the decentralization effort in Assam.
         A good starting point could be to focus on the District/Block/Circle level in the initial
         phase.

      49. The World Bank has extensive experience with conducting Functional Reviews in
          many countries, and could provide assistance to Assam if this appears to be an
          effective approach. Experience elsewhere shows that Functional Reviews may result in
          far-reaching reform recommendations including potential changes in job responsibilities,
          changes in lines of reporting, and options for organizational restructuring. As Functional
          Reviews are time-consuming, and also raise expectations, it would be advisable to use this
          tool only if there is a clear vision and strong support for implementing changes suggested
          by the review. See more detail of Functional Reviews in Annex 4.

                PAC Actions Table 4: Organization and Functions of District Offices

PAC               Possible Initiatives   How feasible?   Comments                       Include in
                  for Inclusion in the   (initial                                       Action Plan?
                  Action Plan            estimate)                                      (M, S, C, W)
Organization      1. Functional Review   To be           A project to carry out
and Functions     of District Offices    determined      functional reviews in the
of District                                              Regions, even for a small
Offices                                                  number, will be substantial.
                                                         On the other hand, it may
                                                         have a good payoff in
                                                         terms of service delivery
                                                         given the centrality of
                                                         these Offices to the
                                                         delivery system at
                                                         grassroots level.




                                                    20
 PAC’s Group 5: Administrative Issues

 50. The analysis revealed that a complexity of administrative procedures can impact service
     delivery. Simplification and streamlining of procedures, reduction in processing levels, and
     the “Paperless Office” were identified as important priorities. The AR&T Department is
     currently working on a procedures manual.

 51. There could be an opportunity to streamline procurement procedures. Officials noted that
     even small items for offices can require complex and time consuming procedures. One senior
     official indicated that: “There are multiple levels for decision making and various approvals
     such as administrative, technical and financial, which are repetitive in nature and time
     consuming, which hinder timely delivery of services”. A second official indicated that “old
     and outdates laws and procedures” is a huge problem. The “Manual of Office Procedure” is
     out-outdated; it does not take account of the introduction of digitization into office work.

 52. The Assam Administrative Reform Commission included the following recommendation :
     “The Manual of Office Procedure (Secretariat) 1981 should be updated, simplified, and
     adequate number of copies should be printed. The current Manual is old, bulky, and almost
     out of print, though the main ideas contained therein are still valid”. There is also a separate
     Manual of Office Procedures for District and Subordinate Offices (1983), but only a partial
     version could be found on the internet. The introduction to this Manual states that it is based
     on the Assam Record Handbook, 1925.

                             PAC Actions Table 5: Administrative Issues

PAC              Possible Initiatives   How feasible?    Comments                        Include in
                 for Inclusion in the                                                    Action
                 Action Plan            (initial                                         Plan?
                                        estimate)
                                                                                         (M, S, C,
                                                                                         W)

Administrative   1. Revise the Manual   High             The revision could identify
Issues           of Office Procedures                    and address the main
                                                         inefficiencies in the current
                                                         procedures.

                                                         The Manual could address
                                                         departments and DC
                                                         offices.

                                                         A team could be formed to
                                                         prepare a new Manual and
                                                         drive forward adoption and
                                                         implementation.




                                                    21
III.   THE WAY FORWARD

53. This note proposes for consideration over 30 actions to address the identified Public
    Administration Constraints. The PAC’s themselves were generally agreed upon during the
    World Bank team missions to Assam in February 2013, and were confirmed on the team
    mission in May 2013.

54. The next stage is a detailed review of this document within the Assam Administration.
    This will now be undertaken by the AR&T and IT Departments, who will circulate it to other
    Departments and seek their input. In particular, Assam could carefully review the proposed
    actions in the Tables, and agree upon a list of potential actions to address the PAC’s.

55. Reforms may require a selective and gradual approach. The full list of options identified
    in this report can probably not be undertaken within a short period. Trying to do too much at
    once could be counterproductive, which suggests a further prioritization of reform measures.
    Once the World Bank team receives from Assam the potential list, the team will prepare a
    draft Strategic Action Plan for discussion and finalization by the Stakeholders Workshop to be
    held late in 2013. A summary of the proposed next five steps is in the Table below.




                                               22
                                             Proposed Next Steps

Steps                               Responsibility         Output


1. Circulation of this document     AR&T and IT            Discussion of the actions proposed in the
to Departments in Assam             Departments            document and views on their inclusion in
                                                           the Strategic Action Plan.
Consideration could be given to
including the DC Offices                                   Other actions may be proposed.


2. Collection and consolidation     AR&T and IT            Revised list of potential Actions for
of the views across the Assam       Departments            inclusion in the Strategic Action Plan
Departments

3. Preparation of Draft Strategic   World Bank Team        Draft Strategic Action Plan
Action Plan

4. Review of Draft Strategic        AR&T and IT            (Revised) Draft Strategic Action Plan
Action Plan                         Departments
                                    Stakeholders’          Strategic Action Plan for adoption by the
5. Finalization of the Strategic    Workshop               Government of Assam.
Action Plan



General Issues

56. The task of agreeing upon a final list to propose to the Stakeholders Workshop could
    follow consideration of a set of general issues and specific criteria . A critical strategic
    decision is how broadly to focus the reform effort. One approach for making this
    determination would be as follows: (i) undertake a comprehensive reform effort of all
    significant Public Administration Constraints which affect service delivery; (ii) conduct a
    more targeted reform effort but still undertake some carefully selected actions across
    government to improve service delivery; or (iii) conduct a reform effort which focuses
    exclusively on identified services for reform at Departmental level, and address Public
    Administration reforms solely within the given institutions that are delivering the identified
    service. A number of considerations are relevant here.

57. First, it would be important to confirm the main objectives of the Strategic Action Plan.
    The objective of the Action Plan could address horizontal public administration constraints
    that affect negatively the effort to improve G2C service delivery. This takes account of
    international and national reviews that confirm that it is difficult to make significant
    improvements in service delivery with a narrow focus on specific services which is also
    important but not sufficient. Service delivery reform requires broader reform of political and
    administrative behavior in order to be effective and sustainable.


58. Second, Assam the appropriate time frame for the Strategic Action Plan could be
    determined. The analysis suggests that a reasonable time frame could be somewhere between

                                                      23
   3 and 5 years. It is difficult to complete many of the proposed actions in less than 3 years, and
   experience shows that anything longer than 5 years is likely to lose its relevance. The time
   frame is an important decision, and it will affect the selection of actions to be included.

59. Third, the Government of Assam could agree upon a system and focal point for the
    management of the Action Plan, including how Assam is going to drive actions that require
    implementation by Departments other than the AR&T and IT Departments. A monitoring
    framework will have to be included. As noted above, driving a horizontal reform process
    requires top-level engagement. While such a commitment is being developed, it might be
    more realistic to focus the Action Plan on activities that can be managed directly by the AR&T
    and IT Departments.

Criteria for selecting Specific Activities to be Included in the Action Plan

60. The following criteria might be applied to select actions to be included in the Action
    Plan:

      Is the proposed action within the competency of Assam, or does it touch on Union
       competencies? It would generally be more effective to focus on activities that are wholly
       within the competence of Assam.

      How important is this action to achieving better service delivery? If the objective of the
       Strategic Action Plan is better service delivery, it would be important to select actions with
       maximum effect on this objective.

      How realistic is to expect that this action can be successfully achieved and completed?
       There are many public administration strategies around the world that have not reached
       their objectives. A major cause for this is lack of realism, a failure to ask questions about
       the readiness of the administration to adopt and implement the reforms.

      If completed, how likely is this action to deliver useful results? The actions proposed in
       this document are there in order to achieve specific results. But even if they are
       successfully completed, there remains a question of whether the expected outcomes would
       actually result, and/or if one might expect negative unintended consequences. It is not
       possible to determine all of this in advance, but it is worth considering, and leaving out
       activities with doubtful prospects.
       Will the proposed action give rise to strong objections from various quarters that are likely
       to derail it? Serious objections from important players in the system need to be anticipated
       and addressed.

      Is there a significant cost associated with this proposed action, and is there a likely source
       of financing to meet this cost? The costs of the selected activities would have to be
       assessed. For some of the proposed activities, the World Bank project may provide
       financing, but it would be useful to identify these carefully and early.




                                                24
            ANNEX 1: Proposed Format for Strategic Action Plan to be agreed at Stakeholders’ Workshop



           Action          Institution(s)    Success       Time line      Progress              Comments             Financial cost and
                             in charge      Indicators                   Monitoring                                   financial source
(A specific manageable                                                   (quarterly)
list to be agreed in the
Workshop)

Action 1                   Institution in   Indicators   The foreseen    Progress         Comments on actions     The required budget for
                           charge of        used for     time for        indicators       or challenges arising   implementing relevant
For example: Develop a     performing       verifying    completion of   are the          when implementing       action and budget source
policy document for        the action       the action   the action      following:       action                  planned to finance the
adoption by Cabinet                         is/was                                                                action.
including Mission,         Additional       performed                    A – entirely
Vision, Objectives and     institutions
Goals for Service          that need to                                  B – greatly
Delivery Reform            be involved
                                                                         C – partly
                           or consulted
                                                                         D – at initial
                                                                         phase
                                                                         E – not at
                                                                         all

Action 2

Etc.




                                                                 25
        ANNEX 2: Policy Statement for Adoption by the Government
1. Assam plans to move forward with an ambitious programme of service delivery
improvement using IT and supported by public administration improvements. The
programme is rooted in the NeGP and in a number of Union and Assam laws.
Commitment from the top political level, Chief Minister and the Cabinet could be
beneficial for program implementation. The various separate laws and other documents
could be reviewed to provide a clear, succinct, easily understandable statement and
commitment to improving services to citizens in a coherent and comprehensive manner.
2. It is proposed that the Cabinet of Assam consider adopting and publishing a
policy decision indicating its commitment to improving services to citizens especially
e-services. The decision could indicate clearly: (i) the objectives of the policy; (ii) the
specific results to be achieved; (iii) the focal point of responsibility for delivery (both
political and administrative); and (iv) the process for monitoring and reporting to the
public on the achievements of the policy.
3. The policy could be supported by an Action Plan that can be monitored. The
Strategic Action plan proposed for consideration by the Government could support the
policy statement, and might serve as a useful Annex to the decision.
4. The policy decision could be short, non-legalistic, and easy to understand by
citizens and might elaborate the following:
(i) Objectives of the policy
A succinct and suitable set of objectives is provided by the GoI Second Administrative
Reform Commission in its report on “Promoting e-Governance”, and these could be
easily adopted as Assam’s objectives. They are:
a. Better service delivery to citizens
b. Ushering in transparency and accountability
c. Empowering people through information
d. Improved efficiency within Governments
(ii) Specific results to be achieved
The targeted results could be both ambitious and realistic. They could include
commitment to notify a certain number of services under the RTPS and ESD, reduce the
time for provision of certain services over a given period (e.g., 3 years), open a certain
number of CSC’s, digitize certain services, etc. Some of the items from the Strategic
Action Plan could be specifically listed.
(iii) Focal point of responsibility for delivery (both political and administrative)
It could be beneficial for the implementation of the policy to identify specifically which
Member of the Cabinet (ideally the CM) would take personal responsibility for delivering

                                             26
the results, and which senior civil servant would be assigned to supervise the delivery.
The senior civil servant could report to the responsible Member of Cabinet. Unless it is
the Chief Secretary, the policy might have to specify the authority given to the
responsible civil servant to manage the activities across government.
(iv) Process for monitoring and reporting to the public on the achievements of the policy
The senior civil servant assigned to supervise delivery could be given authority to
monitor progress as per the Action Plan. This could include an instruction to all
Departments to report results according to an agreed format at the agreed times. The role
of the responsible Member of Cabinet could specifically include regular (quarterly or
semi-annually) progress reports to the public. The role could also include regular
reporting to the full Cabinet, including identification of roadblocks and proposed
solutions.




                                           27
               ANNEX 3: SURVEY OF ASSAM GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
1. A number of the PAC’s identified in this report deal with staff capacity and
performance, but there is insufficient information in Assam about the causes of the
problems, and the best approaches to address these PACs. A staff survey could
provide some useful information about problems and solutions. In addition, a staff survey
can have other useful impacts, such as raising awareness of staff-related issues, and
giving staff the satisfaction of being involved and listened to. Needless to say, once a staff
survey is conducted, this is bound to raise expectations for management to listen and
respond. A survey that does not result in action can potentially have more negative than
positive impact.
2. Surveys of government employees are conducted regularly in some countries such
as the UK, Canada, and Australia.
3. The UK and Canada conduct regular surveys that cover the entire
administration, and include employees at all levels. Thus, for example, in the UK, the
2012 survey was distributed to about 480,000 employees, and completed by 297,318
people in 97 organizations (response rate of about 62%). Similarly in Canada, the 2011
survey was distributed to over 278,000 Federal Government employees in 89
organizations. The response rate was 72.2%, so that over 201,000 employees took the
time to express their views.
4. The Australian approach uses a stratified sample rather than a census approach.
The 2011 employee survey (the ninth such survey) was undertaken by the Australian
Public Service Commission. The survey was conducted by a private research company,
and sought the views of a representative sample of Australian Public Service employees
at all levels from agencies with at least 100 employees. The survey involved a stratified
random sample of 17,326 employees. In all, 10,222 valid responses were received,
representing a 59% response rate.
5. A Civil Services Survey was also conducted in India in 2010. However, unlike the
case of the other countries, where the survey covered employees at all levels, the India
survey covered only selected services, and only employees at the higher levels. The
survey addressed 18,432 persons, and the response rate was about 26% (4,808 responses).
Although the results of this survey cannot provide direct knowledge about the situation in
Assam, there is much to learn from the questions used, and some of them could be used if
it is decided to conduct a survey in Assam.
6. It would be useful to consider conducting a staff survey in Assam, and including
employees from all levels. A decision in principle could be taken before proceeding to
planning, deciding on a specific approach, costing, and implementation. In the process of
designing the survey and the questionnaire, it would be very useful to consult with those
who carried out civil service surveys in various countries and, in particular, the ARPG
which conducted the survey in India.
7. There are a number of options for carrying out the survey, and it could be
considered involving a professional firm in the design and implementation. One

                                             28
option is a sample, the other option is to involve all employees (as in the UK and Canada)
and aim for a good level of response. This full-coverage approach allows for comparisons
between organizations (Departments, DC’s) and, as such, has both advantages and risks.
As to method, there is the possibility of an online survey, or a paper distribution (or a
combination of both). There are good examples of questions from many previous
surveys, but it would be critical to focus on priority questions for Assam. The number of
questions that can be included is somewhat limited, as it appears from past experience
that the time required for responding should not be too long (20-30 minutes), or there will
be a serious drop in completion rate.
8. Details of the surveys, results, and questionnaires can be found in the following
websites:
      India:

   http://www.accountabilityindia.in/sites/default/files/blogfiles/1375_civilservicessurve
   yreport2010.pdf
      UK:
   http://www.civilservice.gov.uk/about/improving/employee-engagement-in-the-civil-
   service/people-survey-2012

      Canada:
   http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pses-saff/2011/introduction-eng.asp
      Australia:
   http://www.apsc.gov.au/about-the-apsc/parliamentary/state-of-the-service/employee-
   survey-results




                                            29
            ANNEX 4: FUNCTIONAL REVIEW OF DISTRICT OFFICES

(i) What is a Functional Review?
1. The starting point for Functional Review is the assumption that public
administration institutions exist to perform functions in order to achieve the
objectives of the political system on behalf of society, and that only the performance of
these functions justifies their existence, their structures, their activities, and their
resources. The purpose of Functional Reviews is to assist governments in moving toward
a situation whereby public administration institution collectively, and each institution
individually, perform all the necessary functions and only the necessary functions, in the
most efficient and effective manner. A Functional Review begins with an attempt to
clarify the roles, missions and objectives of the administrative bodies under study, and to
derive from these the relevant functional requirements.
2. In theory, Functional Reviews can have four primary objectives:

      To eliminate redundant functions. Any function performed by the institution for
       which no justification can be found is a candidate for elimination. The purpose of
       eliminating functions can be cost-savings, but might also improve internal
       operations of the institution, remove unnecessary burdens from the private sector,
       reduce the need for internal coordination, and improve transparency.

      To reduce duplication between and within institutions. All administrative
       systems are a product of gradual development, and tend to develop duplications
       over time. Functional Reviews can be used to examine the system critically in
       order to identify such duplications. This is a different objective from eliminating
       redundant functions.

      To add missing functions. In some cases, it is discovered that the institution is
       not performing optimally because certain functions are not assigned. One example
       is internal coordination, another is human resources management. Some large
       organizations (and the District Offices are large organizations) are hampered by
       insufficient attention to such important management functions.

      To rationalize the distribution of functions. Functions within institutions are
       often split between different units in ways that reduce performance efficiency and
       transparency. For example, two different units may be delivering services to the
       same entities. In such cases, the purpose is to co-locate similar functions in order
       to improve service delivery and reduce the need for internal coordination.

3. Functional Reviews are conducted on the basis of a fairly standard methodology,
adjusted in each case to the institutions under study. The methodology identifies the
functions performed by the institutions, and then provides indication on whether each
function should be:
     Abolished because it is not required to in the public interests, or there is no
       demand for them from the public

                                            30
      Transferred to another institution because there are greater synergies with other
       sectors
      Reduced in quality of volume because it is not a priority function relative to the
       goals of the institution
      Rationalized with other similar types of function within the institution to realize
       economies of scale, and improve decision making, communication, and service
       delivery
      Decentralized to lower levels of government
      Privatized fully or partially

4. Once it has been decided which existing or new functions will remain, the
functions are grouped into organizational units on the basis of agreed principles.
The next phase of the Review deals with developing the institutional structures to
perform the necessary functions, including management, reporting, and estimates of the
human resources needed. In the case of a review that covers a number of similar
institutions, as in the case of the District Offices in Assam, an attempt is made to make
the institutions as similar as possible (although local conditions are taken into account
and can create exceptions and modifications to this principle).

(ii) Why conduct a functional Review of District Offices?

5. There is widespread concern over the structure, functions, and capacity of the
District Office (Deputy Commissioner’s Office). The insufficient organizational and
personnel capacity in the offices of Deputy Commissioners and the subordinate offices is
often noted as well as the inconsistency of personnel numbers and workload between the
various District Offices. The problem is also noted by reports about public administration
in India and Assam. As the frontline office for many of the services being reformed, the
functioning of these offices is of critical importance. In fact, it would be difficult to
improve services significantly without addressing the performance of the District Offices
which act as the point of interface with citizens on many of the services under
consideration. In addition, a comprehensive review of these offices could assist any
process of decentralization of functions to the Panchayats.

(iii) How to conduct a Functional Review of the District Offices

6. The first issue is a decision in principle to conduct Functional reviews. While there
is a fairly well-developed methodology, the decision would need to address the scope of
the review. There are a number of options. The first is to cover all the offices, but this
task would be very large and difficult to manage in a reasonable time. The second is to
pick a sample of, for example, 5 offices with the intention of developing general
recommendations that would apply to all the offices. There is also a possibility of
choosing just one office, but it is unlikely that such a review would support general
recommendations; thus, this type of narrow approach is not advisable. Another issue is
how far down to go, and especially whether to include the Panchayats. The design of the
functional review process could consider the service delivery chain closest to the citizens


                                            31
but also maintain a practical focus on where and how most citizens currently access
services. This may well result in a primary focus on the District/Block/Circle level, and a
secondary focus on Panchayats. Given the country’s continued devolution process, it
would be useful to design the study in such a way that it can shed light on the
functional/organization realities and needs of Panchayats.

7. Functional Reviews could require an expert team of consultants working closely
with Assam, especially the District Offices. Their day-to-day cooperation in the study
could be critical, and they will probably need to establish a Working Group to cooperate
with the study team. The World Bank has extensive experience with conducting
Functional Reviews in many countries, and could potentially provide assistance on this to
Assam if this seems like the right way to proceed. However, experience elsewhere shows
that Functional Reviews often result in far-reaching reform recommendations including
proposed changes in job responsibilities, changes in lines of reporting, and organizational
restructuring. As Functional Reviews are time-consuming, and also raise expectations,
such reviews are best undertaken when the Government considers them in conjunction
with the subsequent implementation phase and envisages to take action based on the
recommendations.




                                            32
