Report No: ACS21875




Republic of Moldova
Moldova Country Gender Action Plan


April 2017




GSU03

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA




                          1
2
Standard Disclaimer:




This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The finding
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or t
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colo
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning t
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and w
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearan
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                          3
Contents

 I.       Background ....................................................................................................................................... 5
 II.      Objectives and Structure .................................................................................................................. 5
 III. Key Gender Issues in Moldova ............................................................................................................. 6
 IV.         Government Priorities on Gender Equality................................................................................... 9
 V. Gender in the WBG Program .............................................................................................................. 11
 VI. Proposed Actions for the Moldova CGAP .......................................................................................... 14
       6.1. Gender mainstreaming (cross-cutting activities) ......................................................................... 15
       6.2. Country gender equality outcomes ............................................................................................. 16
 Bibliography ............................................................................................................................................ 22
 ANNEX ..................................................................................................................................................... 24
 Summary of Key Gender Issues in Moldova ........................................................................................... 24
       Occupational segregation and earnings gap ....................................................................................... 24
       Discrepancies in labor force participation .......................................................................................... 26
       Entrepreneurship and livelihoods ....................................................................................................... 27
       Voice, agency, and gender-based violence ......................................................................................... 29
       Healthy lifestyles and behaviors ......................................................................................................... 31




                                                                             4
      I.       Background

The expectation in the IDA18 and World Bank Group’s Corporate Scorecard’s targets is that all country
strategies should promote equitable gender outcomes, and include targeted actions to this end. The
approach requires that objectives be set at the country level and respond to the local context. According
to the Bank’s operational policy, country strategies should draw on and discuss the findings of gender
diagnostics, including Systematic Country Diagnostics, which starting in FY16 are required to incorporate
gender in their analytical frameworks. In practice, recent gender evaluations show that while Country
Program Frameworks often discuss gender-related issues in the country context, they do not present a
logical chain that links background analysis with actions, pillars, and indicators.

The World Bank Group Gender Strategy: FY17-FY23, approved by the Board in December 2015, seeks
to deepen country engagement on gender, shifting the focus to measurable results, and addressing
four strategic objectives: (i) improving human endowments, as reflected in health and education
outcomes; (ii) removing constraints for more and better jobs, including a focus on enabling factors, such
as policy frameworks for care services, infrastructure and transportation, skills and occupational
segregation; (iii) removing barriers to human ownership and control of assets with a focus on land,
housing, financial services, and agricultural supply chains; and (iv) enhancing women’s agency and voice,
including support for gender diversity in leadership positions, and efforts to prevent and reduce gender-
based violence.

The Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Region is preparing a Regional Gender Action Plan in FY17. The
RGAP envisions deepening of the Bank’s engagement and impact on gender through upstream and
Country-level Gender Action Plans (CGAP). A CGAP builds on the Bank’s comparative advantage as it
seeks to leverage the Bank’s lending, analytical work, policy dialogue, and Bank resources (staff and
financial) to address agreed specific priority gender outcome(s). The CGAP is therefore an instrument to
help the country team articulate what the Bank is doing to advance gender equality outcomes, identify
concrete actions, and describe the contribution of the country portfolio to the Bank’s strategic objective
and corporate goals on gender. The CGAP will preferably be consistent with the CPF in terms of
timeline. The CGAP priority actions will also be chosen in the framework of CPF negotiations with the
Government.


      II.      Objectives and Structure

This document presents a Country Gender Action Plan for Moldova.1 The objective of the CGAP is to
synthesize priority gender issues in the Moldova context, and identify entry points through which the
WBG country program can be both more gender-responsive, and contribute in advancing gender
equality goals. It proposes to do this by identifying priority action areas that can be pursued through
knowledge work, projects, and programs in the upcoming Country Partnership Framework FY18-22
between the WBG and the Moldovan Government.


Specifically, the CGAP seeks to:

1
    One of two pilot CGAPs in ECA region along with Armenia.

                                                         5
     (i)        Propose interventions and outcome indicators within the WBG’s policy, operational, and/or
                analytic program that can advance key gender equality outcomes in the country;
     (ii)       Propose mechanisms and indicators for effective mainstreaming of gender in the portfolio,
                i.e., to ensure that gender analysis, actions, and monitoring are consistently incorporated in
                the country program and progress on agreed gender targets is systematically recorded.

The CGAP is organized as follows:
     Key gender issues in Moldova: a succinct diagnostic of the gender challenges in the country and
       their relevance to pursuing the WBG’s twin goals2.
     Gender in the World Bank portfolio: an overview of progress on gender mainstreaming in the
       WBG portfolio in Moldova as well as ongoing and intended future actions by project teams;
     Proposed actions for the Moldova CGAP: an action matrix identifying selected gender issues,
       causes, and potential interventions where gender analysis or activities can have the greatest
       impact.

III. Key Gender Issues in Moldova

By global and regional standards, gender equality is high in Moldova. The most recent Global Gender
Gap Index of the World Economic Forum (2015) ranks Moldova 26th out of 145 countries, behind only
Latvia and Estonia among East European and former Soviet states.3 The country has close to universal
primary and secondary education completion rates that are equal for boys and girls, and a high
university completion rate with 58% of university graduates being female. Gender discrepancies in labor
force participation are relatively low and women are slightly more likely than men to hold secure, albeit
less well-paid, public sector jobs.

Table 1: Global Gender Equality Gap Index, ECA states, 2016
Rank     Country
18       Latvia
22       Estonia
26       Lithuania
26       Moldova
30       Belarus
38          Poland
41          Bulgaria
48          Serbia
51          Kazakhstan
62          Albania
68          Croatia
73          Macedonia
75          Russian Federation
76          Romania
77          Czech Republic

2
 A more detailed analysis of gender issues in Moldova is presented in Annex. World Bank. (2014a) is the latest
comprehensive Country Gender Assessment conducted by the World Bank in Moldova.
3
 World Economic Forum, 2016. Moldova ranks 26th on gender equality overall, 15th on Economic Participation and Opportunity;
52nd on Educational Attainment; 40th on Health and Survival; and 58th on Political Empowerment. Moldova’s ranking has
declined from the previous year – from 18 to 26th.
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GGGR16/WEF_Global_Gender_Gap_Report_2016.pdf

                                                            6
81      Kyrgyz Republic
83      Bosnia
86      Azerbaijan
89      Montenegro
90      Georgia
93      Tajikistan
94      Slovak Republic
101     Hungary
102     Armenia
130     Turkey
Source: World Economic Forum (2016)

In terms of legislation, Moldova has also made substantial progress. Gender equality provisions exist in
the Constitution and in the Law on Ensuring Equal Opportunities for Men and Women (2006). As of
2016, Law 71 introduced a 40% quota for women in political party lists, and lists for cabinet nominees.
Another recent Law (# 196, approved in July 2016) has strengthened protection mechanisms for victims
of gender-based violence.4 In December 2016 Moldova signed the Council of Europe Convention on
Preventing and Combatting Violence against Women and Domestic Violence as a condition under
Moldova’s EU Association Agreement. A National Action Plan on this topic is under preparation.
Moldova has an established government-led mechanism (the Gender Equality Coordination Council) to
mainstream gender equality in policy. This body has recently completed a new National Gender Equality
Strategy 2016-2020 (the specific elements of this policy are discussed in section IV below.

However, according to both the Global Gender Equality Index and the National Gender Equality Index
developed by the Moldova Partnership for Development Center, the level of gender equality on key
indicators is declining. The Moldova National GEI5 was developed in order to measure progress of the
Government’s new National Gender Equality Strategy. It is based on 31 indicators in 6 areas: (i) labor
market; (ii) politics; (iii) education; (iv) access to resources; (v) perceptions and stereotypes, and (vi)
health. During 2009-14, 4 out of 6 areas registered declines, with deterioration being most evident in
the labor market where the index score decreased from 70 to 63.6 The same center conducted an
assessment of 25 policies adopted by Parliament between 2012 and 2014 concluding that none have
specifically considered gender issues.

Evidence indicates that gender discrepancies persist within important areas of social and economic
life.7 The Moldova Country Gender Assessment of 2014 (Moldova: Gender Disparities in Endowments
and Access to Economic Opportunities) confirms that while gaps in gender outcomes are low, men and
women do face distinct challenges. Women find it more difficult to integrate in higher-earning positions


4
  Law 196 introduces the so-called “urgent restriction order? which gives police officers prerogative to order offender’s exclusion
from the household on the spot; it also provides for free legal assistance to victims, and a website to raise awareness about
services offered.
5
  The National Gender Equality Index was developed by a Moldovan think tank, Partnership for Development Center, as a way to
measure progress of the National Gender Equality Strategy. More details available at:
http://www.progen.md/?pag=n&opa=view&id=333&tip=publicatii&start=&
6
  Recommendations for the National Strategy on Labor Force Participation 2017-2021, study conducted by Partnership for
Development Center with support of East-European Foundation
7
  Evidence based on: World Bank Country Gender Assessment (2014), World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (2015),
Moldova National Gender Equality Strategy (2017), Moldova Gender Equality Portal (http://egalitatedegen.md/en/), reports by
local and international organizations (UN WOMEN, Sida, Women’s Law Center, Partnership for Development Center, Soros
Foundation, see Bibliography attached)

                                                                7
and are constrained by the declining availability of affordable childcare, while men face considerably
lower health outcomes and high mortality.

The priority gender challenges in Moldova can be summarized as follows:

    1) Inequalities in the labor market
           a. Occupational segregation and earnings gap: Despite evident equality in education and
                labor force participation data, there are still significantly fewer women in higher-earning
                sectors and positions. The causes for professional segregation have not been explored in
                detail but are believed to be largely rooted in social norms perpetuated through the
                education system, labor market, and media. Expanding women’s access to higher-skilled
                and higher-earning jobs is particularly important in the current demographic context of
                declining and aging population and one that can help reduce dependence on social
                transfers (e.g., for women-headed households and elderly households) in the future.
           b. Discrepancies in labor force participation: Women delay for longer their entry into the
                labor force and take longer breaks from the labor force. There is a substantial difference
                in labor force participation between women with and without children (20% in 2014,
                one of the highest rates in Europe). Moreover, a declining share of women return to
                work after taking maternity leave. Despite provisions in the Labor Code that prohibit
                gender bias, it exists in the labor market, partly fostered by restrictive maternity leave
                policies, lack of flexible work arrangements, and scarce childcare options for children
                under 3.
           c. Entrepreneurship and livelihoods: Entrepreneurship can be an important gateway to
                livelihoods for both men and women, especially in rural areas where employment
                opportunities are scarcer. Entrepreneurship can give a viable alternative to women who
                may otherwise opt for migration at a high family and social cost. Women in Moldova are
                less likely to start a business, and when they do, they are less likely to expand and
                employ others. Detailed research and policies on women in business is incipient;
                available data suggests that barriers include social norms, access to productive assets,
                and the need for skills such as leadership, management, financial literacy, etc.
    2) Agency, voice, and gender-based violence: Women are under-represented in leadership
       positons in local and national government, in the legislature, among judges, senior civil servants,
       senior foreign servants, and in media. Apart from excluding women from decision-making, this
       serves to perpetuate gender norms and biases.8 In addition, Moldova has one of the highest
       rates in human trafficking (primarily as a source country) and in domestic violence in the region,
       which indicates both vulnerabilities for women on the labor market, and gaps in public
       awareness on these issues among both men and women.
    3) Healthy lifestyles and behaviors: Mortality and morbidity is significantly higher among men,
       driven by unhealthy lifestyles, road and work-related injuries, and the fact that men access
       health services at much lower rates than women.

Research and advocacy work by government, development institutions and CSOs active on this agenda
in Moldova indicate that the persistence of these gender gaps is due to prevalent social norms
reinforced by education, media, and labor market as well as with a lack of effective implementation

8
 As an example, in last year’s presidential election the marital and motherhood status of one of the leading candidates was an
important part of the political and media campaign by her opposition. http://www.rferl.org/a/moldova-sandu-smears-orthodox-
church-pro-eu-candidate-russia/28108474.html

                                                               8
and enforcement of existing legislation. In some cases, progress in legislation has to be followed up
with secondary regulations, guidelines, awareness, and capacity-building efforts. This would ensure that
the relevant agencies are able to apply and enforce the existing high-quality laws, and promote change
in institutional and decision-making culture that would ultimately make an impact on gender equality.
For example, amendments to the Labor Code need to be followed up with detailed guidance on gender-
balanced job announcements, hiring and promotion practices, equal pay for equal work, etc. On other
aspects—such as maternity, childcare, and flexible work arrangements—further policy discussion and
regulatory changes may be needed to prevent disruptions of women’s inclusion in the labor market.
Legal progress on voice and representation for women through quotas also needs to be accompanied by
behavioral and cultural change—including through role of media—to encourage meaningful inclusion of
women in decision-making roles at the local and national level. Judicial protection for victims of violence
should also be accompanied by liveilhood and economic empowerment programs and services that can
give meaningful options to potential victims of trafficking or violence to change their situation.

A more detailed discussion on the gender issues listed above is included in the Annex. These issues are
further summarized in section ‘6.3. Country gender equality outcomes’ in a proposed CGAP Action
Matrix that links the gender issues to the current and planned WBG portfolio in Moldova, and suggested
targets for enhancing WBG impact on key gender equality outcomes in the country.



       IV.      Government Priorities on Gender Equality

National priorities on gender focus on equality in the labor market, increasing women’s
representation in politics, improving the enabling environment for women entrepreneurs and
combating gender-based violence. Moldova has recently elaborated its new Gender Equality Strategy
2016-2020 [to confirm its official approval] that aims to mainstream gender in a wide range of policy
areas including health, education, social services, labor market, women, peace and security, climate
change and disaster management, political participation, etc. The Ministry of Labor, Health, and Social
Affairs has the mandate to coordinate implementation of this program across Government. However,
government agencies in each sector are responsible for allocating financial resources, or directing donor
funding, towards areas under their mandate that are not covered by the national budget.9

Table 2 below summarizes the general and specific objectives of the National Gender Equality
Strategy. The priorities identified by the National Strategy are closely aligned with the World Bank
Groups activities and outcomes, as proposed in the CGAP Matrix above.

Table 2: Objectives of the Draft National Gender Equality Strategy 2016-2020
General Objectives (GO)       Specific objectives (SO)
GO 1:Adopting a               Women’s participation in decision making
comprehensive approach        SO 1.1: Consolidating institutional and legal mechanisms which aim at women’s
to promoting gender           advancement in decision making processes
equality
                              Labor market and gender wage gaps
                              SO 1.2: Legislative amendments to adopt European standards on equal pay for equal
                              work



9
    http://www.mmpsf.gov.md/ro/content/strategia-pentru-asigurarea-egalitatii-de-gen-republica-moldova-pentru-anii-2016-2020

                                                               9
                               Social Protection and Family Policies
                               SO 1.3: Equitable representation of the needs of women and men in social policies
                               SO 1.4: Improving social policies on families with children to ensure equitable
                               involvement of both parents in child care
                               SO1.5: Improving social assistance policies and services through integrating gender
                               dimensions

                               Health Care
                               SO 1.6: Incorporating gender dimensions in medical staff training
                               SO 1.7: Promoting healthy behaviors during life cycles for men and women aiming at
                               increased accessibility to health care services

                               Education
                               SO 1.8: Integrating gender dimensions in teacher’s training aiming to overcome gender
                               stereotypes and increase awareness on gender related issues
                               SO 1.9: Incorporating gender aspects in career consulting services targeting increased
                               access to less conventional professions

                               Climate change
                               SO 1.10: Integrating gender perspectives in sector strategies taking into account climate
                               change impacts

GO 2: Enhancing national       SO 2.1: Building capacity for human resources within the institutional mechanism on
institutional mechanism        gender equality at the level of central public administration
on gender equality             SO 2.2: Increasing efficiency of the Government Committee on Gender Equality
                               SO 2.3: Capacity building for human resources within the institutional mechanism on
                               gender equality at the level of local public administration

GO 3: Combating gender         SO 3.1: Promoting gender-balanced content in media and publicity industries
stereotypes and advancing      SO 3.2: Public awareness raising on gender stereotypes and non-violent communication
non-violent
communication

GO 4: Ensuring gender          SO 4.1 Ensuring equal participation of women and men
equality in security and       SO 4.2 Integrating gender dimensions in security and defense policies
defense fields                 SO 4.3 Ensuring implementation of CEDAW’s general recommendation #30 and UN
                               Security Council Resolutions on women, peace, and security

GO 5: Integrating gender       SO 5.1: Promoting gender dimensions in budgetary processes
sensitive budgeting in         SO 5.2: Enhancing awareness raising on the needs and importance of gender sensitive
budgetary planning             budgeting for decision makers at the national and local levels
processes

As mentioned above, between 2006 and 2016, the Government adopted a number of laws concerning
gender equality. Most recently, Law 71 which introduced political representation quotas, also amended
15 other national laws to include more gender-sensitive provisions; for example, prohibiting sexist
language and images in media and advertizing, allowing a 14-day paid paternity leave, establishing a
process for overseeing implemetation of the Gender Equality Strategy, etc.10 However, the
implementation and enforcement of legislation is still weak.

10
  UN WOMEN, http://eca.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2016/06/moldova-takes-historic-step-to-promote-gender-equality-in-
politics

                                                          10
In addition to this process, in June 2015, a Gender Equality Platform was established by a group of
government and CSO champions. This platform aims to serve as an active and unified voice to advance
gender equality and, in particular, contribute to improving and enforcing gender equality legislation. This
initiative has resulted in the creation of a website that collects resources on gender equality, and advocacy
activities focusing on: (i) promoting equitable representation of women in politics; (ii) preventing and combating
gender-based violence; (iii) promoting a better environment for gender equality in the labor market; (iv)
facilitating women enterpreneurship; and (v) ensuring a functional institutional mechanism for gender
equality.11

For the National Gender Equality Strategy to be effective, it is also necessary to strengthen the
institutional mechanisms for gender equality policy and oversight. Commitments on gender are fairly
decentralized. The Government Committee on Gender Equality has not been consolidated as a key
structure to lead on gender equality issues in the country; it has relatively low capacity, funding, and
power to hold different Government actors accountable for commitments on gender equality.
Enforcement of gender equality legislation remains a key challenge.12 Such enforcement would entail
producing relevant guidance, training and capacity building for each respective agency to uphold gender
diversity standards (for example, in job advertising, hiring, promotion procedures for public and private
employers, etc.).


Several international development partners support aspects of the national gender equality agenda in
Moldova. UN Women leads programs directed at issues of gender based violence, leadership and
political participation, economic empowerment, national planning and budgeting. The Embassy of
Sweden and UNDP are implementing three programs to support women’s participation in politics and
decision-making. EBRD and the Embassy of Sweden provide joint support to the Moldova Women in
Business program. The EU and CoE support the alignment of legislation, policies, and capacity-building
efforts with EU standards on areas on human rights and equality, including gender equality. OSCE
implements an anti-trafficking and gender program.


V. Gender in the WBG Program

WBG analytics and operations have an important role to play in addressing occupational segregation
and labor force participation issues through education and labor interventions, opening up
opportunities for women as entrepreneurs, promoting women’s participation and empowerment, as
well as change towards healthier lifestyles for men. WBG lending and knowledge products can
contribute to establishing the evidence base for linkages between gender equality and social and
economic empowerment, pilot specific skills, training, or capacity-building programs, bring good practice
knowledge in public awareness and communications on gender issues, as well as help build
government’s capacity for establishing better statistics and continuous monitoring of gender outcomes.




11
     http://egalitatedegen.md/noi/
12
     Gender Equality Strategy , 2016-2020

                                                       11
A review of 15 projects active under the 2014-17 CPS shows a growing trend of gender analysis and
gender monitoring.13 Two thirds of projects are informed by some form of gender analysis, and the wide
majority include gender indicators in their results framework (RF). Overall, 80% of projects can be
considered gender-informed, i.e., meeting at least two out of three criteria: gender analysis, actions,
and/or monitoring. A positive trend is also notable when comparing projects approved between FY11
and FY13 with ones approved under the current CPS period (2014-17): 100% of projects approved in or
after FY14 are informed by gender analysis and have gender-related indicators. At the design stage,
gender is integrated either through project-specific analysis (part of a social assessment, PSIA, or
baseline survey),14 or through review of secondary data (household survey, sector-specific data,
evaluations or analysis done under previous projects).15 Moldova’s First and Second DPOs, approved in
2014 and 2016 respectively, are grounded in gender-informed PSIA work.16 Gender monitoring, in the
majority of projects, consists of collecting gender-disaggregated data on beneficiaries.



Fig 1 & 2: Share of active projects that are gender informed in each dimension (analysis, actions, M&E); Share of
projects by date of approval that incorporate gender in each dimension

           % projects active in CPS 14-17 period                         % projects by date of approval that
             that incorporate gender in each                           incorporate gender in each dimension
                        dimension                               120
     100                                                        100
      80                                                          80
      60
                                                                  60
      40
      20                                                          40
       0                                                          20
                                                                  0
                                                                           analysis          action          M&E

                                                                          approved 2011-13       approved 2014-17



Although the portfolio is thoroughly ‘gender-informed’, it still faces challenges in terms of having a
transformational impact on key gender equality issues in the country. It is positive that all projects
conduct gender-disaggregated monitoring of beneficiaries. However, only one project incorporates and
reports on a gender-specific target (50% female beneficiaries in the E-Transformation project), and no
projects target gender equality outcomes in their results framework. The rate of gender-specific actions
in project design (53%) is less than that of analysis or M&E. Moreover, a large share of projects that
report gender actions at the design stage do not provide evidence of these during implementation,
which may indicate that the share of gender activities actually implemented is even lower. It can be
expected that not all projects by design will provide a natural link to advancing gender equality
outcomes. However, in cases where the project has the potential to affect gender equality goals, further
13
   Based on a portfolio review of 15 active Investment Project Financing (IPFs) implemented in Moldova in the course of the
CPS FY14-17. The review does not include TF projects. The assessment is based on preparation and appraisal documents (e.g.,
PADs, CNs, and PIDs) and available implementation and supervision documents (e.g., ISRs, AMs, and POMs) recorded in the
Operations Portal. Ratings have been cross-checked with data from the Gender CCSA.
14
   Local Roads Improvement Project, Tax Administration Project, and District Heating Efficiency Improvement Project.
15
   Moldova Health Transformation Project, Moldova Education Reform AF, and Agriculture Competitiveness Project.
16
   DPOs are not included in the charts presented here.

                                                             12
technical support to task teams would be desirable to help design activities, adopt feasible result
indicators, and report more consistently on implementation and outcomes.

WBG’s knowledge work in Moldova is also making a strong contribution to the evidence base on
specific gender gaps. The 2015 study From Aspirations to Occupations and the Moldova SCD (2016)
highlighted the gap in occupational preferences across men and women with significantly fewer women
entering into higher-earning STEM professions, and the fact that women tend to delay longer their entry
into the labor force. A TA to Moldova’s Small and Medium Business Development Agency (ODIMM) is
undertaking the first national survey on barriers for women entrepreneurs to inform the Agency’s
Women in Business program. The findings from these knowledge products will be an important basis for
informing gender-specific actions in education, livelihoods, and competitiveness/entrepreneurship
sectors. A WB TA informed the Moldova Pension Reform Law, approved in December 2016. This Law
equalized the retirement age for men and women (at 63); it is expected to improve adequacy of
women’s pensions and benefits and reduce the income gap for retired men and women.

The preparation of the IFC’s ECA Gender Project17 included analytical work in Moldova on gender-
sensitive selection of a value chain. Three priority sectors (light industry, horticulture and honey) were
compared for the selection of a value chain which has a potential to contribute to increased women
empowerment and gender equality. Therefore, the honey value chain was selected for further in-depth
gender specific analysis as a chain with significant number of women employed and new job
opportunities, commitment of chain actors, their readiness for change, existence of some level of
organization of chain actors, low entry barriers for women entrepreneurs (time and mobility, access to
technology and assets, cultural constraints), offering new opportunities for women. The Honey Value
Chain Analysis focused on a global gender-sensitive picture of the value chain, the actors involved, their
linkages and the percentages of men and women in each chain segment. The Analysis identified
constraints and opportunities for women to participate in the value chain, the differences in power
(positions) in the value chain governance, and discovered opportunities for women to upgrade their
position. Limited access to both local and foreign markets, lack of women associations, informal
employment and skills gaps were among the major constraints.



Table 3: Gender activities and indicators in the current WBG portfolio
Project                    Gender Elements in Active WBG Program                           Type of
                                                                                           intervention
                                                                                           OPN=operational
                                                                                           M&E=indicators
                                                                                           AA=analytic

Education Reform          Disbursement linked indicator related to a functioning           M&E
Project                   Education Management information System (EMIS) (which can
                          track basic indicators such as enrollment, completion, drop-
                          rate rates by gender)
E-Transformation          % of female beneficiaries (citizens who access public services   M&E
project (P121231)         via the Government e-portal or mobile phone), 50% target
Agriculture               Communication and outreach targeted at women clients             OPN

17
  This project envisaged including Moldova, and helping to develop beekeeping / honey production value chain
and supporting female producers in this value chain; currently the project is being prepared for Armenia.

                                                       13
Competitiveness          % of women participating in communication activities            M&E
(P118518; P127125)       % of female beneficiaries
Health Transformation    Support enabling environment for men to access health care      OPN
(P144892)                services                                                        M&E
                         Tailored communication campaign to female health workers
                         Smoking prevalence (by gender)
                         % of adults with hypertension receiving treatment (by gender)
                         % of adults whose blood pressure is under control (by gender)
Strengthening            # of female beneficiaries                                       M&E
Effectiveness of SSN     # of female SSN beneficiaries
(P120913)
Local Roads              # of girls trained in road safety awareness                     M&E
Improvement              % of female beneficiaries
(P150357)
Second                   National survey to assess barriers to women entrepreneurs       AA
Competitiveness          Support to ODIMM to improve women entrepreneurship              OPN
Enhancement              program                                                         M&E
(P144103)                % of Matching Grants beneficiaries that are woman-owned or
                         have a female CEO
District Heating         Social Impact Mitigation plan for potential retrenchment to     OPN
Efficiency Improvement   include gender-specific activities (support retraining)         M&E
(P132443)                % of female beneficiaries who gained access to more energy
                         efficient cooking and/or heating generating facilities
                         % of female staff received re-training (target of 50%)
Tax Administration       Conduct gender-disaggregated satisfaction survey to inform      OPN
Modernization            improvements in tax services                                    M&E
(P127734)                100% of appropriate STI staff trained (by gender)
                         # of female STI staff trained



VI. Proposed Actions for the Moldova CGAP

This CGAP is based on a desk review of key gender issues in Moldova and of the current and upcoming
WBG country program in Moldova. This CGAP will feed into Moldova’s Country Partnership Framework
2018-2022. Specifically, it seeks to: (i) identify entry points in WBG’s policy, operational, and/or analytic
work that are aligned with WBG’s twin goals and can advance key gender equality outcomes in the
country; and (ii) propose mechanisms and indicators to ensure that gender analysis, actions, and
monitoring are consistently incorporated, and progress on agreed gender targets is systematically
recorded.

To achieve this objective, the CGAP is proposing a two track approach:
     Mainstreaming (or cross-cutting activities): ensure continuous attention to gender in the
        portfolio, identify opportunities for deepening gender analysis, actions, and/or targets in
        projects;
     Country gender equality outcomes: selectively pursue specific targets in the CPF period that are
        aligned with both the Bank portfolio as well as key gender issues in the country.

The proposed actions and metrics in these two areas are described in more detail below.



                                                       14
6.1. Gender mainstreaming (cross-cutting activities)
Activities to support gender mainstreaming would include providing technical support to task teams,
bringing up-to-date knowledge on gender to the country team, conducting periodic supervision of
gender in the portfolio, and communicating with external partners, such as Government counterparts
and development partners, active on the gender equality agenda.

Mainstreaming activities will be advanced through a Country Gender Focal Point as well as dedicated
communication efforts to disseminate successful practices in gender mainstreaming.18 These activities
will build on tasks performed by the country Gender Focal Point under the existing CPF and will aim to
strengthen the technical assistance to teams, monitoring and recording of progress and achievements in
project documents.

The CMU will designate a country gender focal point to:

          Monitor the execution of the Country Gender Action Plan, and recommend action to Task Teams
           and management to avoid slippages;
          Work with GPSURR on the updating of the CGAP at the time of the Performance and Learning
           Review;
          Bring and share information internally and externally, particularly information from the Gender
           CCSA, and information on funding sources;
          Liaise with project task teams, respective GP gender focal points, and ECADE (OPCS Gender
           review) at project preparation to ensure that task teams are considering all options to
           incorporate gender analysis, actions, and monitoring in new operations; Refer teams to relevant
           GP focal points on gender for technical advice on integrating gender in their sector.
          Represent the World Bank in gender donor coordination meetings and provide relevant inputs
           to country strategic documents, as relevant;
          Ensure that GPSURR and/or the Gender CCSA provide upstream inputs on gender to WBG
           strategic country documents, e.g., CPIA, PLR, CLR, etc.
          Collaborate with selected task teams and the communications team in the dissemination of
           stories about successful gender work emerging in the country program.

Table 4 below outlines specific commitments to be considered in Moldova’s CPF with regard to
mainstreaming gender in the country program for FY18-21. It I worth noting that already 80% of the
portfolio of projects are fully gender informed, and 100% of projects include gender analysis and
gender-sensitive monitoring. The results listed below would aim to improve the rate of reporting and
recording of gender monitoring in project documents, and encourage teams to pursue specific gender
targets, where relevant.
Table 4: Moldova CGAP Gender Mainstreaming Targets

Result                            Indicator                              Target       Responsible party
Projects aim at                                                          At least 2   TTLs and Country Gender
transformational gender           Pipeline projects incorporate          Projects     Focal Point
impacts                           gender activities and targets aiming   by 2022
                                  to close a priority gender equality
                                  gap:

18
     Practice proposed in Armenia CGAP

                                                        15
                                 -     Education Reform AF
                                 -     Skills for Jobs Project
                                 -     [Land Registration,
                                       Valuation, Taxation
                                       Project]
                                  -    [Improving Access to
                                       Justice for the Vulnerable,
                                       JSDF proposal]
Success stories on gender    # of stories disseminated internally    At least 1   TTLs, Communications
outcomes produced and        and externally                          by 2022      officer, Country Gender
disseminated                                                                      Focal Point


6.2. Country gender equality outcomes


The matrix below summarizes a range of proposed sectors, actions, and outcomes that can be pursued
in the framework of the Bank’s CPF FY18-22. These are formulated to address key gender issues in the
country—recognized in research and in the National Gender Equality Strategy—that are also aligned
with existing and planned WBG program.

The Action Matrix proposed in this CGAP includes a range of options to pursue gender equality goals
through the World Bank’s program in Moldova. The specific activities, outcomes and targets to be
adopted by the Moldova CPF can be adapted further by the respective GPs/task teams and CMU.




                                                    16
Table 5: Moldova CGAP Country Goals Action and Results Matrix

This table includes a list of key gender challenges, linkages to the WBG program and proposed interventions and results. It should be noted that
all activities and results are pending further discussion with national counterparts and may be adapted further by task teams.

In addition to actions related to the five identified gender issues, this matrix includes activities on road safety and mobility proposed by
Transport GP.

Key Gender Issue           Causes                   Interventions                                     Bank Program         Proposed Results / Indicators
Occupational               Gender norms and         Conduct review / diagnostic of curriculum to      Education Reform     Curriculum assessment conducted
segregation                stereotypes reinforced   assess gender stereotypes/norms                   AF                   and informed teacher training
     Women                by education system,
         under-            media, labor market.     Integrate gender diversity module in teacher/     Pending resources    # of teachers trained in gender
         represented in                             education policy-maker training                   and agreement of     module
         high-paying,      ‘Feminization’ of                                                          counterparts
         high-skill jobs   education and social     Initiate dialogue with Min of Education on
                           service sectors          integrating training on social issues such as
                                                    bullying, GBV, safety/cyber-safety in school
                                                    program as well as in teacher curriculum and/or
                                                    training courses

                                                    Improve information for women on skills           Skills and Jobs      Recommendations presented to Min
                                                    demand and education opportunities in STEM        Project (pipeline)   of Education to increase incentives for
                                                    fields                                            and/or related TA    women in STEM

                                                    Improve gender-disaggregated data collection      Pending resources    Gender-disaggregated statistics on
                                                    in STEM fields / Assess barriers for women to     and agreement of     youth entering STEM professional
                                                    entering STEM occupations                         counterparts         education/jobs conducted annually




                                                                           17
                                                      Assess norms and behaviors that drive hiring         SP&L ASA FY18        Research results on roots of
                                                      decisions in selected sectors                                             occupational segregation presented
                                                                                                                                to Government
                                                                                                           Pending
                                                      Soft skills training for women incorporated in       resources
                                                      vocational / active labor market programs




Discrepancies in labor   Employer bias (‘hidden       Design and deliver training module for National      Skills and Jobs      Training module designed and
force participation      discrimination’) in hiring   Employment Agency /HR professionals to               Project (pipeline)   delivered on inclusive labor/HR
     Women delay        young women due to           strengthen implementation of Labor Code                                   practices
         longer their    restrictive maternity        provisions on reducing gender bias
         entry into LF   leave policies                                                                                         Guidelines prepared and presented
         and take                                     Introduce guidelines / pilot training for
         longer breaks   Restricted childcare         removing gender bias in hiring processes
         from LF         options until age of 3
     Significant        partly due to obsolete
         difference in   and restrictive
         occupation      regulations                  Propose secondary legislation to implement           AA, DPO              Draft regulations prepared
         rates between                                gender equality provisions as per the Labor
         women with                                   Code (equal pay standards, gender equality           Pending resources    Policy options for childcare reform
         and without                                  standards in job advertising, hiring, promotion,     and counterpart      presented to Government
         children                                     etc.)                                                agreement            Draft regulation prepared/
                                                                                                                                Consultations concluded / Secondary
                                                      Reform childcare policies to introduce more          OR ‘advocacy’        legislation enacted to introduce more
                                                      flexible options for childcare services (can boost                        flexible options for childcare services
                                                      women’s employment as potential
                                                      workers/entrepreneurs in childcare services,
                                                      and their flexibility to take employment)




                                                                               18
Entrepreneurship          Traditional gender           Conduct national survey to inform the             Second             ODIMM Women in Business Program
     Women less          norms affecting              Government’s beginning Women in Business          Competitiveness    informed by results of national survey
        likely to own a   perceptions of women         Program                                           Enhancement
        business and      as employers and                                                               Project (T&C)
        to be             managers                                                                                          increased participation of women-
        employers                                      Promote participation of women-owned              Committed          owned businesses in Government
                          Lack of training             businesses as beneficiaries of the Government’s                      support schemes (e.g., Matching
                          opportunities to             Matching Grant Facility                                              Grant Facility)
                          strengthen financial
                          literacy, management,
                          leadership skills among
                          women.
                                                       Design business training/exchange program/        Second             Increased participation of women in
                                                       grant program to promote women                    Competitiveness    business training workshops
                                                       entrepreneurship                                  Enhancement
                                                                                                         Project (T&C)

                                                                                                         Pending
                                                                                                         agreement with
                                                                                                         counterparts


Health                    Social norms (women          Targeted health screening services extended to    Health             Increase in # of male beneficiaries
     Higher              responsible for health in    men                                               Transformation     reached by improved screening for
       mortality,         the household) resulting                                                       Project            select conditions.
       lower life         in men having less           Awareness campaigns targeted at men and
       expectancy         information of available     boys for preventative health care services                           Increase in # of persons (%
       among men          health services                                                                                   male/female) reached by public
                                                                                                                            awareness campaign
                          Less healthy lifestyles of
                          men and at young age         Increase in tobacco tax, resulting increased      DPO                Decrease incidence of smoking
                          (tobacco/alcohol)            price for consumers
                          though trends may be
                          slowly changing

Gender-based Violence     Social norms; behaviors      Improve capacity of justice-sector officials to   Pending approval   Contribute to / Inform the
    High rates of        (alcoholism)                 adequately address needs of GBV survivors.        of TF resources    Government’s action plan on gender-
        violence,                                                                                        (JSDF proposal     based violence

                                                                                19
        especially of   Weak public awareness,       Expand the range of judicial, livelihood, and       under
        domestic        and enforcement of           skills services available to GBV survivors.         preparation) and    Increased # of women benefitting
        violence        protection services                                                              agreement with      from access to justice and livelihood
                                                     Raise public awareness on the range of services     counterparts        programs
                        Weak institutional           available to victims of GBV, particularly in the
                        capacity, budget             Justice sector.
                        availability, and range of
                        services fostering
                        livelihoods and
                        economic independence
                        of GBV victims/survivors
Road Safety             Women are involved in        Incorporation in the physical design of roads       Local Roads         Number of consultations with women
    High               multi-chain trips (e.g.      the needs of vulnerable populations (women,         Improvement         for road infrastructure design.
        percentage of   from home to work, to        children, people with disabilities), for instance   Project
        men dying in    school, etc.), which         by encouraging the use of local area traffic                            Number of targeted awareness
        road            expose them and their        management (e.g., use of traffic-calming            [committed;         campaigns for women and children
        accidents.      children to more car         devices such as road humps, creating lower-         restricted to the   on road safety
        However, as     accidents.                   speed environments, and roundabouts) and            beneficiary
        pedestrians,                                 safer road crossings (e.g., marked pedestrian       communities of      Number of trainings for girls and
        women are       Men use more cars than       crossing, controlled pedestrian crossing, and       the project]        women on road safety
        more            women which make             pedestrian overpasses or underpasses).
        vulnerable to   them more prone to
        road            fatal accidents.             Providing trainings and designing/implementing
        accidents.                                   awareness road safety campaigns.
                        Poor physical design of
                        roads that do not take
                        into account the needs
                        of more vulnerable
                        populations.

Mobility barriers and   Social and economic          Undertake gender analysis to inform the design      Local Roads         Number of qualitative/quantitative
access to jobs          roles of men and             of transport investment.                            Improvement         assessments that identify women’s
     Women and         women: many women                                                                Project             mobility barriers
         men have       need to make trips that      Conduct qualitative analysis on women’s
         different      are shorter in both time     barriers to mobility or use planned Impact          [committed;         Recommendations of gender-
         mobility       and distance, be more        Evaluations to incorporate questions that can       restricted to the   sensitive assessments reflected in
         patterns and   willing to combine trips,    capture gender differences in mobility.             beneficiary         sub-project design
         use of         make more household-                                                             communities of

                                                                              20
transport          serving trips, and travel   Include women in stakeholder’s consultations   the project]
modes, which       with children and with      for transport planning.
can impact         more packages than
their ability to   men do. This limits the     Collect sex disaggregated data on access
access to more     possibility of accessing    constraints through routine transport
and better         better jobs.                monitoring as user satisfaction surveys.
jobs.




                                                                      21
Bibliography


Gender Knowledge Gateway, Republic of Moldova http://egalitatedegen.md/en/


Poutiainen, P., Brearley, EJ., and Vyzaki, M. 2016. Policy Note: General principles for Gender
Mainstreaming and Benchmarking in ECA. World Bank, Washington DC.

Partnership for Development Center (PDC). 2015. Gender Equality Index: Gender Policies Impact 2009-
2014, Chisinau, Moldova

Partnership for Development Center (PDC) with the support of the East-European Foundation. 2015.
Recommendations for the National Strategy on Labor Force Participation 2017-2021, Chisinau, Moldova
http://www.progen.md/files/4823_cpd_set_de_recomandari_snofm_2017-2021.pdf

Republic of Moldova. 2016. Gender Equality Strategy, 2016-2020.

Soros Foundation, IPP, Percepţiile cetăţenilor asupra rolurilor de gen

Spear, A. et al. 2016. Gender Analysis of the EU AA/DCFTAs with Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine. Funded
by Sida.

Terzi-Barbarosie, D. and Radu, A. 2008. Final Report on Gender monitoring of the Press in Employment
Area. Chisinau, Moldova

UNICEF. 2008. The Impacts of Migration on Children in Moldova. New York, NY.

Women’s Law Center. 2015. Men and Gender Equality in the Republic of Moldova: based on IMAGES
methodology. Chisinau, Moldova

World Bank. [2013]. Papua New Guinea: Country Gender Action Plan FY14-16.

World Bank. 2014a. Moldova: Gender Disparities in Endowments and Access to Economic Opportunities.
World Bank, Washington DC.

World Bank. 2014b. Moldova: Consideration of Gender Rights in Operations.

World Bank. 2014c. West Bank & Gaza: Country Gender Action Plan FY2015-2017.

World Bank. 2015. World Bank Group: Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth. Gender
Strategy 2016-2013. World Bank, Washington DC.

World Bank. Forthcoming. Regional Gender Action Plan: Europe and Central Asia. World Bank,
Washington DC.

                                                    22
World Bank. 2016. World Bank – Moldova Partnership. Country Program Snapshot. Chisinau, Moldova.

World Bank. 2016. Poverty and Shared Prosperity at a Glance. World Bank, Washington DC.

World Bank. 2016. From Aspirations to Occupations: the Role of Information in Educational and Labor
Market Decisions in Moldova. World Bank. Washington DC.

World Economic Forum. 2015. The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.

World Health Organization. 2013. A Retrospective and Prospective Assessment of Mortality in the
Republic of Moldova. Copenhagen, Denmark.

World Health Organization. 2014. Non-communicable Diseases (NCD) Country Profile




                                                  23
                                                  ANNEX
                          Summary of Key Gender Issues in Moldova

Gender differences in development outcomes in Moldova are not high by global or regional standards.
They also do not exclusively concern women. Women remain affected by traditional gender norms
when it comes to choice of profession, earning equal income, integrating in higher-earning sectors, and
being represented in leadership positions (in business, social life, or politics). Child and family care
responsibilities continue to weigh more heavily on women and take a toll on their continuous
participation in the labor market as well as professional development. Demographic shifts—shrinking
population, higher life expectancy of women, and high poverty risk for elderly women—expanding
opportunities for high-skilled and high-earing employment for women is an issue of concern. Also, men
face substantially higher mortality and morbidity.

Using the framework of the World Bank Group’s Gender Equality Strategy, gender gaps for Moldova
can be seen mostly in the areas of economic participation, and voice and agency, while endowments
are generally equitable for men and women. The sections below elaborate on the five priority gender
challenges for Moldova identified in this Country Gender Action Plan: occupational segregation and
earnings gap; discrepancies in labor force participation; entrepreneurship and livelihoods; voice, agency,
and gender-based violence.

Occupational segregation and earnings gap

Gender gaps in educational attainment at all levels (primary, secondary, and tertiary) are negligible in
Moldova. Moldova has close to universal primary [and secondary] school completion rates, yet the
quality of education has been of higher concern. The enrollment of men and women in tertiary
institutions is also balanced. However, as the Moldova CGA (World Bank 2014a) concludes, secondary
and tertiary education levels appear to be the beginning of occupational segregation that yields less
favorable outcomes for women in the labor market.

A closer look at the choices of university specialization for men and women19 does not in itself suggest
a clear division in professional occupations in higher- and lower-earning streams. Women comprise
more than two thirds of enrolled students in chemical and bio-technology, communications, economics
[including finance], education, humanities, manufacturing and processing, public services, social
sciences, and social services. Men comprise more than two thirds in agricultural sciences, architecture,
engineering, environmental sciences, military, security services, and transport. Professional fields such
as law, political science, natural sciences, arts, and sports have a relatively equal distribution.

Yet, gender segregation is evident when looking at labor market data: by sector, occupation, and
gender distribution of leadership positions. The majority of employed women concentrate in public
administration, education, agriculture, and trade and hotel services. Only 21% of firms have women as
top managers. Women earn only 74% of what men earn and the earnings gap persists even in economic
sectors in which women predominate. Women are underrepresented in areas such as IT and financial

19
  Min of Education Statistics for university enrollment by field and gender for 2015-2016:
http://www.statistica.md/public/files/publicatii_electronice/Educatia/Educatia_RM_2016.pdf

                                                     24
services that generally offer higher-paying jobs.20 The World Bank (2016) report “From Aspirations to
Occupations? finds that gender differences in aspirations in terms of vocational or general education as
well as preferred fields of study perpetuate existing occupational segregation in the labor market. A
recent SIDA gender analysis of Moldova’s accession to the EU Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade
Agreement (Spear, et. al. 2016) concludes that Moldovan women may not be as successful in reaping
economic benefits from the DCFTA agreement due to the sectors of the economy where female labor is
concentrated, and lower access to finance, among other factors. Women may benefit as employees in
selected sectors, such as agriculture and textiles.

At the national level the gender earnings gap (12%) is comparable, or even relatively low, compared
to other ECA countries; however, it is greater in higher skilled and higher earning jobs. For example,
women earn 29% less than men in financial services, but only 9% less in the agricultural sector. This may
contribute to explaining why Moldovan women with tertiary education are slightly more likely to look
for opportunities abroad compared to similarly educated Moldovan men. The gender wage gap has
long-term repercussions, as it translates into higher vulnerability to poverty for retired women. Many
retired women find themselves living in poverty because they had worked in the informal sector of the
economy or had been employed in low paid jobs.21

Occupational choices of men and women arise from entrenched social and cultural norms that begin in
the family, community, and school, including early childhood education. Because of this, interventions
to enhance gender equality in professional development should also begin early in life throughout early
childhood, primary and secondary education. Such interventions may include a gender assessment of
the curriculum and related curriculum reform, preparation and delivery of gender module to be added
to teacher training courses, providing incentives for more gender balanced work force in primary and
secondary education, among others.

The role of media is also significant in shaping norms, and fostering a more gender neutral
representation of men and women in professional roles. An analysis of professional representation of
men and women in media (Radu and Terzi 2008) revealed a trend of women being under-represented in
professional areas. In more than 9,000 articles analyzed, which refer to “women? and “men? as
professionals, men are more often presented in professional roles, and dominate areas of politics and
economy, social fields, and science, while women professionals mostly appear in the entertainment
field. The same study conducted a review of more than 150,000 employment announcements. It found
that a large number of announcements are explicitly aimed at women or men (e.g., “seeking woman –
night receptionist at hotel?). Announcements aimed at men are more likely to seek leadership qualities
and highlight professional development opportunities, while announcements aimed at women stress
physical appearance, personal character, and lack of family responsibilities.




Figure 1: Percentage of men and women presented in professional roles (Radu and Terzi 2008)



20
   Based on Europe’s Digital Agenda and Europe 2020 Initiative, the ICT sector would bring an additional profit of 9 billion euro
if women would be engaged more efficiently in technological occupations.
21
   National Gender Equality Strategy 2016-2020

                                                               25
                                 Men      Women


           39




                                          17
                                    16




                                                             14

                                                                    8
                 7




       POLITICS AND           ENTERTAINMENT          SOCIAL AND SCIENCE
        ECONOMY



The causes for occupational segregation and resulting earnings gaps in higher-paying professions and
positions require further examination. They are likely to be found in social norms, perpetuated through
the education system, media, and labor markets. Efforts to better understand, monitor, and reverse
occupational segregation may include:
    (i)     Improving tertiary education data to better track women in STEM (Science, Technology,
            Engineering, and Mathematics) and encourage gender balance in STEM fields;
    (ii)    Assessing gender norms in education curriculum and pursuing more gender-neutral
            representation of men and women in professional roles in the curriculum;
    (iii)   Working to reverse the ‘feminization’ of lower-paying public service positions (such as
            primary and secondary school teachers where women represent over 80% of the labor
            force);
    (iv)    Supporting Government, media, and/or CSO-led public awareness efforts on gender equality
            in the professional domains;
    (v)     Reforming legislation that prohibits or protects women from working in certain fields, such
            as driving heavy vehicles;
    (vi)    supporting initiatives to increase women’s participation in higher-earning sectors such as IT;
    (vii)   Providing opportunities for soft and leadership skills development for women in public and
            private sectors. For example, the National Gender Equality Strategy highlights the need for
            career mentorship to encourage girls to pursue less traditional professions.
    (viii)  Helping to implement and enforce recent legislation that prohibits sexist images and
            language in media, advertisements, job announcements, etc.



Discrepancies in labor force participation

As suggested by the section above, gender inequalities in Moldova are most evident in the labor
market. In fact, the decrease in the Gender Equality Index score (discussed earlier) can be largely
attributed to intensifying inequalities in the labor market – the labor market equality score decreased
from 70 in 2009 to 63 in 2014.22 Delays in entry to the labor force, longer breaks from the labor force,

22
  The Gender Equality Index in the labor market was calculated based on 5 indicators: occupation rate; occupation rate of the
population aged 25-49; people who have at least 1 child aged 0-6, vertical segregation, horizontal segregation, and informal
occupation rate, except in the agriculture field. More details on the Gender Equality Index can be found at
http://progen.md/files/7562_raport_indexul_egalitatii_gen_2015final.pdf

                                                               26
gender bias in labor market decisions, and restrictive childcare and maternity regulations are some of
the main issues that obstruct opportunities for women to work. The participation rate of women with at
least one child has decreased. In 2014, the difference between occupied women with one pre-school
child and women with no children was 20%, one of the most significant discrepancies among European
countries.23 There is a declining number of women who resume work after benefitting from partially-
paid child care leave (up to 3 years).24 Women are the primary beneficiaries of child care leave and thus
their careers are affected because of long interruptions.

Hidden discrimination in the market, due in part to restrictive maternity leave policies, may be further
disadvantaging women on the labor market. Compared to other European countries, Moldova has one
of the most generous child care leave policies.25 Partially-paid childcare leave is available for up to 3
years, and unpaid leave up to six years, the period for which the employer is obligated to reserve the job
place. This is likely to influence employers’ decisions in hiring young women. At the same time, flexible
work programs are not common and in fact are used by men slightly more than women: a recent study
revealed that 47.2% of women enjoy a flexible work program, and 6% enjoy a very flexible work
program, while the shares for men are 49.7% and 13.1% of men respectively.26 The Labor Code of
Moldova prohibits gender bias in hiring, firing, promotion, and salary decisions. However, these
provisions are rarely enforced, and there is a widely-recognized need for additional guidelines and
capacity building for properly implementing gender equality provisions in HR functions in both public
and private enterprises.

Absence of early childcare services (0-3 years) and disparities between maternity leave (126 days) and
paternity leave (14 days) further put women at a disadvantage in the labor market. This is due, in
part, to social norms which perceive women being care givers. The new provision allowing for a 14
days paternity leave was adopted in April 2016 and, as of now, has not yet been enforced (a leave
calculation formula has not yet been established). By law, both women and men can benefit from child
care leave (partially-paid up to 3 years; and unpaid up to 6 years). In practice, women are those who
most often take the leave with long interruptions in their professional lives. Opportunities for childcare
up to the age of 3 are scarce, and strict childcare regulations have prevented expansion of private
childcare services. The promotion of more flexible options for private day care services could provide
both employment opportunities for women (as providers of childcare) as well as more flexibility for
women on the job market. The enforcement of obligatory paternity leave, and public awareness
measures encouraging men to partake in childcare, can contribute to changing norms, facilitating
women’s retention in the labor force, and reducing bias among employers.



Entrepreneurship and livelihoods

Supporting women’s incomes and livelihoods has wide-ranging consequences. It is important for
reducing the overall risk of poverty. This is partly due to the relatively high share of female-headed
households in Moldova, 41%, slightly higher than the ECA average.


23
   Recommendations for the National Strategy on Labor Force Participation 2017-2021, study conducted by Partnership for
Development Center with support of the East-European Foundation
24
   In 2013, 15% of women returned to work. In 2014, this number declined to 11% (Moldova Social Report, 2014).
25
   Source: OECD Family Database cited by PDC in its study
http://progen.md/files/7562_raport_indexul_egalitatii_gen_2015final.pdf
26
   Omnibus Survey, Center for Development Partnership, 2015

                                                             27
Figure 2: Share of female-headed households in selected ECA countries

                       SHARE OF FEMALE HEADED
                             HOUSEHOLDS




                                                                                 82
                72




                                                      59
                              58




                                                     56




                                                                                                        55
                                                                                            52
                                           51




                                                                41
                         39




                                                                            39




                                                                                       37
                        35
           33




                                    33




                                                33
                                    32




                                                                                      32
                                                                          31
                      30




                                   27




                                                                     25
                     23




                                                                                                   23
                                                           20




                                                                                                 13
      12




              CZECH…




       KAZAKHSTAN
           CROATIA
           ARMENIA




        TAJIKISTAN
           GEORGIA




            KYRGYZ




          ROMANIA
            CYPRUS
           ESTONIA




             LATVIA




      MONTENEGRO
            POLAND
          HUNGARY




         LITHUANIA




             SERBIA




           UKRAINE
           BELARUS




            GREECE




             RUSSIA

          SLOVAKIA



            TURKEY
          BULGARIA




        MACEDONIA
           ALBANIA




          SLOVENIA
          MOLDOVA


It is also important for preventing insecure and socially-disruptive labor migration. Economic migration
of women, leaving families in Moldova, has a number of negative social implications. About 32% of all
migrants are women. “Women dominate the groups of Moldovan migrants in several countries,
including Italy, Greece, Israel, and Turkey, the majority being employed in the area of individual care
services. These occupations offer certain possibilities for accumulating savings, but not so much
knowledge, skills, and innovations. Also, these occupations may increase the risk for women to be
harassed, not paid, and without any support from the networks and informal groups, since the care
services are provided mainly in private houses.? (World Bank 2014b)

The effects on children of women’s absence from home are said to be greater than men’s absence.
This is relevant, in particular, in areas of children’s educational achievement, nutrition, health, and
psychological wellbeing. An analysis of 4th and 9th grade student assessments for the past academic
year has shown that while the absence of either or both parents has a negative effect on the student's
performance in those assessments, the impact is greater when the mother migrates. A UNICEF (2008)
study found that when the mother leaves, only 46% of fathers take on the role of direct care giver,
whereas 64% of mothers do so if the father is absent. In cases where the mother migrates, children
experience more frequent and significant changes in care (that may include also grandparents, relatives,
or child institutions). There are some indications that the situation may be worse in minority
communities, many of whom tend to migrate to Russia due to language and cultural ties. “The rate of
poverty in households among migrants to Russia is almost double compared to the rate of poverty in
households among migrants to the EU. This may indicate that “push? factors are more relevant for
households with migrants to CIS countries and “pull? factors are more important for households with
migrants to the EU.“ (World Bank 2014a)

Entrepreneurship, in particular in rural areas, can be an important source of livelihoods. The Gender
Equality Strategy notes that important disparities exist between rural and urban female employment
rates, and highlights the need for rural women empowerment as a key priority. Women in rural areas
have fewer economic opportunities than those residing in urban areas.27 In addition, agriculture is one


27
     Gender Equality Strategy, 2016-2020

                                                                          28
of the sectors with high female employment, accounting for 23% of women’s employment in the
country.

The Moldovan Small and Medium Enterprise Development Agency (ODIMM) has recently initiated a
Women in Business program. As part of this initiative the first national survey exploring barriers to
women in starting a business is being commissioned with WBG funding. Women in Moldova often own
small businesses that do not employ others. Employers are 26.9% women and 73.1 % men. One of the
goals of this program would be to provide skills and training to increase the share of female business-
owners as well as stimulate additional employment by female-owned businesses.

Access to productive assets is one area where attention to gender in entrepreneurship development
can be promoted. Women and men have equal rights to own land and other property in Moldova.
Women’s right to property does not depend on their marital status. All property acquired after marriage
is owned jointly by spouses, while men and women retain individual property rights on assets acquired
before marriage. In practice, some discrepancies can be noted in terms of asset ownership. Women
comprise 36% of agricultural landholders, but own only 19% of agricultural land (Spear et. al. 2016).
While women and men have equal rights to credit, women often are unable to access credit because
they have less collateral. The share of women with personal bank accounts in 2011 was slightly lower
than that of men (17% vs. 19%). A survey of credit applications in rural areas (Miluka, Juna 200928) found
that 73% of applications were filed by men and only 22% by women, the rest being filed jointly.
Systematic gender desegregated information on access to assets is still scarce in Moldova.



Voice, agency, and gender-based violence

Agency is about one’s ability to make choices, and to transform them into desired actions. Women’s
agency influences their ability to build their human capital and take up economic opportunities.
Women’s agency also matters for the welfare of their children. Without women’s participation,
resources are allocated and decisions are made only to reflect men’s perspectives and, thus, leave out
the voice of the other half of the population.

Moldovan women are underrepresented in the decision making processes related to politics, public
policy, and foreign relations.29 “Moldova has made some progress in integrating women in politics, yet
representation remains low. Women hold about 20% of seats in parliament, which is comparable to the
average for most developed countries in the region. However, in 2012, only 6% of ministerial positions
were held by women, and the representation of women at local levels of government is very low.
Women are also underrepresented among judges, and the number of female ambassadors, senior civil
servants, and journalists is much lower than those in neighboring countries or in the rest of the EU.?
(World Bank 2014a)

Moldova has one of the highest rates of human trafficking among neighboring countries and is
primarily a source country. The economic situation in the country and domestic violence are identified
as the main reasons for the persistent problem of trafficking of women. The Government has made
progress in addressing the protection of victims and the prevention of trafficking but has not shown


28
     Cited in Moldova Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) http://www.genderindex.org/country/moldova
29
     Ibid

                                                              29
sufficient progress in addressing widespread complicity in trafficking by law enforcement and other
public officials.

Gender based violence (GBV) represents a significant issue that has a considerable negative impact on
women’s physical and mental health as well as on their perception of self-esteem. Sexual harassment,
physical aggression, and limited access to opportunities for vulnerable categories of women constitute
the key forms of gender based violence in the country. Moldova is one of the highest ranking countries
in ECA for prevalence of physical and sexual violence by an intimate partner. A UN study (2011) found
that 63% of women had experienced emotional abuse, sexual or physical violence from their husband or
partner and at least one in 10 has experienced economic violence. Rural, elderly, separated or divorced
women were at higher risk of experiencing multiple types of violence. An increased level of tolerance
towards GBV at the level of family, community, media, and society as a whole represents a major
challenge for the sustainable development of the country.
                                                                                         30
F IGURE 3: PREVALENCE OF PHYSICAL AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE BY INTIMATE PARTNER ( LIFETIME )




Moreover, the infrastructure and support services to survivors of violence and trafficking are in
precarious financial condition and face obstacles in terms of their sustainability. The lack of a
coordinated mechanism to collect data on GBV and to evaluate the programs and polices aiming to
eliminate GBV makes it difficult to assess the scope of this phenomenon.31 At the same time, under the
country’s decentralization reforms, support centers for women are in a precarious financial situation; in
principle they are supposed to be supported by local government, but in practice are reliant on donor or
NGO grants.

Moldova has approved legislation in three out of eight areas which are considered key for protecting
the rights and providing equal opportunities of its LGBT population. Homosexual acts between adults
are legal, and there are equal age limits for consensual sex between homosexual and heterosexual
couples. Discrimination in employment based on sexual orientation is prohibited by law; yet, there is


30
   Compiled by the United Nations Statistics Division from Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), Reproductive Health
Surveys (RHS) and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS).(ICF International, 2014, CDC, 2014 and UNICEF, 2014c).
Taken from: UNWomen 2015. World’s Women. New York, cited in World Bank. 2016. ECA RGAP 17-20 DRAFT
31
   Gender Equality Strategy, 2016-2020

                                                        30
scarce information on the enforcement of this legislation. Draft legal amendments have been approved
by three parliamentary committees to criminalize the promotion of homosexuality among minors.



Healthy lifestyles and behaviors

Health outcomes and behaviors are significantly worse for men than women; such discrepancy is
mainly due to gender stereotypes on the value of health for boys and girls. Mortality and morbidity
rates are higher among men than those among women, mainly because of unhealthy life style,
accidents, drug abuse, work related traumas, and intoxication. The new Gender Equality Strategy
highlights male health education and preventative health as priorities. WHO (2013) analysis of male-to-
female death ratios suggests that male death rates have been increasing relative to female, as also
supported by the figures below. Men use health care services less frequently than women. Also, the
social norms and expectations, which focus on men as key providers for their families, increase the
pressure for performance on men. Such tendency is reflected in an increased rate of drug abuse and
suicide among men (the suicide rate among men is 5 times higher than that among women).32

Figures 4 & 5: Incidence of tobacco and alcohol consumption for men and women

            TO BACCO SMO K I NG (%,                       A LCO HO L CO NSUMPT I O N (L
                    2011)                                         PE R CA PI TA )
                                                                 25.9
                 43




                                                                                     8.9
                                           5




               MEN                     WOMEN                   MEN               WOMEN

Source: WHO, 2014

Figure 6: Life expectancy for men and women in Moldova: 2000-2012




32
     Gender Equality Strategy, 2016-2020

                                                    31
Source: WHO, 2014



Public policies targeting preventive measures across sectors are generally not gender responsive. The
Gender Equality Strategy points to the lack of gender mechanisms which could guide policy making in
the health care sector. At the same time, the sectoral public policies, which directly influence public
health, need to be reviewed in terms of gender dimensions.33




33
     Gender Equality Strategy, 2016-2020

                                                  32
