Report No. ACS21095




   The Impact of Social Accountability on the Quality of Community
                                 Projects in Uganda:

Impact Evaluation Results from NUSAF2 Transparency, Accountability
                      and Anti-Corruption Sub-Component




February 14, 2017
Document of the World Bank
Social Protection, Labor and Jobs Global Practice; Africa Region (GSP01)




                                              1
Standard Disclaimer:




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




                                                            2
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements....................................................................................................................................... 7
1.      Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 9
2.      The TAAC Social Accountability and Community Monitoring Intervention........................................ 15
     2.1 SACM Design and Content ................................................................................................................ 15
     2.2 Additional Incentives ........................................................................................................................ 19
     2.3 Theory of Change .............................................................................................................................. 20
     2.3 Quality of SACM Implementation ..................................................................................................... 23
3. Impact Evaluation Design and Data ........................................................................................................ 27
     3.1 Impact Evaluation Design.................................................................................................................. 27
     3.2 Baseline Data and Baseline Balance ................................................................................................. 29
     3.3 Follow-up Data, Main Outcomes and Intermediary Outcomes ........................................................ 30
4. Empirical Estimation Strategy ................................................................................................................. 33
5. Impact Evaluation Results ....................................................................................................................... 35
     5.1 Impacts on Main Community Project Outcomes .............................................................................. 35
     5.2 Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes and Mechanisms ..................................................................... 38
6. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................... 43
References .................................................................................................................................................. 47
Tables .......................................................................................................................................................... 51
Annex: Components of the main outcomes indices ................................................................................... 61




                                                                                 3
List of Figures
Figure 1: Accountability Relationships in Service Delivery ......................................................................... 21
Figure 2: Impacts on Main Community Project Outcomes, All Project Types ............................................ 35
Figure 3: Impacts on Main Community Project Outcomes, Livestock Projects Only .................................. 36
Figure 4: Impacts on Components of Livestock Project Quality Score ....................................................... 37
Figure 5: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Procurement and Contracting Process ............................. 38
Figure 6: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Community Monitoring .................................................... 40
Figure 7: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Complaints by Individuals about NUSAF2 Sub-projects ... 40
Figure 8: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Complaints by Communities about Other Government
Services ....................................................................................................................................................... 41
Figure 9: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Payments and Satisfaction with Officials.......................... 42
Figure 10: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Trust in Local Leaders and Public Officials ...................... 42




List of Tables
Table 1: Sample Projects by Type and Status ............................................................................................. 28
Table 2: Baseline Balance............................................................................................................................ 51
Table 3: Impacts on Main Outcomes (All Project Types) ............................................................................ 52
Table 4: Impacts on Main Outcomes (Livestock Projects Only).................................................................. 53
Table 5: Impacts on Main Outcomes (Livestock Projects Only, Beneficiary-level indicators) .................... 54
Table 6: Component of Main Project Score (Livestock Projects only, Beneficiary-level Indicators) .......... 55
Table 7: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Procurement & Contracting ........................................................ 56
Table 8: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Community Monitoring and Complaints about NUSAF2 sub-
projects ....................................................................................................................................................... 57
Table 9: Spillovers in Community Monitoring, Complaints about Non-NUSAF2 Government Services .... 58
Table 10: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Payment and Satisfaction with Officials .................................... 59
Table 11: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Trust in Local Leaders and Public officials ................................. 60




                                                                                4
Abbreviations


ASSIP       Accountability Sector Strategic Investment Plan
CAO         District Chief Administrative Officer
CDD         Community-Driven Development (Program)
CMG         Community Monitoring Group
CPMC        Community Project Management Committee
CPC         Community Procurement Committee
CSO         Civil Society Organizations
CT          Community Trainer
DIME        Development Impact Evaluation (at World Bank)
IG          Inspectorate of Government
IPA         Innovations for Poverty Action
ITT         Intention to treat
NDO         NUSAF2 Desk Officer
NDP         National Development Plan
NTF         Nordic Trust Fund
NUSAF1      First Northern Uganda Social Action Fund
NUSAF2      Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund
LC1         Local Council I (village) chairman
LC3         Local Council III (sub-county) chairman
OPM         Office of the Prime Minister
PRDP        Peace, Recovery and Development Plan
RDC         Resident District Commissioner
SAC         Social accountability committees
SACM        Social accountability and community monitoring intervention
TAAC        Transparency, Accountability and Anti-Corruption Component
UDN         Uganda Debt Network




                                                    5
6
Acknowledgements

The Impact Evaluation of the Transparency, Accountability and Anti-corruption (TAAC) sub-
component of the NUSAF2 project would not have been possible without the collaborative effort
between the Government of Uganda, the World Bank, and partner researchers.

The scientific aspects of the design, implementation and analysis of the impact evaluation were
led by co-principal investigators Nathan Fiala (University of Connecticut) and Patrick Premand
(World Bank), who wrote this report.

A World Bank team was instrumental in the design and implementation of the TAAC sub-
component, SACM intervention and related impact evaluation. Suleiman Namara was the task
team leader during the design phase of NUSAF2, the conceptualization of the TAAC sub-
component, and initiated the impact evaluation activity. Endeshaw Tadesse was the task team
leader for the supervision of NUSAF2 implementation and managed the impact evaluation
activity. Filder Aryemo and Jillian Larsen provided implementation support to the TAAC sub-
component, oversaw the SACM curriculum development and roll-out, and contributed to the set-
up and implementation of the impact evaluation. Filder Aryemo also contributed to this report.

The NUSAF2 project was managed and implemented by the Government of Uganda. The Office
of the Prime Minister was responsible for the overall coordination, resources and
implementation of the project, while the Inspectorate of Government (IG) was responsible for
implementing the TAAC sub-component. The IG team who managed the TAAC sub-component,
oversaw the SACM intervention, and were engaged in the design and implementation of the
impact evaluation included Mr. James Penywii (Director Project Monitoring) and Ms. Munira Ali
(Head, Public and International Relations). The IG worked in partnership with a consortium of
CSOs for the delivery of the SACM intervention, and in particular with a UDN team working under
the stewardship of Uganda Debt Network led by Mr. Gilbert Musinguzi (National Coordinator),
Mr. Julius Kapwepwe (Program Director) and Mr. Patrick Tumwebaze (Executive Director).
Collaboration with the NUSAF2 Technical Support Team (TST), in particular Dr. Robert LimLim
(Director) and Sam Sakwa (Field Operations Coordinator) is gratefully acknowledged.

                                              7
Special thanks also go to the agencies that undertook data collection and their field staff,
including Robert Sentamu at Wilksen Agencies for baseline data collection, as well as Areum Han,
Kalie Pierce, Simon Robertson and Mariajose Silva Vargas at Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA)
for the implementation study and follow-up sub-project assessment data collection.

The research team is grateful for comments provided at various points of this study by the
Inspectorate of Government (IG) team, the World Bank team, Pia Raffler, as well as Colin
Andrews, Bénédicte de la Brière, Robert Chase, Deon Filmer, Vincenzo Di Maro, Ezequiel Molina,
Obert Pimhidzai, Christina Malmberg Calvo, Pia Raffler, Ritva Reinikka, Lynne Sherburne-Benz
and Dena Ringold at the World Bank.

Financial support from the DIME i2i Trust Fund and Nordic Trust Fund at the World Bank, as well
as a vanguard charitable trust through IPA, is greatly acknowledged.




                                               8
      1. Introduction

Promoting citizens’ voice and participation has the potential to improve the quality of
government services and development projects, as well as reduce leakage or corruption. A fast-
growing body of international literature shows how corruption can undermine development by
generating costs for society1. Finding the most successful and cost-effective approaches to
reduce corruption remains a topic of active debate. The 2004 World Development Report
presents a simple framework that articulates the relationships between citizens or program
beneficiaries, service providers and policymakers. Governance and anti-corruption interventions
can take the (vertical) long-route from clients influencing policymakers (bottom-up) and
policymakers influencing service providers (top-down), or the (horizontal) short-route with
citizens and program beneficiaries directly influencing service providers.

Most traditional governance and anti-corruption interventions take the long route towards
accountability, for instance by conducting (top-down) audits of programs and officials.
However, these can often be costly to implement and can themselves become subject to elite
interference. Besides, auditing may prove relatively ineffective in weak institutional
environments (Serra, 2008; Barr and Serra, 2010).

Recent research has shed light on the promise of using the (horizontal) short route for
accountability. Providing populations with information and voice can be seen as an objective in
its own right, including in the context of promoting human rights. Engaging local populations and
encouraging transparency on the performance of local leaders and service providers can improve
public governance by increasing the demand for accountability and ultimately reducing


1
    Those costs can take different forms and range from an increase in bureaucratic hurdles to extract greater
payments (Bertrand et al., 2007), to the creation of an unappealing economic environment for foreign investments
(Woo, 2010) or a reduction of human capital stemming from bad-quality delivery of health or education services
(Reinikka and Svensson, 2004, Bjorkman and Svensson, 2009). Not only does corruption represent an efficiency loss
for society, but it also has a negative equity impact, affecting more severely those with less voice but with greater
need for public services (Olken, 2006, Hunt, 2007).


                                                         9
corruption (Björkman and Svensson, 2009, Deininger and Mpuga, 2004, Banerjee et al., 2010,
Banerjee et al., 2011, Djankov et al., 2010, Ferraz and Finan, 2008, Serra et al., 2011). Social
accountability can be less effective in the presence of elite capture, or in cases where the
population is not able to fully affect service providers’ incentives (Reinikka and Svensson, 2004;
Björkman and Svensson, 2010, Barr and Zeitlin, 2011). Empirical evidence testing the relative
effectiveness of alternative ways to design social accountability interventions in the context of
large-scale national programs remains limited (Devarajan et al, 2011). This is particularly
important as a range of design features can affect the likelihood of project success (Khwaja,
2009).

In Uganda, many observers have highlighted that challenges in terms of transparency,
accountability and corruption are affecting the quality of service delivery. The recent systematic
country diagnostic for Uganda highlights some of these challenges (World Bank, 2015). According
to the World Governance Indicators, the effectiveness and regulatory quality of the Government
of Uganda are on a declining trend. The voice and accountability environment, which improved
between 2003 and 2008, has also deteriorated2. Transparency International’s Global Corruption
Barometer Survey (2013) found that 61 percent of Ugandans had paid a bribe to one of the eight
institutions (judiciary, education, tax services and customs, permits/registries, medical services,
police, land services, or utilities) in the last 12 months3. The average value of small bribes paid
was approximately 20 percent of citizen’s annual income (IG 2014 a). Corruption was also
highlighted as the most significant obstacle to doing business in Uganda by a recent global
competitiveness report.

How best to address the governance challenges in Uganda remains subject to active debates.
The government’s commitment to increasing transparency and accountability in public service
delivery is enshrined in Vision 2040, the National Development Plan (NDP), and the


2
  Uganda’s capacity to control corruption appears to have reached an all-time low and is only above that of
Kenya’s, East Africa’s worst performer.
3
  The quality of the decentralization framework has worsened since 2005 mainly due to the proliferation of
districts without adequate manpower and budget. This has negatively affected service delivery. Uganda’s
performance is good on transparency but weak on budget credibility, controls, and compliance, essentially
highlighting implementation issues.

                                                        10
Accountability Sector Strategic Investment Plan (ASSIP). In the last two decades, the government
has actively pursued decentralization, anticorruption, and a range of reforms (World Bank, 2015).
However, while legislation is in place, gaps in implementation of these regulations remain,
including the ability to apply effective sanctions. At the same time, the effectiveness of
encouraging citizen engagement and social accountability approaches remains unclear. Still,
improving the demand for accountability was highlighted as one of the priority actions to improve
the issue of public service delivery in the recent Systematic Country Diagnostic for Uganda (World
Bank, 2015).

The second phase of the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF2) was a large-scale
Community-Driven Development (CDD) Program implemented by the Office of the Prime
Minister in coordination with district and sub-county authorities. Between 2011 and 2016, over
10,000 sub-projects of various types were implemented throughout the Eastern, Northern, West
Nile and Karamoja regions. These sub-projects included (i) public works (mostly for road-building
and tree-planting), (ii) livelihood investment (including livestock and enterprise support) and (iii)
infrastructure rehabilitation (such as staff house, boreholes or fencing). As part of the program,
communities, with the assistance of community facilitators, were invited to formulate projects
and submit proposals to the government. Sub-project approval included desk reviews at the sub-
county and district as well as visits to the community before submission to the office of the prime
minister for final approval. Once projects were approved, funds were managed directly by
committees elected by the communities. In particular, Community Project Management
Committees and Community Procurement committees were in charge of delivering the selected
projects. Social Accountability Committees were formed with the responsibility to monitor
project progress and provide oversight on behalf of the communities. Sub-county and district
authorities undertook monitoring activities and provided oversight in coordination with project
staff.

The NUSAF2 project has been seen as instrumental in supporting the Government of Uganda
to strengthen mechanisms to improve transparency and social accountability. One of the
innovations of the NUSAF2 project is that it includes a Transparency, Accountability and Anti-


                                                 11
Corruption (TAAC) sub-component. The objective of the TAAC sub-component is to strengthen
transparency, accountability and anti-corruption in Northern Uganda, using the project as an
entry point to develop improved systems to be used by communities, local authorities and others
with the mandate to promote improved governance in development. The TAAC sub-component
is managed by the Inspectorate of Government (IG)4, and seeks to mainstream an anti-corruption
prevention intervention in a Community Driven Development (CDD) project. Among other
activities, some of the key innovations developed by the NUSAF2 TAAC sub-component included
the set-up of a free anticorruption hotline, as well as the design and implementation of a social
accountability and community monitoring (SACM) intervention.

The NUSAF2 TAAC sub-component was designed to build on lessons from NUSAF1, where
implementation of community projects faced several challenges. In particular, NUSAF2 pulls
together the lessons of NUSAF1 on the promotion of public and social accountability in the design
of a stronger service delivery mechanism mainstreamed into existing government systems.
NUSAF1 introduced bottom-up accountability in a fragile environment. NUSAF2 further
strengthened bottom-up accountability, among others through the TAAC sub-component.
NUSAF2 also aimed to contribute to broader objectives of the Ugandan Peace, Recovery and
Development Plan (PRDP), the overarching framework for post-conflict reconstruction in
Uganda.

The Social Accountability and Community Monitoring (SACM) intervention included thorough
training on social accountability and community monitoring of NUSAF2 sub-projects
communities. Follow-up visits by trainers were also conducted to provide on-going support to
the communities to monitor implementation of NUSAF2 sub-projects. Community assemblies
were organized to discuss the principles of social accountability and community monitoring. As
part of this mobilization phase, new representatives were elected by the whole community to
strengthen the NUSAF2 accountability structure, the social accountability committees (SACs).
Members of the expanded committees, referred to as Community Monitoring Groups (CMGs),
made a public pledge to participate in a training program, undertake monitoring of the project

4
    The Inspectoral of Government also has field offices throughout the country.

                                                          12
on behalf of the community, and report back to the community. The training provided
background on social accountability and NUSAF2, how to monitor projects and provided tools to
monitor NUSAF2 sub-projects. A comprehensive training curriculum was developed (IG, 2015b).
The training also provided hands-on skills in writing reports, providing feedback to the
community, generating a community action plan and applying monitoring skills to government
services other than NUSAF2 in the community.

Given that SACM was large-scale and innovative in nature, a prospective randomized impact
evaluation of the social accountability and community monitoring intervention was put in
place. The impact evaluation was designed and implemented in collaboration between the World
Bank, the IG and partner researchers. The objective of the impact evaluation was to assess the
effectiveness of the social accountability and community monitoring (SACM) intervention
implemented as part of the NUSAF2 TAAC sub-component.

The impact evaluation provides evidence on the potential to integrate and mainstream social
accountability interventions into large-scale operations. The study is particularly noteworthy
given its scale: it focuses on a large-scale government-led intervention implemented in
collaboration with local NGOs throughout the Eastern, Northern, West Nile and Karamoja regions
of Uganda. The impact evaluation sample includes 940 communities, of which 634 communities
were randomized to receive the social accountability and community monitoring (SACM)
training, while 306 communities form a control group. As such, the results provide information
to the IG and Government of Uganda on the value of promoting social accountability
interventions in national programs. Given that it is one of the largest impact evaluation of a social
accountability intervention around the world, the results of the impact evaluation will also be of
interest for policymakers and development practitioners beyond Uganda.

This report contains the main results from the social accountability and community monitoring
(SACM) intervention impact evaluation. The results are mostly based on a large-scale follow-up
sub-project assessment survey covering 634 NUSAF2 sub-projects randomized to receive the
SACM intervention, and 306 comparable NUSAF2 sub-projects randomized to serve as control.
Some results are also drawn from a household-level follow-up survey in treatment and control

                                                 13
communities. The impact evaluation results show that the social accountability and community
monitoring (SACM) intervention improved community project quality by a small but significant
magnitude amounting to 0.12 standard deviations. This overall improvement in community sub-
projects is driven by a mix of increases in the quality and quantity of outputs. Livestock sub-
projects are the most common type of sub-projects in the sample. In these projects, the social
accountability and community monitoring intervention led communities to have healthier
animals, as well as reduced by 25% (from 17.8% to 13.1%) the livestock that could not be found
in the communities at the time of the follow-up sub-project assessment. The main results are
shown to be similar for the standard social accountability and community monitoring
intervention, and a treatment arm including additional incentives. Overall, the impact evaluation
shows that community monitoring of large-scale decentralized development interventions can
improve the quality of community projects.

The study also analyzes the main channels through which the social accountability and
community monitoring intervention led to improvements in community sub-projects. Results
show that stronger monitoring of NUSAF2 sub-projects by communities is the main mechanism
through which the SACM intervention was effective. Community members were more engaged
in ensuring they were receiving quality project outputs, and more likely to report issues to local,
sub-county and district officials, as well as to the Inspectorate of Government. Some spill-overs
from the community monitoring are also observed, as complaints from community members
about government services others than NUSAF2 also increase. In contrast, no impacts from the
SACM intervention are found on the process used by communities to procure goods and
materials. No impacts are found on payment made to district officials, satisfaction or trust in
public officials, although beneficiaries report lower trust in community sub-project leaders.

The report is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the content of the SACM intervention,
and the underlying theory of change of the impact evaluation. It also summarizes the result of an
implementation study undertaken in a sub-sample of communities that participated in the SACM
training. Section 3 presents the impact evaluation design and data, including the scope of the
baseline survey and follow-up surveys, as well as the main outcome measures considered for the


                                                14
impact evaluation. Section 4 outlines the empirical estimation strategy. Section 5 presents the
impact evaluation findings. Section 6 concludes.



    2. The TAAC Social Accountability and Community Monitoring Intervention


2.1 SACM Design and Content



The Transparency, Social Accountability and Anti-Corruption (TAAC) component of NUSAF2
included various activities managed by the inspectorate of government (IG). The component
implemented anti-corruption prevention activities such as public awareness through radio talk
shows, sensitization workshops and training of NUSAF2 social accountability committees. Several
information, education and communication material were produced and distributed. A free
corruption reporting hotline (“6009”) was set-up to ease reporting of complaints to the IG. A
detailed curriculum for a social accountability and community monitoring (SACM) intervention
was developed, piloted and implemented. Development of the SACM training curriculum
included a review of key literature as well as consultations with NGOs/CSOs that are involved in
social accountability interventions across Uganda. A team of local and international consultants
from the World Bank worked closely with the IG to draft, pilot and validate the SACM training
curriculum, which was published in 2014.

The SACM intervention was implemented by a consortium of CSOs contracted by the IG. This
collaboration created a unique partnership between a government institution and civil society
organizations. The lead CSO was the Uganda Debt Network, which worked with 9 grassroots CSOs
across the project area5. UDN and its partners selected 42 community trainers who underwent



5
 The lead NGO was UDN and partners included 1) Church of Uganda-Teso Diocese Planning & Development Office
(COU-TEDDO); 2) Community Empowerment for Rural Development (CEFORD) – West Nile; 3) Gulu District NGO
FORUM (GDNF); 4) Lira NGO Forum (LNF); 5) Moroto-Nakapiripirit Religious Leaders’ Initiative for Peace
(MONARLIP); 6) Pader NGO Forum (PNF); 7 Recreation for Development and Peace (RDP) – Uganda; 8) Tororo Anti-
Corruption Coalition – TAC and 9) Uganda Joint Christian Council (UJCC).


                                                    15
two weeks of rigorous training of trainers organized by the IG. One full-time community trainer
was based in each NUSAF2 district covered by the SACM intervention. Community trainers
conducted their work with technical support and supervision from UDN, IG and the World Bank
teams. The intervention was implemented between May 2014 and February 2016, with training
in the evaluation sample concluding by October 2015. Achievement of the targets set for
community trainers was monitored through a locally designed remote web-based technology
hosted by the Grameen foundation in Uganda. Additional monitoring included field spot checks
as well as periodic progress review meetings with the consortium partner heads, regional
managers and community trainers.

The SACM intervention curriculum focused on promoting bottom-up social accountability.
Community mobilization assemblies took place to enroll additional members of the wider
community into a community monitoring group. The assemblies were organized by community
trainers with the help of village local leaders (LC1). The purpose was to introduce basic principles
of social accountability and community monitoring, validate the role of the sub project social
accountability committees (SAC) and invite additional members of the community to join existing
SAC members to form a Community Monitoring Group (CMG). Specifically, four additional willing
members of the community were elected by the community during the enrollment meetings to
join and strengthen social accountability committees. The four newly elected members of the
community and the five originally elected SAC members formed an expanded monitoring group
called the community monitoring group (CMG). Members of the committees made a public
pledge to participate in a training program, undertake monitoring of the project on behalf of the
community, and report back to their communities. Once the community monitoring group was
set-up, its members participated in 3 full days of training, complemented with 3 follow-up
support visits. The three-day training was based on the SACM curriculum developed by the IG
and the World Bank. The curriculum addressed three main areas: how to identify problems in
community sub-project implementation, how community members can resolve implementation
problems, and how to report or petition relevant local authorities about potential issues,
including use of the toll free corruption reporting hotline. The SACM curriculum was developed
to be delivered to semi-literate and illiterate populations, with intensive piloting and heavy use

                                                16
of visual-based learning. The intervention was focused on improving community monitoring and
encouraging the communities to follow-up on findings. It was made clear that it was not the role
of community trainers to conduct monitoring and take actions themselves.

The first curriculum module covers community mobilization and an introduction to social
accountability. This module includes 2 to 3 hours of interaction with mobilized members of the
community where a NUSAF2 sub project is implemented. In the meeting, the community trainer
leads a discussion on key concepts of accountability and community engagement, the roles and
responsibilities of the Social Accountability Committee (SAC). An election is then organized to
select four willing members of the community to strengthen the existing SAC and form a
Community Monitoring Group (CMG). Part of the meeting also identifies existing government
programs operating in the community, provides an overview of NUSAF2 and why it is important
for the wider community members to monitor these projects even if they are not direct
beneficiaries. Discussions on key concepts of accountability cover: a) common types of
corruption at the central, local government and community levels such as bribery,
embezzlement, nepotism, absenteeism and solicitation of favors; as well as b) social
accountability and the constitutional right of every Ugandan to participate in conducting
accountability and combating corruption. This session is concluded with brainstorming on key
actions the community can take as individuals or group to conduct social accountability, combat
corruption and thus improve project outcomes. The module ends with the election and
introduction of the community monitoring group (CMG), which includes original SAC members
and four newly elected members. Preceding the election, a presentation reviews the roles of the
monitoring group and characteristics of people who would be suitable for this role. Both the SAC
chairman and the coordinator of the newly formed CMG are given an opportunity to give short
speeches on how they will execute their duties to meet the expectations of the community. The
CMG members are then invited for a three-day training at a selected venue and date.

The second module discusses social accountability more specifically in the context of NUSAF2.
It takes place on the first day of the three-day comprehensive training. It reviews in details all the
basic concepts discussed at the enrollment meeting as well as provides a deeper understanding
of the different stages of implementation of the NUSAF2 sub-project, including the procurement

                                                 17
rules and procedures to select and monitor contractors to provide goods and services to the
community. The community trainer leads the community in identifying key implementation areas
that are more prone to mismanagement and explores ways in which the community can engage
in monitoring to obtain better project outcomes.

The third module tackles community monitoring skills. This module aims at providing basic skills
in community monitoring of the NUSAF2 projects. The CMGs review steps in monitoring, such as
identifying sources of information, gathering and managing monitoring data. The module
includes practical exercises to help CMGs to ask critical questions to monitor the procurement,
timeliness, technical support, financial management and quality of inputs for the NUSAF2 sub-
project in their own community.

The fourth module covers post-monitoring activities. The module provides a basic
understanding on how to review, store and manage monitoring data and findings. It covers the
production of simple reports using monitoring data for submission to relevant authorities.
Practical exercises include conducting a mock monitoring session and writing a simple report. The
module ends with a session on providing feedback on monitoring findings to other community
members as well as exploring possible actions to follow-up.

The fifth module discusses how to generate a community action plan. This is a practical step-
by-step session on how to develop an action plan relevant to the NUSAF2 community sub-project.
CMGs are taken through a participatory discussion that results into key action plans that will be
implemented and reviewed with the community trainer during the first follow-up support visit.
The session works on planning monitoring activities and allocation of tasks among the CMGs.

The sixth module covers follow-up support visits by the community trainer. This module
provides step by step guidance on how the CMGs can review the action plan generated in module
5 and how the community training can provide technical support or refresher training depending
on identified gaps. The module ends with guidance on how to revise and create new action plans
at the end of every follow-up support visit.

The final module reviews how to apply lessons learnt from the training to other government
services. The aim of this module is to help CMGs apply the skills they gained from monitoring
                                               18
NUSAF2 to other government programs in their communities. The module uses an example of
teacher absenteeism from the education sector to help CMGs learn and apply their monitoring
skills to other sectors. The module ends with a practical session on creating a monitoring checklist
for teacher absenteeism.




2.2 Additional Incentives



The incentives for community members to engage in project monitoring are not clear a priori,
in particular for non-beneficiaries. The NUSAF2 Operational Manual outlines that social
accountability committees are expected to complete “participatory monitoring tools” to ensure
active involvement of all stakeholders in monitoring of project activities and outputs, secure
commitment, and build the capacity of communities to be able to analyze, reflect, and take
corrective action. It is expected that regular reporting will improve accountability and project
outcomes. However, communities may lack the incentives to engage in these activities,
particularly if there is fear of retaliation. The Whistleblowers Protection Act 2010 provides that a
whistleblower shall be rewarded for his or her disclosure five percent of the net liquidated sum
of money recovered based on that disclosure. However, this incentive for reporting faces long
delays, and few people know about it.

In addition to receiving the standard SACM model, some of communities were offered
additional incentives for regular participation in training and active project monitoring. The
incentives were designed to include individual rewards as well as group rewards. For individual
rewards, individuals who completed the preliminary training and participated in follow-up visits
and monitoring received an official “Community Monitor” pin from the IG. This pin helped to
identify the community monitors who have been trained and empowered to monitor NUSAF2
projects and other government projects within their communities. They also received a contact
card to enable them to reach out to the IG regional office and the Director of Project Monitoring
for any support. As such, the incentives increase the salience of the link between CMGs and the
Inspectorate of Government. As part of the group reward, communities that completed the
                                                19
entire training, support visits, and conducted the community monitoring resulting in the final
report were intended to be recognized by the IG for their hard work on local radio stations. The
individual reward was designed to be based on attendance and participation in the training and
follow-up visits. The group reward was designed to be based on timely production from monthly
reports on their community monitoring findings. In practice, group rewards were not
implemented, and the additional incentives mostly consisted of the symbolic IG pin and IG
contact card, which together strengthen the visibility of the link between community monitoring
groups and the Inspectorate of Government.




2.3 Theory of Change


The 2004 World Development Report presents a governance framework for the relationships
between citizens or program beneficiaries, service providers and public officials. Governance
and anti-corruption interventions can take the (vertical) long-route from communities
influencing policymakers (bottom-up) and policymakers influencing service providers (top-
down), or the (horizontal) short-route with communities and program beneficiaries directly
influencing service providers (see Figure 1, World Bank, 2003). This simplified framework has
proved influential to analyze the pathways through which social accountability interventions can
lead to better development outcomes (Ringold et al., 2012), including for a finer analysis of the
theory of change from these interventions (Molina, 2014).




                                               20
                  Figure 1: Accountability Relationships in Service Delivery




                                                State
                                            (Political and
                                              Technical
                                              Officials)




                           Community
                          (Beneficiaries
                                                             Providers and
                           (CMC, CPC,
                                                              Contractors
                         SAC/CMG) and
                        non-beneficiaries



                         Source: Simplified framework from World Bank (2003)




In light of this framework, and given the scope of the SACM training described in the previous
section, we consider three main potential pathways through which the SACM intervention can
improve the quality of community projects. We start by considering two pathways that mostly
relate to the short accountability route, i.e. how the community can directly influence service
providers and contractors. First, as part of the NUSAF2 community-driven intervention,
communities select providers and contractors through a procurement process. A more
transparent and smoother procurement process can contribute to the selection of better or more
accountable contractors or service providers, which may ultimately improve the quality of
services and goods received by communities. We therefore analyze whether the SACM
intervention leads to changes in the process by which communities select contractors, and
ultimately their choice of contractor. Second, we assess whether more intensive community
monitoring leads to the delivery of better project outputs. This second pathway also relates to
the short accountability route, but here the influence of the community occurs mostly after the
contractor has been chosen, i.e. when the project outputs are being delivered. Related to this,


                                                    21
more intensive community monitoring can also lead to additional complaints by communities to
public officials about the performance of service providers and contractors. Finally, we consider
a third pathway that relates mostly to the long accountability route. Specifically, we assess
whether there are changes in the interactions between communities and their local officials. We
consider both local political officials, as well as local technical officers that are involved in NUSAF2
project implementation. Specifically, we consider whether there are changes in the payments
made by communities to these officials, the satisfaction with the services provided by the various
officials, as well as the trust in local leaders and public officials. Changes in interactions between
community members and officials could indicate that the SACM intervention affects project
outcomes through the long accountability route.

In this context, the impact evaluation tests to what extent the SACM intervention led to
improvements in project quality, and assess which of these various channels is most likely to
explain the observed impacts on project quality. In practice, the various mechanisms can
interplay and jointly explain improvements in project quality. While the mechanisms cannot be
fully disentangled, the impact evaluation can shed light on the strength of the effects on these
various mechanisms, and as such indicate which mechanisms, or which combination of
mechanisms, is more likely to explain overall impacts on project quality.




                                                  22
2.3 Quality of SACM Implementation

An implementation study was undertaken in a sub-sample of communities that participated in
the SACM training. The objective of the implementation study was to document the quality of
implementation of the training, and as such to complement and facilitate the interpretation of
the main impact evaluation results presented in section 5 below. Given the large scale of the
SACM intervention and its disperse geographical scope, it is important to understand the extent
to which implementation was consistent with the intended design. This enables us to understand
whether the impact evaluation results are affected by potential implementation issues.

The implementation study was undertaken in a random sample of 97 communities trained as
part of the SACM intervention, or approximately 15% of all sub-projects and communities
selected to be included in the impact evaluation study. As such, the implementation study
sample is large enough to provide good measures of quality of implementation. The first round
of surveys took place in March 2015, the second round of surveys in early May 2015, and the
third round of surveys at the end of June 2015. The implementation study was based on a short
instrument which was administered to a minimum of five members of the CMG, in either local
language or English depending on the CMG's preference. Communities were mobilized via phone
or in-person and most interviews took place on the same day as mobilization and in person. The
instrument covered issues related to mobilization and group formation, timing of the training,
understanding of the training curriculum, disbursement of funds to the sub-projects, self-
confidence, civic understanding and social accountability.

The implementation study shows that over 90% of the sample correctly nominated and elected
their CMG members in line with the intended protocol and received the full three-day training.
As part of the SACM intervention, every community was expected to be mobilized within one day
and receive three days of training. In the random sample selected for the implementation study,
only 72% were mobilized as planned in one day, but over 90% of the sample received the full 3




                                               23
days of training6. The majority of NUSAF2 communities followed the correct procedure for
picking their CMG members. For over 90% of the sample, the community directly nominated and
elected members to join the CMG7. Over 85% of the sample agreed that the CMG is accountable
to the community and must report its activities and findings to them.

A relatively small number of sub-projects in the implementation study sample (4%) started
using their NUSAF2 funds at least a month before they received training. The usefulness of the
training in part depends on the timeliness of its implementation, so that the CMGs can indeed
monitor key sub-project activities on time. SACM training may not be as effective in communities
where substantial progress has been made, for instance purchase of materials taking place
several weeks before they received training. Overall, the implementation study shows that most
training took place in timely fashion. In the implementation study sample, 15% of communities
received their training after they started using their funds. However, 2/3 of those communities
received training within a couple weeks of starting to use their funds. Only 4% of communities in
the sample received the training more than one month after starting to use the funds.

Over 75% of the CMGs found it "easy" to understand the training. The SACM training curriculum
was developed with the objective to be delivered to semi-literate and illiterate populations using
visual supports. The implementation study highlighted a good understanding of the curriculum
by the communities. Most trainers used the local language and some English to teach the
curriculum. Over 75% of the CMGs declared that they found it "easy" to understand the training,
while 20% found it "a little difficult".

Roughly 90% of CMGs were able to articulate concrete action plans in response to examples of
potential corruption or service delivery issues. During the implementation study interview, a
few "vignettes" containing hypothetical scenarios were described to CMGs8, who were then

6
  A small number of communities - roughly 7% of the sample - received only one or two days of training. A couple
of communities, however, had not received any training at all at the time of implementation study. Both of these
communities were from the Karamoja region.
7
  A small number of communities did not follow correct procedure. In five communities, no additional CMG
members were selected by the community. In four communities, the trainer or facilitator selected the additional
CMG members themselves (rather than allowing the community to nominate and elect them).
8
  The vignettes covered the following scenarios: 1) Imagine that you are monitoring a livestock project and you find
out that in distributing the animals, the CPMC executives took more animals for themselves than they gave to

                                                        24
asked how they would respond to such a situation. A particularly evocative example is a case
when the CMG is asked how they would respond if the procurement committee were to deliver
low quality animals to the community. Over 95% of the sample agreed that they would reject the
animals and take some form of action. For all four scenarios presented to the communities, at
least 93% of the sample answered with a plan of action consistent with the training curriculum9.
In terms of the types of actions taken if they experienced problems with service delivery,
approximately 40% of the suggested actions involved contacting the IG, and most of the other
suggested actions involved reporting to other authorities such as the CAO, RDC, Sub-county Chief,
NUSAF officer, LC1, or police. Many communities also suggested conducting their own
investigation. Most CMGs were able to come up with 3 different plans of action. Only a few
communities gave answers that indicated lack of empowerment, saying that there isn’t anything
they could do to address the issue.

The implementation study also contained questions related to communities’ understanding of
potential cases of corruption. The results showed that the majority of the trained communities
understood potential corrupt practices. When incorrect answers were given, communities and
CMGs lean toward being extra critical of project management10.



other group members. What would you do? 2) Imagine that the community facilitator - who assisted your group to
initiate this project - insists on completely taking over managing the finances of your group project fund. After all,
he or she assisted your group in writing the project proposal and in most cases is more educated than the
members of your group. What would you do? 3) Imagine that the contractor of your sub-project got the first
advance of 8 million shillings to start work and then disappeared. What would you do? 4) Imagine that you are
monitoring a livestock project and the supplier brings you very poor quality animals. You suggest that the group
reject these animals and instead have the supplier come back with animals of higher quality. The CPMC and the
CPC, however, insist that the group accept the animals that are of poorer quality. What would you do?
9
  Examples of responses included: "We report to the community development officer at the sub-county," "Report
to the sub-county and if it fails to act, we shall report to the IG," "Investigate further, after finding the truth, then
we shall ask for fresh re-distribution," "We meet as a group to decide, thereafter report to LC 1 and we will ensure
that animals are distributed afresh if the group decides”, and "We call them, question them on how distribution
was done and demand redistribution if they refuse we report to IG and other district leaders."
10
   The potential cases presented to communities were as follows: i) Imagine someone in the CPMC is given money
from the sub-project to buy materials. However, their child is in a candidate class and needs to go back to school
but they have no money to pay school fees. They decide to use the sub-project money to pay school fees. Do you
consider their act a case of corruption? ii) Imagine that the supplier spent 50,000 shillings and came back with less
goods than expected but he brought his receipts and his receipts show that the goods were simply more expensive
than had been budgeted for. Do you consider this a case of corruption? 96% of communities answered correctly to
the first case. A little over 60% gave the correct answer to the second case, which offered a much more
complicated scenarios. Of those who failed to give the correct answer to the second question, however, over 90%

                                                           25
The implementation study highlighted some areas through which the training may have
affected community actions. About 88% of the CMGs stated that they were confident in their
ability to improve service delivery of the NUSAF2 project. 70% of the CMGs in the sample said
that they had applied their training to projects others than NUSAF2. They gave examples with
regards to monitoring of NUSAF2 project, but also with regards to questioning the quality of other
public services, for instance in health centers.

Ultimately, the implementation study reveals a satisfactory level of implementation of the
social accountability and community monitoring (SACM) intervention. The training was mostly
implemented as designed, despite the large-scale nature of the program. Some delays took place
but few communities received the training too late for it not to be useful during project
implementation11. An important caveat is to be noted with regards to implementation in the
Karamoja region, which suffered additional delays. Finally, and as mentioned above, the
incentives were only partly implemented, and as such actual incentives are relatively weak. Some
areas for improvements were highlighted through the implementation study as well. Interviews
with group members reveal some confusion over who was in which committee and what was the
purpose of each committee. Almost 14% of the CMGs in the sample did not know that the CPC
was in charge of procurement for the NUSAF2 sub-projects. Finally, the majority of CMGs
interviewed asked for some kind of compensation for their service and stated their desire to be
considered as beneficiaries in the next round of the NUSAF project.




answered "Yes," indicating that the CMGs lean toward being extra critical of project management rather than
under critical.
11
   Inefficiencies in the flow of funds between the IG, UDN, the CSO partners and community field trainers
contributed to some of the delays.

                                                       26
3. Impact Evaluation Design and Data

3.1 Impact Evaluation Design

The goal of the SACM training was to improve the quality of implementation of NUSAF2
community sub-projects and overall service delivery. In this context, the main impact evaluation
question of interest is whether the social accountability and community monitoring intervention
was effective in improving the quality of NUSAF2 community projects. Beyond the effectiveness
of the overall SACM intervention, a secondary question addresses what is the most effective
modality for the social accountability intervention, and in particular whether additional
incentives are needed to encourage community monitoring. A third question relates to the
mechanisms which are more likely to explain the observed impacts on project quality, in
particular the broad areas highlighted in section 2: (i) the procurement and contracting process,
(ii) community monitoring and reporting of complaints, and (iii) community interactions with
district officials, as well as satisfaction and trust in public officials and local leaders.

In order to answer these questions, a large-sample, randomized control trial was put in place.
In a random selection of communities benefitting from NUSAF2, a social accountability and
community monitoring (SACM) intervention was introduced. The intervention included two
treatment modalities: (1) the standard model in which communities were trained to monitor the
implementation of their local NUSAF2 development projects and address any issues with project
implementers and government officials; and (2) the standard model with additional incentives
for communities to report corruption and produce quality project outputs. By comparing these
two intervention models against a randomized control group of NUSAF2 projects that did not
receive the SACM intervention, the causal impact of the social accountability and community
monitoring training can be obtained. In addition, each intervention can also be compared against
each other, allowing for an identification of the most effective intervention model, and the value-
added of the extra incentives.

The social accountability and community training intervention was implemented in a large
number of NUSASF2 sub-projects, covering various types of community projects, with a

                                                    27
prevalence of livestock sub-projects. As mentioned above, as part of NUSAF2, communities were
invited to formulate sub-projects and submit proposals the local government office for appraisal.
The submitted projects can fall under three main categories: (i) public works (mostly for road-
building and tree-planting), (ii) livelihood investment (including livestock and enterprise support)
and (iii) infrastructure rehabilitation (such as staff house, boreholes or fencing). As such, the
social accountability and community monitoring intervention was implemented in different sub-
project types. Table 1 provides the number of each sub-project type assigned to the control
group, the standard SACM modality and the SACM training with added incentives. Randomization
was done at the project level without stratification on project type or location. Livelihood
investment projects (including livestock and enterprise support) amount to approximately 2/3 of
the sample. The rest of the sample is mostly composed of infrastructure rehabilitation projects.
Due to the range of project types and the difficulty of comparing outcomes for these different
projects, approximately 20 projects among the least common are dropped from the final analysis.
(including valley damn and valley tank projects). Given livestock sub-projects are predominant in
the sample, the analysis provides results for all sub-project types, and then separately for
livestock.

                             Table 1: Sample Projects by Type and Status

                                                      Treatment Status
                          Project Type           Control SACM SACM + Total
                                                                  Incentives
                Livelihood Investment
                Livestock                             212   206       217      635
                Enterprise                            23    29        29       81
                Infrastructure Rehabilitation
                Borehole                               5      3        6        14
                Fencing                                9     11        7        27
                Staff House                           11     22        14       47
                Dormitory                              2      2        5        9
                Classroom                              2      2        3        7
                Health Center                          3      4        4        11
                Valley Tank                            2      1        0        3
                Valley Dam                             1      0        0        1
                Public Works
                Roads                                  9    12        10       31
                Tree Planting                         27    29        18       74
                Total                                 306   321       313      940

                                                 28
3.2 Baseline Data and Baseline Balance

A baseline survey was conducted between January 2012 and March 201312. The baseline survey
was implemented among local officials throughout the 45 districts and 485 sub-counties in areas
where NUSAF2 operated at that time. Sub-county officials included in the survey were sub-county
chiefs, LC3 and NUSAF2 desk officers. The survey sought to capture local leaders’ attitudes
towards corruption and governance. The survey also collected socio-economic data on local
leaders (including education, work experience, earnings and assets), their knowledge of NUSAF2
operating rules, as well as leaders’ cognitive and behavioral skills13. The baseline survey among
local officials was meant to complement available administrative data on community sub-project
characteristics.

The baseline data shows that the randomization procedure produced treatment and
comparison groups that were similar before the roll-out of the SACM intervention, with
satisfactory balance in observed characteristics. Balance tests are conducted on three sets of
data. The first two, project budget and type, is from the administrative data obtained from the
Office of the Prime Minister of Uganda. The third type of data is from the follow-up project
assessment survey. Communities were asked when they received their NUSAF2 grants, which
was coded as a continuous date. This variable, while not fully objective, gives a proxy of when
the project was able to start14. In order to document balance between the treatment and control
group, we test whether there is a statistically significant difference between treatment
assignments on these indicators. Table 2 in annex provides the results. All of the coefficients are
small and none are statistically significant. On this limited set of variables we conclude that there

12
   Note that it was originally expected that the SACM intervention would start in 2013. However, delays in the
procurement process to select and contract the implementing NGO implied that the intervention only started in
May 2014. The intervention was implemented until October 2015. This explains the time lag between the baseline
survey and follow-up sub-project assessment survey.
13
   It was originally anticipated that randomization could be implemented at the sub-country level, and as such that
baseline balance could be tested at the sub-country level. However, due to the fact that NUSAF2 project
implementation was more advanced in some sub-counties, the remaining number of sub-counties was not
sufficient and randomization had to be performed at the sub-project level. As such, balance tests on the leaders’
survey cannot be performed as originally intended. The information from the baseline survey will mostly be used
in extensions of the analysis to consider heterogeneity in program impacts by local characteristics.
14
   83 of the communities (10% of the sample) reported that they did not know when the money came and so this
variable is coded as a missing value.

                                                        29
was generally good balance across the various treatment and control groups. This means that
the sub-projects assigned to the various control and treatment groups were similar before the
roll-out of the SACM training. Therefore, program impacts can be estimated by taking first-
difference in outcomes observed in the follow-up survey. We return to the empirical estimation
strategy in section 4 below.




3.3 Follow-up Data, Main Outcomes and Intermediary Outcomes

The main source of follow-up data for the impact evaluation consists of a sub-project
assessment collected after the completion of SACM implementation, between December 2015
and February 2016. The sub-project assessment included an observation of community projects
by a team of enumerators. For projects with a single output (e.g. a staff house or a borehole),
enumerators directly observed characteristics of the output. For livelihood support projects
where outputs were distributed to beneficiaries, a sample of beneficiaries was drawn and
beneficiary-level outputs were observed15. For example, for livestock projects, a sample of
beneficiaries was selected and enumerators visited the sampled beneficiaries to observe the
animals provided by the project. The sub-project assessment data allows for the measurement
of a set of core outcomes for the impact evaluation, but also of intermediary outcomes (or main
underlying mechanisms) that can lead to changes in final outcomes. For each domain, the sub-
project assessment allows capturing a range of variables, which can later be aggregated into
indices. The next sub-sections provide additional information on the main outcomes and
intermediary outcomes to be tested and the indicators that were collected to measure them. The
annex provides tables with the full list of variables composing the various indices.




15
   In livestock and enterprise projects, the enumeration team collected the names of all participants. From this list,
five people were selected at random to be interviewed. These five people were sought and replaced only in the
instance that they had died (in which case attempts were made to track the animal they had originally been given),
or were living with their animals very far away. Replacements were restricted to these special cases. The total
number of individuals replaced was less than 3% of the sample. Data collection for all other projects was at the
community level.

                                                         30
Complementary data is obtained from a follow-up household surveys, which covered NUSAF2
beneficiaries in SACM treatment and control communities and was collected between May and
July 2016. The follow-up household survey provides complementary information at the
household level, including on intermediate indicators related to individual complaints to local
leaders and officials, and trust in local leaders and officials16.

The primary outcome is a measure of a project overall score, which is composed of indices that
measure the quality of the project and the quantity of outputs delivered17. The project overall
score is the main outcome for the analysis. It is built as an interaction of a quality measure and
quantity measure. This allows accounting for the situation where a community received more of
output from a project, but at lesser quality, and vice versa. The quality and quantity indices are
also analyzed separately. As the quality and quantity indicators are created across different
product types, the indices constructed are normalized within each project type to ensure
comparability.

Project quality is measured within each project type through direct observation of a range of
attributes of the project output. For livestock, the project quality score is an additive index of
whether the animal received was of the appropriate age, whether it was a local or improved
breed of animal, whether the animal was productive when visited by the survey team 18, and
whether the animal displayed any signs of illness. For staff houses, quality is whether the walls,
roof, windows, doors, ceilings and floors meet quality standards. For enterprise projects this is
whether individuals have access to materials, transportation, credit, labor and markets. Roads
are assessed based on the material used in the construction, and tree planting based on whether
the seeds or seedlings were certified. The annex provides the full set of indicators that compose
the quality index.




16
    Additional information from the follow-up survey will be used in extensions of the analysis that will also consider
impacts on household-level assets.
17
    All indices are additive from the individual components.
18
    Productivity is defined by animal type. For instance, if the animal is a dairy cow it is determined to be productive
if it is producing milk.

                                                          31
The quantity measure captures the outputs delivered as part of the community project. It is
determined by the number of animals received, length and height of the building constructed,
number of people engaged in the enterprise, length of the road constructed and the number of
trees planted. These measures are obtained from direct observations of the outputs by
enumerators during the sub-project assessment. In cases where the output could not be
observed, the quantity measure takes a value of 0. This happens for livestock sub-project when
the livestock has died or is missing at the time of the sub-project assessment. The annex provides
the full list of quantity indicators.

To complement the observed measures of sub-project quality and quantity of outputs, an index
of project implementation is also constructed. This score is composed of subjective questions
asked to the community about whether they felt the project was useful, whether they felt the
project was completed as expected, and whether the materials met expectations and were not
deemed to be very expensive.

The final indicator considered is whether the project appeared to be a “potential problem
project”. 23 of the projects could not be found at the time of the follow-up sub-project
assessment. These projects are categorized as “potential problem projects”. In practice, the
implementing agency and the IG verified that funds were disbursed to the communities and the
sub-projects implemented, ruling out major issues with these projects. Still, the data collection
agency could not undertake the sub-project assessment in these projects and they could not be
included in the sample. As part of the analysis, we test whether the share of potential problem
projects varies between treatment and control communities.

In addition to the primary outcomes, the sub-project assessment also measures three types of
intermediary outcomes that capture the main underlying mechanisms that can explain changes
in final outcomes. As mentioned above, the three main domains of intermediary outcomes are
(i) the procurement and contracting process, (ii) community monitoring and reporting of
complaints, and (iii) community interactions with district officials, as well as satisfaction and trust
in public officials and local leaders. These three domains relate to some of the key areas covered
by the social accountability and community monitoring curriculum. Indicators on the

                                                  32
procurement and contracting process include an index of challenges faced by communities in the
procurement process, an index of satisfaction with suppliers of goods and materials, and whether
the community hired a contractor. For communities that did hire a contractor, indicators also
include an index of challenges faced by communities in the contracting process, and an index of
satisfaction with the contractor. The second main domain for intermediary outcomes include
indicators on community monitoring, in particular an index for the intensity of project community
monitoring, and an index for intensity of monitoring by the Social Accountability committee
(SAC). Indicators are also built from the follow-up household survey on the number of complaints
made by individuals to officials, including LC1 chairperson, sub-county officials, district officials
and the Inspectorate of Government. These complaints are reported separately for the NUSAF2
sub-projects and for government services unrelated to NUSAF2, in order to proxy for potential
spill-overs on service delivery at the local level. Finally, the third main domain for intermediary
outcomes captures interactions between communities and local officials. This includes indicators
for whether a payment was made to district official or staff, an index of satisfaction with the sub-
county NDO and district veterinarian officer, as well as measures of trust in local leaders and
public officials.


4. Empirical Estimation Strategy


The empirical estimation strategy relies on the randomization of the SACM training at the sub-
project level, which allows identifying the impact of SACM training based on first-difference in
outcomes at follow-up. Specifically, data from the follow-up sub-project assessment and follow-
up household surveys are used to test the differential effects of each program modality on the
outcomes and intermediary outcomes presented in Section 3.              The impact of the social
accountability and community monitoring training is estimated through the following intention
to treat (ITT) regression model:

                                   Yi = α + βT + γXi + δR + εi                                 (1)



                                                   33
where i refers to a community, Y is the outcome (or intermediary outcome) of interest, T is a set
of dummy variables for which treatment a community was assigned to, X is a matrix of project
controls (administrative data on project type, start date and budget)19, R is a set of region, district
and sub-county dummies, and ε is the error term. The estimation is performed separately for a
pooled treatment (combining the standard SACM model and the SACM model with incentives),
and separately for each type of treatment modality. In addition to the main outcomes and
intermediary outcomes listed in Section 3, the same estimation method is applied to components
of the individual indices.

While heterogeneity by sub-project type cannot be formally estimated due to small sample
sizes, program impacts are also estimated separately for livestock sub-projects only. This gives
a sense of the robustness of the results for the main project type in the sample, but also allows
looking into the specific components of the overall project score for this type of sub-project. In
addition, since the sub-project assessment was performed for a sub-sample of beneficiaries for
the livestock projects, the main indicators can be analyzed at the beneficiary level for these
projects, providing some additional statistical power.

In order to ensure the transparency of the study, the analysis to be conducted was specified in
a technical pre-analysis plan that was registered prior to the analysis being undertaken. The
pre-analysis plan also outlines two extensions of the analysis beyond the scope of the current
report20. First, additional research will assess to what extent variations in the density of social
accountability training across sub-counties lead to spill-over or displacement effects. Second,
additional research will assess heterogeneity in the training effectiveness by characteristics
measured from the baseline leader survey.




19
     These community controls are used in robustness tests only.
20
     See Fiala and Premand (2016).

                                                         34
5. Impact Evaluation Results

5.1 Impacts on Main Community Project Outcomes

Results show that the social accountability and community monitoring training intervention
improved the overall quality of community projects. Figure 2 and Table 3 present the results for
the five main outcomes: total sub-project score, score separated by quality and quantity,
whether a project is a potential problem project, and the project implementation score. We find
a statistically significant effect on the overall project score of 0.12 standard deviations. This is a
moderate effect size and suggests that there was an important change in the communities due
to the SACM intervention21. This overall improvement in community sub-projects is driven by a
mix of increases in the quality and quantity of outputs, though improvements in the quality and
quantity scores taken separately are marginally not significant. There is no significant difference
in the share of potential problem across the treatment and control groups. There is no change in
the subjective indicator of project implementation either.




            Figure 2: Impacts on Main Community Project Outcomes, All Project Types

         0.14
         0.12           *
         0.10
         0.08
         0.06
         0.04
         0.02
         0.00
        -0.02   Sub-project Overall Sub-project quality    Sub-project       Potential Problem       Project
                    Score (std)         score (std)     quantity score (std)      Project        implementation
                                                                                                      score




21
   A cleaner interpretation of the magnitude of the effects can be provided for livestock project. A one standard
deviation increase in the quantity score is equivalent to a community receiving five extra cows. For the quality
indicator, a one standard deviation increase would represent all of the sub-project's animals changing from either
unproductive to productive, bought at the incorrect age to the correct age, having an illness to not having an illness
or being local instead of hybrid.

                                                            35
No statistical difference was found in the impact of the standard SACM model, and on the
SACM model with added incentives. There is no evidence that the incentives had a significant
value-added on final outcomes beyond the standard SACM training. This is not really surprising
given the incentives were relatively weak (and low-cost), and mostly consisted in individual
incentives that strengthened the salience of the link between community monitoring groups and
the Inspectorate of Government. Therefore, in light of these results, we pool the two treatment
modalities for the rest of the analysis since they do not appear to lead to different impacts.

Given the livestock projects are the most prevalent and constitute 2/3 of the sample, they can
also be analyzed separately. Table 4 present the same results as in Table 3, but for the livestock
projects only. The point estimates are broadly consistent with results for the full set of projects.
They point to improvements in overall project score, mostly coming from improvements in the
quality of livestock sub-project. However, these indicators at the project level are marginally not
significant, in part due to the fact that the sample of livestock projects is slightly smaller,
providing less statistical power. In order to gain additional statistical power, Table 5 and Figure 3
display similar results for indicators measured at the beneficiary level. Results again point to
improvements in overall livestock project score that are marginally not significant, mostly coming
from improvements in the quality of livestock sub-project, including a significant improvement
in animal health.




       Figure 3: Impacts on Main Community Project Outcomes, Livestock Projects Only
                             (Indicators at the beneficiary level)
               0.20


               0.15


               0.10
                                                                                            *


               0.05


               0.00
                      Sub-project Overall Sub-project quality    Sub-project       Sub-project quality
                          Score (std)         score (std)     quantity score (std) score (std) - health
              -0.05


                                                          36
The SACM intervention led communities to have healthier animals, and decreased the share of
animals that could not be found during the follow-up subproject assessment. Figure 4 and Table
6 present impacts on the individual components of the livestock sub-project score. This helps to
determine which component of the indices is driving the results documented above. We do not
find statistically significant effects on animal age, whether the animal is an improved breed, or
whether the animal is productive. We do find that the social accountability and community
monitoring intervention led communities to have healthier animals, with a 15% decrease in the
number of illness among animals delivered in livestock projects (from 0.187 to 0.16). In addition,
a lower number of animals were missing and could not be found during the follow-up sub-project
assessment. Specifically, results show a statistically significant effect on the fraction of animals
that were dead, stolen or sold in communities. The SACM training decreased the likelihood of
missing animals by approximately 25% (-0.047/0.178), a relatively large effect. This means that
either the SACM intervention increased the number of animals actually received by communities,
or increased the quality of the animals received and as such their probability of survival until the
follow-up sub-project assessment.




              Figure 4: Impacts on Components of Livestock Project Quality Score

     1.00
     0.90                                                                  *
     0.80
     0.70
     0.60
     0.50
     0.40
                                                                                             **
     0.30
     0.20
     0.10
     0.00
            Share Animals of   Share Animals of   Share of Productive   Index of animal   Share of Missing
              Correct Age      Improved Breed          Animals              Health           Livestock

                                      Mean in Treatment       Mean in control




                                                       37
5.2 Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes and Mechanisms


This sub-section explores the underlying mechanisms that can contribute to explain the overall
impacts documented above. As suggested in the section on the theory of change, three main
mechanisms are considered, namely (i) the procurement and contracting process, (ii) community
monitoring and reporting of complaints, and (iii) community interactions with district officials, as
well as satisfaction and trust in public officials and local leaders.

First, the SACM training did not lead to changes in the ways communities undertook
procurement and contracting processes, i.e. in their selection of providers of goods and
services. Figure 5 and Table 7 present the main results on intermediary outcomes related to the
procurement of goods, services and materials, as well as the contracting of suppliers to deliver
goods and services to the community. No impacts are observed on these indicators. Treatment
communities do not report significantly less challenges in the procurement process and
significantly higher satisfaction with the suppliers of goods and materials. Sub-projects in
communities that benefitted from SACM are as likely as control sub-projects to rely on
contractors to deliver community projects. They do not face significantly less challenges in
dealing with contractors, and do not report higher satisfaction with contractors.




     Figure 5: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Procurement and Contracting Process

       6.00

       5.00

       4.00

       3.00

       2.00

       1.00

       0.00
               Challenges in   Satisfaction with   Hired a Contractor Index of challenges Satisfaction with
               Procurement      supplier Index       to Implement       in Contracting    contractor Index
               Process Index                             Project            Process

                                      Mean in Treatment       Mean in control



                                                       38
A finer analysis of the individual variables that enter in the various aggregate indices reveals no
changes in any of the procurement variables. Almost none of the contracting variables are
significant either. The only exception is a significantly higher reliance on single-sourcing in
treatment communities, as well as a significantly lower share of communities complaining that
their opinion was not taken into account by the contractor during project implementation. The
latter effect reflects the stronger community monitoring that took place in these sub-projects, as
we now discuss in relation to the second mechanism.

Second, there is evidence of higher intensity of sub-project monitoring by communities
assigned to the SACM intervention. As such, stronger community monitoring contributes to
explain the improvements in community projects noted above. Figure 6 and Table 8 present
the results on community monitoring indices. The SACM training led to an increase in overall sub-
project monitoring by communities. For instance, communities that benefitted from SACM were
more likely to produce accountability reports or monitoring reports. The SACM intervention led
to a particularly strong increase in the intensity of sub-project monitoring by members of the
community monitoring groups. The intervention was effective in making the social accountability
committees more active: social accountability committees in communities assigned to SACM
undertook approximately 40% more monitoring activities compared to committees in
communities that were not assigned to the SACM training. Social accountability committees were
more likely to produce written monitoring reports, monitor project implementation, and monitor
the selection of livestock and material. Although these changes are large in relative terms, the
level of monitoring by the social accountability committees in the control group is rather low. As
such, the absolute increase in community monitoring is moderate, which is in line with the small
overall improvements in the quality of community projects.




                                                39
                  Figure 6: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Community Monitoring

        3.50
        3.00                      *
        2.50
        2.00
        1.50
        1.00                                                                          ***
        0.50
        0.00
               Index for Intensity of Project Community Monitoring         Index for Intensity of Social Accountability
                                                                                Committee Project Monitoring

                                                 Mean in treatment      Mean in control




Consistent with increased community monitoring, individuals in communities that received the
SACM training are also more likely to report having complained to public officials about issues
with their sub-project. Figure 7 and Table 8 present impacts on the number of complaints about
the NUSAF2 community sub-project made to various public officials. The overall number of
complaints increased by 13% in treatment communities. The number of complaints made to LC1
chairperson, sub-county officials, district officials and the Inspectorate of Government all
increased. The impact is particularly strong for complaints made to the Inspectorate of
Government, although this type of complaint is less frequent to start with.



 Figure 7: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Complaints by Individuals about NUSAF2 Sub-
                                         projects

 2.50
                ***
 2.00

 1.50

 1.00
                                           **
 0.50
                                                                 *                      **                      ***
 0.00
          Total # Complaints to       # Complaints to LC1    # Complaints to         # Complaints to         # Complaints to
                 Officials                Chairperson       Subcounty Officials      District Officials      Inspectorate of
                                                                                                               Government

                                                 Mean in treatment      Mean in control



                                                                 40
Some spill-overs from community monitoring are also observed, as complaints from
community members about government services others than NUSAF2 also increase. Figure 8
and Table 9 present impacts on the number of complaints made by community members about
government services others than the NUSAF2 community sub-project. Results reveal a strong
overall increase of 20% of the number of complaints made about other government services. The
number of complaints made to various officials increase, including LC1 chairperson, sub-county
officials, district officials and the Inspectorate of Government. These results suggest that the
SACM intervention increased community monitoring of other government services as well, which
could lead to impacts on service delivery beyond those documented above on the overall quality
of NUSAF2 community projects.



   Figure 8: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Complaints by Communities about Other
                                   Government Services

 2.50
            ***
 2.00

 1.50

 1.00
                                     **
                                                           *
 0.50                                                                           **
                                                                                                    ***
 0.00
        Total # Complaints to   # Complaints to LC1    # Complaints to       # Complaints to      # Complaints to
               Officials            Chairperson       Subcounty Officials    District Officials   Inspectorate of
                                                                                                    Government

                                           Mean in treatment      Mean in control




Finally, no impacts are observed on indicators capturing community interactions with district
officials, as well as satisfaction and trust in public officials and local leaders. Figure 9 and Table
10 present the results on community interactions with officials, both technical officers (such as
district veterinarians, engineers or NUSAF2 desk officer) and local leaders. Some indicators
capture whether payments were made to local officials. When payments are reported, the data
does not allow distinguishing whether the payments were legitimate (such as when communities

                                                           41
pay district veterinarians for medicine) or illegitimate (such as bribes). Other indicators capture
whether communities were satisfied with the quality of service they delivered, as well as on trust
in local leaders. Figure 10 and Table 11 present impacts from the SACM intervention on trust in
local leaders and public officials. No impacts are observed on any of the indicators on payments
made to officials and satisfaction with these officials, suggesting that the training did not affect
communities’ interactions with officials, although it did improve the quality and quantity of goods
and services delivered to the communities. Trust in public officials in the local and central
government is unaffected by the intervention. However, SACM communities report lower trust
in community sub-project leaders.

    Figure 9: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Payments and Satisfaction with Officials

   1.00                                                         2.45
   0.80
                                                                2.40
   0.60
   0.40                                                         2.35
   0.20                                                         2.30
   0.00
          Payment was made to    Payment was made to            2.25
             district official    district officer (vet,               Satisfaction with NDO    Satisfaction with
                                        engineer                                Index          Disctrict Vet Index

             Mean in treatment      Mean in control                     Mean in treatment      Mean in control




   Figure 10: Impacts on Intermediary Outcomes: Trust in Local Leaders and Public Officials

               4.00
               3.50     ***
               3.00
               2.50
               2.00
               1.50
               1.00
               0.50
               0.00
                      Sub-project     LC3         Subcounty          LC5       District      Central
                        Leaders   Chairperson      Officials     Chairperson   Officials   Government

                                  Mean in treatment        Mean in control




                                                           42
6. Conclusion



This report presented the main results from the social accountability and community
monitoring (SACM) intervention impact evaluation implemented as part of the TAAC sub-
component of NUSAF2. The impact evaluation results show that the social accountability and
community monitoring (SACM) intervention improved community project quality by a small but
significant magnitude amounting to 0.12 standard deviations. This overall improvement in
community sub-projects is driven by a mix of increases in the quality and quantity of outputs. For
livestock sub-projects – the most common type of sub-projects in the sample, the social
accountability and community monitoring intervention led communities to have healthier
animals, as well as reduced by 25% (from 17.8% to 13.1%) the livestock that could not be found
in the communities at the time of the follow-up sub-project assessment. The main results are
similar for the standard social accountability and community monitoring intervention and a
treatment arm including additional incentives.

The study analyzes the main channels through which the social accountability and community
monitoring intervention led to improvements in community sub-projects. It shows that
stronger community monitoring is the main channel through which the intervention was
effective. Community members were more engaged in ensuring they were receiving quality
project outputs, and more likely to report issues to local, sub-county and district officials, as well
as to the Inspectorate of Government. Some spill-overs from the community monitoring were
also documented, as complaints from community members about government services others
than NUSAF2 also increased. On the other hand, no impacts were observed on the process used
by communities to procure goods, services and materials, or on interactions between
communities and public officials, although beneficiaries report lower trust in community sub-
project leaders. The table below summarizes the main findings for each impact evaluation
question.




                                                 43
                     Summary of Main Results by Impact Evaluation Question
 Main Study Question                                       Main Findings
 1. Is the social accountability and community             Yes. The SACM intervention has statistically
 monitoring (SACM) intervention effective in               significant impacts on an overall index of
 improving the quality of community projects?              community project quality. Results suggest
                                                           that communities get a mix of additional and
                                                           better-quality outputs from their NUSAF2
                                                           projects. The magnitude of the impacts are
                                                           not very large, however.

 2. Are additional incentives effective beyond the         No, the additional incentives do not have
 standard SACM model?                                      impacts beyond the standard SACM model.

 3. What are the mechanisms that are more likely to
 explain the observed impacts on project quality:

i) changes in the way communities procure                  No impacts are observed on intermediary
    goods and services?                                    outcomes that capture how communities
                                                           procure goods and services.

ii) more intensive community monitoring and                This is the most likely mechanism. Impacts
    additional complaints to public officials?             are observed on the intensity of community
                                                           monitoring, as well as on the number of
                                                           complaints made by community members to
                                                           public officials.

iii) changes in interactions with local leaders and        No impacts are observed on intermediary
    public officials, as well as satisfaction and trust    outcomes that capture interactions between
    in these leaders?                                      communities and local officials (aside from a
                                                           decrease in trust for community sub-project
                                                           leaders).




Results from the impact evaluation of the TAAC SACM intervention highlights the promise of a
novel approach to social accountability. The program is of a significantly larger size and
geographic spread than has previously been experimentally tested, which is likely to make the
results more generalizable. The trainings are also of greater intensity than has previously been


                                                      44
attempted and implemented in a way that is more likely to be scaled-up by governments around
the world. As such, the results have the potential to get researchers and policy makers to consider
how bottom-up accountability can lead to real changes in national community-based
development programs.

An important caveat is that the cost to benefit ratio of the intervention is not fully established,
and would be hard to ascertain without being able to fully take into account potential spill-
overs. A key question relates to the value-for-money of the SACM intervention itself. Due to
challenges in contracting, the scope of the training, and the fact that the implementing NGO/CSO
was a consortium of various partners, the program was relatively expensive to implement. The
cost of the training per community is estimated at approximately $900-$1000. This can be
compared to the overall cost of the community projects: a majority of livestock projects were
given 12,000,000 USH (approximately $3,636), which is also the average amount received per
community. As such, the SACM training would need to increase the quantity or quality of outputs
delivered to communities by close to 1/4 of the total value of community projects for direct SACM
impacts on NUSAF2 projects alone to justify the cost of the program. The magnitude of the
impacts documented in this report are smaller. Still, the increase in the quantity of outputs
delivered to communities is not the only benefit from the program. Indeed, the training also had
positive spill-over effects by strengthening monitoring of other government programs and
services, which would be very challenging to quantify. The program may also have led to valuable
individual-level changes on beneficiaries’ empowerment or attitudes. In any case, finding ways
to reduce the cost of the training would be needed to ensure its cost-effectiveness. It is likely
that the same training could be delivered at a significantly lower cost, in particular as the delivery
of the training for the first time at a large scale induced some fixed costs and inefficiencies.

This report also points to a set of questions that would deserve additional research. If it was
possible to predict where the program is most likely to work best, and for which types of sub-
projects, it could be targeted and the overall impacts could be larger, further contributing to
better cost-effectiveness. Future research will explore this question, as well as heterogeneity in
program impacts by local characteristics or local program density. Additional analysis beyond the
scope of this report would also be required to assess impacts on individual beneficiaries’ assets.

                                                 45
Lessons from implementation of the NUSAF2 TAAC sub-component and SACM intervention
have already had broader policy influence. They informed the design of NUSAF3 TAAC sub-
component. For instance, in line with the approach in the SACM training, the Community
Monitoring Groups (CMGs) have replaced the Social Accountability Committees (SACs) and have
been given an expanded mandate. At the same time, training of these communities will build
upon the SACM curriculum. In addition, the experience of the TAAC sub-component has already
been emulated in social protection programs in Liberia and Sierra Leone. The NUSAF2 TAAC sub-
component is also mentioned as an example in the World Bank new strategic framework for
mainstreaming citizen engagement (World Bank, 2014).




                                             46
References


BAIRD, S., B. OZLER, C. McIntosh, (2011). The regressive demands of demand-driven
development, The World Bank.

BANERJEE, A., GREEN, D., GREEN, J. & PANDE, R. 2010. Can voters be primed to choose better
legislators? Experimental evidence from rural India.

BANERJEE, A., S. KUMAR, R. PANDE & SU, F. 2011. Do Informed Voters Make Better Choices?
Experimental Evidence from Urban India.

BARR, A. and D. SERRA (2009). "The effects of externalities and framing on bribery in a petty
corruption experiment." Experimental Economics 12(4): 488-503.

BARR, A. and A. ZEITLIN. 2011. Conflict of interest as a barrier to local accountability. CSAE
working paper, Oxford University.

BERTRAND, M., DJANKOV, S., HANNA, R. & MULLAINATHAN, S. 2007. Obtaining a driver's
license in India: An experimental approach to studying corruption. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122, 1639-1676.

BHARGAVA, V. E. 2006. Global Issues for Global Citizens: An Introduction to Key Development
Challenges, Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

BJORKMAN, M. & SVENSSON, J. 2009. Power to the People: Evidence from a Randomized Field
Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
735-769.

BJORKMAN, M. & SVENSSON, J., 2010. "When is community-based monitoring effective?
Evidence from a randomized experiment in primary health in Uganda." Journal of the European
Economic Association 8(2-3): 571-581.




                                                47
DEININGER, K. and P. MPUGA, 2004. Does greater accountability improve the quality of delivery
of public services? Evidence from Uganda. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper. 3277.

DEVARAJAN, S., S. KHEMANI, and M. WALTON. (2011). Civil society, public action and
accountability in Africa, The World Bank.

DJANKOV, S., LA PORTA, R., LOPEZ-DE-SILANES, F. & SHLEIFER, A. 2010. Disclosure by Politicians.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 179-209.

FERRAZ, C. & FINAN, F. 2008. Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil's Publicly
Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 703-745.

FISZBEIN, A, D. RINGOLD and H. ROGERS (2009). Making Services Work; Indicators,
Assessments, and Benchmarking of the Quality and Governance of Public Service Delivery in the
Human Development Sectors. Mimeo, the World Bank, Washington DC.

HUNT, J. 2007. How Corruption Hits People When They Are Down. Journal of Development
Economics, 84, 574-589.

IG, 2014a. Inspectorate of Government Report to Parliament (July – December, 2014).
Inspectorate of Government, Kampala.

IG, 2014b. Social Accountability and Community Monitoring Training Curriculum. Inspectorate
of Government, Kampala.

KOZIOL, M. and C. TOLMIE (2010). Using Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys to Monitor
Projects and Small-Scale Programs. Washington DC, World Bank.

LITSCHIG, S. and Y. ZAMBONI (2011). Audit risk and rent extraction: Evidence from a
randomized evaluation in Brazil, Department of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra.

MOLINA, E., 2014. “Can Bottom-Up Institutional Reform Improve Service Delivery?” IDB
Working Paper Series No. IDB-WP-513.

                                                48
OLKEN, B. & PANDE, R. 2012. Corruption in Developing Countries. Annual Review of Economics,
4.

OLKEN, B. A. 2006. Corruption and the costs of redistribution: Micro evidence from Indonesia.
Journal of Public Economics, 90, 853-870.

FIALA, N. and P. Premand. 2016. "The Impact of Social Accountability on Service Delivery:
Experimental Evidence from a Large-scale Community-driven Development Program in
Uganda." AEA RCT Registry.

REINIKKA, R. & SVENSSON, J. 2004. Local Capture: Evidence from a Central Government
Transfer Program in Uganda. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 679-705.

REINIKKA, R. & SVENSSON, J. 2006. "Using Micro-Surveys to Measure and Explain Corruption."
World Development 34(2): 359-370.

REINIKKA, R. & SVENSSON, J. 2011. "The power of information in public services: Evidence
from education in Uganda." Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8): 956-966.

RINGOLD, D., A. HOLLA, M. KOZIOL, S. SRINAVASAN, 2012. “Citizens and Service Delivery,
Assessing the Use of Social Accountability Approaches in the Human Development Sectors.”
World Bank, Washington DC.

ROSE-ACKERMAN, S. 2004. Governance and Corruption. In: LOMBORG, B. (ed.) Global crises,
global solutions. Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.

RUBIO, G. M. 2011. Measuring governance and service delivery in safety net programs, World
Bank Social Protection Working Paper Series, Washing ton DC.

SERRA, D., 2009. "Combining Top-down and Bottom-up Accountability: Evidence from a Bribery
Experiment", Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford.




                                              49
SERRA, D., A. BARR, T. PACKARD, 2011. Education outcomes, school governance and parents'
demand for accountability: evidence from Albania, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
Series, Washington DC.

VAN STOLK, C. and E. TESLIUC, 2010. Toolkit on Tackling Error, Fraud and Corruption in Social
Protection Programs. World Bank Social Protection Working Paper Series, Washing ton DC.

WOO, J.-Y. 2010. The Impact of Corruption on a Country's FDI Attractiveness: A Panel Data
Analysis, 1984-2004. Journal of International and Area Studies, 17, 71-91.

WORLD BANK. 2003. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People.
New York: Oxford University Press; Washington, DC: World Bank

WORLD BANK, 2014, Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank
Group Operations, Engaging with Citizens to Improve Results.

WORLD BANK, 2015, Uganda Systematic Country Diagnostic, Boosting Inclusive Growth and
Accelerating Poverty Reduction. World Bank, Washington DC.




                                               50
Tables
Table 2: Baseline Balance
                                      (1)                (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)                 (8)
                                                                                      Fencing                                                   Project start date
                                  Sub-project      Livestock      Enterprise          project      Roads        Tree project   Staff House     (When grants were
VARIABLES                           budget       project (0/1)   project (0/1)         (0/1)    project (0/1)      (0/1)       project (0/1)        received)

Treatment==SAC                       0.336              -0.010      0.003              -0.001      0.012          -0.014          0.009               0.060
                                    [0.526]            [0.029]     [0.018]            [0.009]     [0.015]         [0.023]        [0.012]             [0.361]
Treatment==SAC Plus                  -0.071             0.016       0.006              -0.010      0.011          -0.028          0.005               -0.018
                                    [0.528]            [0.030]     [0.018]            [0.009]     [0.015]         [0.023]        [0.012]             [0.359]
Observations                          895                895         895                895         895             895            895                 812
R-squared                            0.976              0.625       0.638              0.727       0.421           0.385          0.737               0.357
Mean in Control                     20.549              0.729       0.079              0.031       0.031           0.093          0.038              38.380
p-value for equality of treatments   0.433              0.385       0.880              0.332       0.952           0.524          0.763               0.827
Standard errors in brackets
Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                                 51
Table 3: Impacts on Main Outcomes (All Project Types)



                            (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)                  (5)
                                           Sub-project quality
                     Sub-project Overall          score           Sub-project quantity   Potential Problem         Project
 VARIABLES          Score (standardized)     (standardized)       score (standardized)        Project        implementation score

 Treated                   0.119*                 0.094                  0.059                -0.003                0.034
                           [0.071]               [0.075]                [0.049]               [0.012]              [0.075]
 Observations                864                   864                    855                   895                  710
 R-squared                  0.354                 0.374                  0.419                  0.28                0.411
 Mean in Control           -0.026                 0.01                  -0.041                 0.027                2.377
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                 52
Table 4: Impacts on Main Outcomes (Livestock Projects Only)



                         (1)                 (2)                    (3)               (4)                (5)
                     Sub-project     Sub-project quality        Sub-project                            Project
                    Overall Score           score             quantity score   Potential Problem   implementation
 VARIABLES         (standardized)      (standardized)         (standardized)        Project             score

 Treated               0.101                0.105                 0.017             -0.007             0.001
                      [0.090]              [0.087]               [0.055]            [0.011]           [0.074]
 Observations           606                  614                   606                635               589
 R-squared             0.375                0.400                 0.441              0.336             0.425
 Mean in
                        0.027                0.023                0.004             0.028              2.308
 Control
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                53
Table 5: Impacts on Main Outcomes (Livestock Projects Only, Beneficiary-level indicators)

                         (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                     Sub-project      Sub-project quality       Sub-project      Sub-project health
                    Overall Score            score            quantity score            score
 VARIABLES         (standardized)       (standardized)        (standardized)       (standardized)

 Treated                0.114                 0.120               -0.017               0.109*
                       [0.079]               [0.081]              [0.040]              [0.058]
 Observations           2,788                 2,798                2,783                2,811
 R-squared              0.391                 0.389                0.495                0.230
 Mean in
 Control                -0.016               0.015                 -0.03                -0.001
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                 54
Table 6: Component of Main Project Score (Livestock Projects only, Beneficiary-level Indicators)



                           (1)                      (2)                       (3)                    (4)               (5)
                                                                                                                   Fraction Of
                                                Animal Is An                                 Animal Health By      Animals Not
                   Animal Bought At The   Improved/Crossed/Hybrid     Animal Is Productive   Mean Number Of         Observed
 VARIABLES           Correct Age (0/1)          Breed (0/1)                  (0/1)               Illnesses      (Dead/Stolen/Sold)

 Treated                  0.024                    0.018                    -0.013                 0.027*           -0.047**
                         [0.029]                  [0.011]                   [0.027]                [0.015]           [0.019]
 Observations             2,814                    2,812                     2,645                  2,645             2,814
 R-squared                0.271                    0.761                     0.234                  0.187             0.178
 Mean in
 control                  0.345                  0.167                       0.397                 0.859              0.336
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                 55
Table 7: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Procurement & Contracting



                       (1)            (2)             (3)                  (4)            (5)
                   Challenges
                        in                          Hired a             Index of      Satisfaction
                  Procurement    Satisfaction    Contractor to        challenges in       with
                    Process      with supplier    Implement            Contracting    contractor
 VARIABLES           Index          Index           Project              Process         Index

 Treated             -0.056         0.136           -0.001               -0.123         -0.004

                     [0.083]        [0.134]         [0.031]              [0.291]        [0.231]

 Observations           742           686             833                 307             501
 R-squared             0.273         0.362           0.619               0.554           0.432
 Mean in
                       2.046         5.544            0.41               3.623           5.273
 control
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                 56
Table 8: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Community Monitoring and Complaints about NUSAF2 sub-projects



                          (1)                   (2)                  (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)              (7)

                                        Index for Intensity
                  Index for Intensity       of Social
                      of Project          Accountability        Total #       # Complaints    # Complaints   # Complaints    # Complaints to
                     Community          Committee Project     Complaints to      to LC1      to Sub-county     to District   Inspectorate of
 VARIABLES           Monitoring            Monitoring           Officials     Chairperson        Officials      Officials      Government

 Treated                0.155*               0.245***           0.300***        0.075**         0.055*         0.059**          0.117***
                        [0.086]               [0.067]            [0.102]        [0.031]         [0.030]        [0.027]           [0.027]
 Observations             855                   907               6,002          6,581           6,445          6,328             6,286
 R-squared               0.486                 0.434              0.230          0.171           0.177          0.181             0.205
 Mean in
                          2.767                0.628             1.929           0.74           0.611           0.422            0.237
 control
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                57
Table 9: Spillovers in Community Monitoring, Complaints about Non-NUSAF2 Government Services

                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)                 (5)
                                                                                                          # Complaints to
                   Total # Complaints   # Complaints to LC1   # Complaints to sub-   # Complaints to      Inspectorate of
 VARIABLES             to Officials         Chairperson          county Officials    District Officials     Government

 Treated                0.174**              0.095***                0.088***            0.038**             0.054***
                        [0.074]               [0.032]                 [0.026]            [0.018]              [0.018]
 Mean in
                          0.872                0.461                  0.317               0.158               0.154
 control
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                58
Table 10: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Payment and Satisfaction with Officials



                       (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)
                                  Payment
                   Payment        was made
                   was made       to district    Satisfaction   Satisfaction
                   to district   officer (vet,    with NDO      with District
 VARIABLES          official      engineer          Index        Vet Index

 Treated             -0.003        -0.013          -0.040          0.093
                     [0.027]       [0.028]         [0.122]        [0.141]
 Observations           871           871            881            572
 R-squared             0.347         0.343          0.332          0.429
 Mean in
                       0.141        0.166         2.377               2.308
 control
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
 p<0.10




                                                                 59
Table 11: Main Intermediary Outcomes, Trust in Local Leaders and Public officials

                       (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)         (6)
                   Sub-project        LC3        Sub-county         LC5          District       Central
 VARIABLES           Leaders      Chairperson    Bureaucrats    Chairperson    Bureaucrats    Government

 Treated            -0.099***       -0.042         -0.026         -0.037            -0.037       0.026
                      [0.028]       [0.034]        [0.029]        [0.038]           [0.033]     [0.021]

                      7292           7278           7260              7233           7271        7273
 Observations
 R-squared             0.115         0.129        0.104               0.096         0.097       0.102
 Mean in
                       3.651         3.199        3.309               3.027         3.322        3.62
 control
 Standard errors in brackets
 Controls include sub-county and project type dummies
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
 p<0.10




                                                                 60
Annex: Components of the main outcomes indices
The table below summarizes which variables enter the main outcomes indices, separately for the
quantity indices (first column) and quality indices (second column). The overall indices aggregates
both the quality and quantity indices, and as such includes the variables in the first and second
columns. The variables entering the indices are presented separately by sub-project types. When
analyzing results across sub-project types, sub-project indices are normalized before being
aggregated together.

       Sub-Project Type
                          Quantity Indicator(s)                             Quality Indicator(s)
          Livestock
                          Total number of animals the subproject received   Age when animals were received (as recalled by beneficiaries).
                                                                            Age of observed animals. Caluculated by examining the animals
                                                                            teeth.

                                                                            The breed of the animal. Either local or crossed/imporved/hybrid.
                                                                            Indicates that an oxen is ploughing
                                                                            Indicates that a female cow has given birth
                                                                            Indicates that a breeding bull has bred
                                                                            Cow is pregnant
                                                                            Goat is pregnant
                                                                            Female animal is lactating
                                                                            female animal is plough (for Karamoja)
                                                                            Weight of cow measured using a tape around the chest
                                                                            Weight of goats measured using a tape around the chest.
                                                                            Indicates wounded skin
                                                                            Indicates scarred skin
                                                                            Indicates swollen skin
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the ears.
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the eyes.
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the mouth.
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the nostrils.
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the rectum.
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the vulva.
                                                                            Indicates abnormal discharges from the udder.
                                                                            Indicates swollen lymph nodes
                                                                            Indicates limping
                                                                            Indicates lameness
                                                                            Indicates fractures
                                                                            Indicates blindness
                                                                            Indicates bloating
                                                                            Indicates swollen joints
                                                                            Indicates diarrhorea
                                                                            Indicates slow dullness
                                                                            Indicates slow breathing
                                                                            Indicates rapid breathing
                                                                            Indicates reduced appetite
                                                                            Indicates coughing
                                                                            Indicates parasite infestation. We consider an animal ill if it is
                                                                            severly infested.
                                                                            Indicates the temperament of the animals. We consider an animal
                                                                            ill if it has an aggressive or dull temperament.
                                                                            Indicates inflamed udder.

                                                                            Indicates issues with the teats. We consider an animal to be ill if
                                                                            the teats are not functional, small, missing, swollen or with soares
                                                                            Indicates the state of the testis. We consider an animal to be ill if
                                                                            the testis are not functional, small or there is only one
                                                                            (uncastrated animals only).
    Staff House           Length of staff house                             Indicates walls are satisfactory.
                          Width of staff house                              Indicates roof is satisfactory.
                          Height of front wall of staff house        61     Indicates windows are satisfactory.
                          Height of rear wall of staff house
                                                                            Indicates doors are satisfactory.
                                                                            Indicates ceiling is satisfactory.
                                                                            Indicates floor is satisfactory.
                                                                            Indicates painting satisfactory.
                                                                    Indicates inflamed udder.

                                                                    Indicates issues with the teats. We consider an animal to be ill if
                                                                    the teats are not functional, small, missing, swollen or with soares
                                                                    Indicates the state of the testis. We consider an animal to be ill if
                                                                    the testis are not functional, small or there is only one
                                                                    (uncastrated animals only).
Staff House     Length of staff house                               Indicates walls are satisfactory.
                Width of staff house                                Indicates roof is satisfactory.
                Height of front wall of staff house
                                                                    Indicates windows are satisfactory.
                Height of rear wall of staff house
                                                                    Indicates doors are satisfactory.
                                                                    Indicates ceiling is satisfactory.
                                                                    Indicates floor is satisfactory.
                                                                    Indicates painting satisfactory.

Enterprise      Number of people currently engaged in the
                enterprise                                          Current access to materials
                                                                    Current access to transportation
                                                                    Current access to credit
                                                                    Current access to skilled labour
                                                                    Current access to markets
                                                                    How successful they feel their enterprise is.
Fencing         Length of the fence.
Roads           geopoints for either end of the road and any        Material the road is made from.
                corners. With this we can calculate the length of
                the road




                Width of the road. (Measured in 3 places)

Tree Planting
                Size of the land used.
                                                                    Indicates whether the seeds/seedlings bought were certified.
                Number of seedlings planted.
                Number of seeds planted.




                                                             62
