                                             SUMMARY REPORT

           Technical Assistance on “Mainstreaming Beneficiary Feedback in Select Sectors in Egypt?



    I.         CONTEXT

The World Bank’s Middle East and North Africa (MNA) Regional Strategy identifies economic and social
inclusion and governance as two of its key pillars for engagement in the region. Egypt’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) also highlights improving governance as fundamental for achieving
sustainable growth and reducing poverty. It states that the delivery of infrastructure and social services
is significantly hampered due to the absence of transparency and accountability. In order to improve
governance at the sector level, sector specific issues must be addressed through an increased focus on
policies and regulations, institution-building, and more effective channels for voice and participation.

At the sector level, the World Bank is supporting the Government of Egypt (GoE) to continue
strengthening voice and participation by supporting clear guidelines for sector ministries to employ
approaches for beneficiary feedback for improved responsiveness and equity of sector policies and
strategies. At the project level, the World Bank can support the institutionalization of mechanisms to
foster more efficient beneficiary feedback and effective program/project level grievance redress
systems to channel citizen complaints.

The GoE has demonstrated interest in taking steps to be more responsive to its citizens and the World
Bank has leveraged its comparative advantage to showcase global lessons on designing and
implementing GRMs. The Bank has demonstrated to have unique convening power to bring together
local partners, government and civil society, and the broader international community of practice to
build client capacity and design contextualized sector specific GRMs in Egypt.

    II.        OBJECTIVES

The eighteen-month activity provided technical assistance to three select sectors in Egypt – health, rural
sanitation, and natural gas (subsequently swapped for Jordan’s labor sector) to strengthen the capacity
of national and local institutions to design and implement effective sectoral grievance redress systems.
Strengthening channels for beneficiary feedback aimed at giving voice to service users, beneficiaries and
citizens more broadly; at promoting greater accountability of service providers and government
agencies; and enabling evidence-based corrective actions to achieve better service delivery outcomes.

    III.       TA COMPONENTS

The TA was Bank executed because the focus was on building client capacity and in fostering knowledge
sharing and networking in three sectors: health, rural sanitation and energy sectors1. The sectors and
projects were selected based on several criteria. First and foremost, the impact of the TA in selected
sectors and target projects was considered to be substantial based on the project’s existing objectives


1
 The TA was originally envisioned to cover the natural gas, health and rural sanitation sectors in Egypt. Due to
problems and significant delays in getting the government clearances for the bottom up assessment in the natural
gas sector, the work in the sector was replaced with similar work for the Ministry of Labor in Jordan who could
benefit from a similar assessment.

                                                                                                               1
and expected outcomes. In the Rural Sanitation Program Program for Results (PfR), one of the
Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI) to improve operational systems is citizen engagement, for which
improved responsiveness to grievances will be tracked and therefore counterparts have incentive to
perform. In the health sector, improving complaints handling at the national, governorate, and local
level is part of the project’s design and objectives thus client capacity will be necessary for successful
implementation. In the Natural Gas Household Connections Project, substantial resources have been
allocated for the establishment of Customer Service Centers, also responsible for handling customer
complaints. In the latter, the work did not proceed as planned due significant delays in obtaining
security clearances therefore the work was replaced with the Economic Opportunities for Jordanian and
Syrian Refugees for Jordan PfR. The Jordan Project has a commitment in its Program Action Plan (PAP)
commitment to strengthen the Ministry of Labor in handling complaints. In all of these cases, there is
strong government ownership because these have been included in above mentioned project designs.
Moreover, the projects will benefit a sizable number of identifiable beneficiaries’. Lastly, project
resources were provided for each project (Refer to brief project descriptions and objectives are detailed
in Annex 1).

The TA comprised of three key components:

Component 1 – Deep Dive Sectoral Diagnostics and Knowledge Development:

Component One supported the knowledge development on GRM that is both specific to the Egyptian
context and the target sectors. Diagnostic studies for each of the participating sectors were
commissioned to assess the institutional environment, capacity of target entities, as well as existing
channels of communication and feedback to and from beneficiaries. The studies built on existing
analytical work in these areas and complemented the traditional “top-down? analysis with a “bottom-
up? approach. The studies mapped out sectoral issues, the interaction between the relevant sector
agencies and beneficiaries/customers, and identified actionable measures to improve customer
satisfaction, service quality, transparency, and accountability in the sector.

Component 2 – Design and Implementation of Beneficiary Feedback Mechanisms:

The Bank’s added value to supporting GRM design, implementation support, and client capacity is its
ability to generate economies of scale around GRM and draw in broader policy dialogue on beneficiary
feedback via this TA activity. The specific support under Component 2 was to be tailored based on the
findings from component 1.

The types of activities would be structured along three buckets: institutional strengthening, client
capacity, and responsiveness to beneficiaries. For example, activities could include: (i) the
establishment of administrative rules and procedures for GRM processes; (ii) supporting sector agencies
to effectively disseminate these to targeted agencies, (iii) institutionalizing the publication of minimum
service standards and citizen charters across targeted sector agencies; (iv) publication of the rules,
standards, etc. to inform stakeholders (i.e. citizens, CSOs, media, think-tanks) through diverse mediums,
including government portals and CSO websites, and (v) training of government agencies on grievance
redress handling, among others based on findings in Component 1.

Component 3 - Policy Dialogue, Networking, and Project Management:



                                                                                                        2
The proposed TA would leverage the momentum generated by the multi-sectoral approach to provide a
contextualized forum for learning and exchange around effective beneficiary feedback mechanisms in
Egypt. Specifically, the Bank will convene a series of fora aimed at elevating the discourse in Egypt
around the benefits of effective beneficiary feedback mechanisms. Issues around implementation
challenges would be discussed and addressed by convening global, regional and sector experts on GRM.

   IV.       OUTPUTS

The main outputs included (detailed further in the report and attachments):

        Three Sector-Specific Technical Assessments (diagnostic studies) providing a diagnosis of the
         strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and challenges for designing, strengthening, and
         implementing GRMs in the three select sectors

        Three Action Plans for implementing recommendations in each sector, including capacity
         building plans for target agencies

        Two Operational Manuals

        Capacity building activities and/or proposals in three sectors (detailed in Activities and
         Achievements)

        One multi-sectoral Knowledge Event for Egyptian clients for knowledge sharing and networking

        Online platform (C4D) for client Knowledge Exchange



   V.        METHODOLOGY

The TA defined a GRM as an institutionalized system by which queries or clarifications about service
delivery are responded to, problems with implementation are resolved and complaints and grievances
are addressed efficiently and effectively. A successful GRM:
        Provides a suitable remedy to a complainant
        Evaluates and improves programs and services
        Informs decision making about future service delivery
        Maintains a good relationship between the public and builds client loyalty
GRMs enhance the accountability of service providers to end beneficiaries, and are an integral tool for
improving the quality of services delivered. An analysis, following the six steps continuum outlined in
the diagram below, was used to structure the analysis conducted to prepare the technical assessment:




                                                                                                        3
Flowing from the assessments findings, a detailed action plan was produced for the rural sanitation,
health sectors for Egypt [See Annex 1 in Technical Assessments], and Jordanian Labor Sector
Assessment [See Chapter 6] with proposed corrective actions.

The methodology used to carry out the diagnostic work in the three sectors included an institutional
assessment which entailed interviews with the key sectoral departments and stakeholders and a bottom
up assessment which reached out to beneficiaries/customers through consultations, focus group
discussions, and phone calls to complement the assessment. A sole technical GRM assessment was
produced.

In the water and sanitation sector, the process constituted of an institutional assessment as well as a
“bottom-up? assessment to capture the WSCs’ customers’ opinions/use of the existing GRM set up. The
institutional assessment was carried out at the three levels: the branch level (markaz), the Water and
Sanitation Company at the governorate level, and the relevant national institutions in Cairo (e.g.,
Holding Company for Water and Wastewater -HCWW, Egyptian Water Regulatory Agency -EWRA, and
the Consumer Protection Agency). Technical meetings were held with staff of all these institutions in
the three project targeted governorates (Beheira, Dakahliya and Sharkiya) and in Cairo.

The “bottom-up? assessment used a mix of participatory methodologies to reach citizens. They
combined quantitative and qualitative methods by conducting phone calls, focus group discussions,
transect walks in the communities, and visits to infrastructure and construction sites in the three
targeted governorates. The assessment sought to obtain and document the formal and informal systems
used by citizens, their perspectives on what works and can be improved, and their level of awareness of
the GRM.

For the health sector, the assessment identified challenges and gaps in the current GRM system and
developed recommendations for an effective system. Similarly, the assessment used a multi-pronged
methodology comprised of an a) institutional analysis, b) consultation with a wide range of stakeholders

                                                                                                      4
at central, governorate and district level, and c) bottom-up assessment through focus group discussions
with beneficiaries in various primary healthcare facilities in order to capture citizens’ perspectives.
Specifically, meetings were held with Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) officials in Cairo and
with MoHP representatives at the governorate, district and primary health care (PHC) level in three
governorates (Beni Suif, Qena and Sohag). Focus group discussions were held in six Primary Health Care
Units.2 In each focus group, around 8-12 health care patients were invited to attend the discussion. Most
participants were women, who had come to the facilities as patients, accompanying their children for
vaccinations or medication, and/or visiting the health center for family planning purpose.

Substantial preparatory work had been conducted with the natural gas sector to collect preliminary
documents, identify the scope of work and localities for the diagnostic work, site selection criteria, and
focal points for each project area. The criteria for selection included geographic coverage
(representation from all four Local Distribution Centers (LDCs), and population density. The Customer
Service Centers (CSCs) sites selected included:

    Governorate          LDC                      Markaz/Village                 Population Density
    Giza                 Town Gas                 El Omraniya                    Urban
    Qalubiya             Egypt Gas                Shoubra El Khiema              semi-urban
    Sohag                Regas                    Sohag and Gerga                Mix (rural + semi urban)
    Ismailia             Sinai Gas                El Qantra Shark                Semi-urban


Despite the advanced state of the preparatory work, the Bank team did not receive the necessary
security clearance to proceed with the bottom-up assessment. Instead, resources were re-allocated to
preparing a technical assessment and action plan for the Ministry of Labor in Jordan which could benefit
from this activity, as per agreement with the Country Management Unit (CMU) and MENA Trust Fund
(MDTF).

In the Jordanian labor sector, the assessment was based on an in-depth institutional analysis of the
different MoL directorates involved in the grievance redress mechanism at the central as well as
decentralized level. Meetings were held with Ministry of Labor staff in the following directorates:
Inspections, Child Labor, Hotline, Internal Audit Unit, Public Communications and Social Media,
Domestic Work and Human Trafficking, and Information Technology. In addition, several external
stakeholders were consulted including international organizations such as UNHCR, Better Works Jordan
(BWJ) and the International Labor Organization (ILO), NGOs such as Tamkeen, ARDD Legal Aid, Phoenix
Center for Economic and Information Studies, and the Embassy of Bangladesh. The team also met with
the General Trade Union of workers in Textile, Garment and Clothing Industries (an official union) and
the Independent Union for Male and Female Agriculture Sector Workers (independent Union).

Due to the shift in sector and country at a late stage of the TA, a structured bottom up assessment was
not conducted in this case. However, a detailed and costed action plan was developed (Chapter 6 in the
Assessment) to reflect specific areas to support the Ministry of Labor improve its data collection,
processing and information systems as they relate to case management of complaints. A proposal to

2
 Consultations were held in: Beni Suif Governorate, Family Health Units of Sherif Basha and Hakamna; Qena
Governorate, Family Health Unit of Madienet el Omaaland and El Tramsaa Health; and Sohag Governorate, Family
Health Units of Rawafeaa El Qousear and Naida.

                                                                                                            5
train inspectors was also developed which would be rolled out by the independent institution, Better
Work Jordan3. BWJ will contribute to greater labor compliance of factories and will raise awareness
about worker’s rights and redress channels. These also contribute to the broader objectives of the Bank-
financed Program for Results.

    VI.      ACTIVITIES AND ACHIEVEMENTS

All sectors involved benefited from the TA through the preparation of technical assessments to identify
strengths and weaknesses, and from action plans to correct these gaps. The health and rural sanitation
sectors directly benefited from varying degrees of tailored capacity building activities, while in the case
of Jordan, an inspector’s training proposal was developed to strengthen the Ministry of Labor’s labor
compliance targets.4 The Knowledge Event on global, regional and Egyptian lessons learned benefited
not only the rural sanitation and health sectors, but was also widely represented by the energy, gas,
transport, agriculture, social protection, housing and irrigation sectors and client counterparts in Egypt.

These activities contributed to the intermediate outcome, “client capacity increased? both in terms of
design and implementation capacity strengthened of client counterparts.

1) Support to Rural Sanitation Sector:
      a. Assessment Findings:

The assessment is rich in information and provides the analytical base that underpins the recommended
specific actions reflected in the Action Plan to strengthen the existing Ministerial-level GRM. “Big
picture? key findings include:

         Public Awareness and Communication: (i) The hotline #125 is primarily used to report
          emergencies and is only accessible through the landline; (ii) the #125 is widely publicized;
          however, it only handles water complaints; #175 handles wastewater complaints; (iii) there is no
          information about how to deal with construction-related complaints (project level).
         Uptake: Multiple channels exist to register complaints, many of which are informal and are not
          captured through the formal systems, e.g., walk-ins, phone calls, letters, fax, and complaints
          directly to technicians.
         Registration of Complaints: The existing complaints management system (CMS) is available only
          in the hotline departments and lacks categories to capture project level complaints (during
          infrastructure construction) and complaints about staff.
         Follow Up: The hotline departments lack the authority to request the resolution of grievances
          from relevant departments. Moreover, the existing system does not distinguish between a
          response to complaints and the resolution of grievances.
         Feedback: The hotline responds to customers whose complaints are resolved but does not
          provide feedback for unresolved cases.
         Appeals: Overall, there is a lack of information about the appeals process. Therefore, the
          handling of complaints is fragmented, and complaints are channeled to EWRA, HCWW, and the
          Consumer Protection Agency.

3
  Better Work Jordan is a joint International Labor Organization (ILO) and IFC program that provides assessment,
advisory, and training services to factories and to improve working conditions and increase compliance with
international labor protection standards (child labor, working conditions, and so on) and local labor law.
4
  The Jordan Economic Opportunities for Jordanian and Syrian Refugees PfR has leveraged donor funding to
finance aspects of the action plan, including the soft skills training for inspectors.

                                                                                                                   6
       b. Action Plan – Refer to Annex 1 in Assessment with detailed action plan.

       c. Capacity Building activities: Financed Water and Sanitation Program (WSP)

The SRSSP PfR obtained substantial funding from the WSP program (USD $3 million) and it was agreed
with the project team that WSP would finance the capacity building activities related to GRM and other
citizen engagement related items for a more streamlined approach to their overall citizen engagement
DLI. Under WSP funding, the following institutional strengthening and capacity building to the client
was rolled out and developed, building on the assessment findings:

      Guidelines and operational procedures for project-related GRM were developed (ie., complaints
       about land acquisition, contractors, project delays, other implementation issues);
      Operational Manual to implement the GRM at the project level (Arabic only);
      Training plan developed for citizen engagement / GRM for relevant staff who participated in the
       assessment. These included the WSCs, HCWW, and EWRA at the central and Governorate
       levels; and
      Delivered training to clients at the three participating WSCs on GRM aimed to enhance uptake,
       receipt, resolution, as well as to increase management awareness.

2) Support to Health Sector:
      a. Assessment

The assessment informs the recommended specific actions reflected in the detailed Action Plan to
strengthen the existing GRM (Annex 1). “Big picture? key findings are:

      Public Awareness and Communication: Currently, the most prominent way of communicating
       with beneficiaries about filing complaints is limited to written notices hung on the walls in
       primary health care centers. The notices display the phone numbers of three health officials
       from the facility, governorate, and the central levels, and the toll-free number (#19153), which
       citizens can call to place a complaint.
      Uptake: At the central level, the various uptake channels for complaints include by telephone,
       letters, or walk-ins. Complaints are also referred from the prime minister’s office or from other
       ministries to the relevant departments. At the district and PHC levels, however, no formal
       complaint uptake channels exist and almost all complaints are made in person and verbally.
       Though there are “complaints and suggestions? boxes prominently placed at the entrance of the
       PHCs, beneficiaries rarely use them to file a complaint. Finally, there is a toll-free number which
       receives information requests regarding the Poverty Program. The MoPH is in the process of
       contracting a firm to set up the same toll-free number to also receive complaints regarding
       HQIP.
      Registration of Complaints: The government portal and the Department of Citizen Service (DCS)
       have different registration databases, and staff collecting different information while registering
       the complaints. As a result, it is difficult to obtain comprehensive data about the types of
       complaints and their geographical source. In addition, and more importantly, resolution and
       follow-up of the complaints becomes complicated. Complaints tend not to be registered at the
       PHC level.


                                                                                                        7
      Follow Up: There are clear procedures for following up complaints at the DCS level but
       procedures are non-existent at the PHC level.
      Feedback: The DCS provides feedback to the complainants regarding resolution of the complaint
       at the central and governorate levels. At the PHC level no feedback is provided to complainants,
       with the exception of Sohag where staff responsible for managing the grievances writes a short
       summary of what the issue was and how it was resolved and posts it on a bulletin board at the
       entrance of the PHC.
      Appeals: Currently, no appeal process is available for decisions taken by HQIP for the resolution
       of citizens’ complaints. Bottom-up assessment also indicated that citizens at the PHC level are
       unlikely to appeal even if they are unsatisfied with the outcomes of their complaints.

       b. Action Plan – Refer to Annex 1 in Assessment with detailed action plan.

       c. Capacity Building Activities

The support to the MoH Meeting consisted of a thoroughly consultative process with decision makers
and implementers of the key Departments in the Ministry. It was agreed with the HQIP PMU Director
that the Bank Team would support the MoH in developing a GRM User’s Guide/Manual for Primary
Health Care through a series of participatory workshops to ensure all counterparts validated the
assessment findings and developed realistic solutions to improve the GRM system. It was agreed that
the proposed manual would build on the current practices of MoH and that the following Departments
would be part of the process to develop a unified User’s Guide: Citizen Services, Primary Care, Family
Planning, Social Services and Quality Departments.

The development of the OM was developed through a two-part workshop (December 2016) which
facilitated dialogue amongst the central, Governorate, and district level staff from the Ministry of
Health. They reached a common understanding of the key challenges in implementing an effective
grievance redress system and seeking consensus on feasible corrective measures to improve the system.

The workshops were successfully able to reach specific decisions on the workings of the GRM process in
Primary Care, including

      defining the roles and responsibilities of all actors at central, governorate, district and PHC level;
      clarifying the process of uptake, registration and resolution of complaints at different levels;
      identifying links between different levels for referral and resolution of complaints;
      outlining the monitoring and evaluation process at different levels and;

A User’s Guide was developed in Arabic, based on elements agreed during the participatory workshops,
including a series of forms to standardize the processes. (See MOH GRM User’s Guide – available both
in English and Arabic). It is currently being validated and will be tested, piloted and training for the
relevant staff would be rolled at the PHC, district, governorate and central level.

The MOH, through the HQIP has committed publicly to printing and distributing copies of the OM to be
distributed to all seven Governorate Directorates and Units participating in the Project.

3) Support to Jordan’s Ministry of Labor:
      a. Assessment


                                                                                                            8
The assessment informs the specific and costed action items reflected in the detailed Action Plan to
strengthen the existing GRM (Chapter 6). “Big picture? key findings are:

      Public Awareness and Communication: Limited outreach efforts have been implemented to
       raise awareness among constituencies that a grievance redress system is available at the MoL.
       A large majority of the complaints received are from employers about their employees, rather
       than laborers. There is no communication strategy which includes disseminating information
       through all available channels, including media, NGOs, labor unions, embassies, UN agencies,
       etc. and a strategic partnership between MoL and the expatriates’ embassies to disseminate
       information about the embassy hotlines is absent.
      Uptake: The call center at the central Ministry lacks infrastructure (phones, computers) and a
       central hotline database with the directorates at the decentralized level to capture all
       complaints received by the MoL. Systematic documentation of walk-in inquiries and complaints
       is absent as are protocols for the Internal Auditor to determine how complaints are classified
       and what the penalty for each violation is.
      Registration of Complaints: The MoL does not have internal systems to handle complaints from
       Syrian refugees, which are inconsistently transferred to UNHCR. The current registration system
       of the Division of Hotline and Complaints to capture key data requires updating and roll out at
       the directorate (decentralized) level. A unified case resolution management (CRM) system
       would be able to register and link all complaints that MoL receives regardless of division and / or
       directorate as well as track their resolution.
      Follow Up: Existing Inspectorate Unit staff require strengthened technical expertise, and a
       necessity of shifting the mindset from ‘policing’ to providing incentives to comply with
       standards. Some of the inspectors are not well versed with the updated labor law and court
       rulings (Court of Appeals) and its regulations therefore training and distribution of this
       information is needed. Currently the Follow up and Monitoring Division to the complaints
       databases are de-linked, thus updated information to be provided to complainant on status of
       resolution is unreliable.
      Feedback: Standardized forms need to be developed to receive written feedback regarding their
       complaint, (e.g., a standard form can be included in the database that is generated
       automatically and includes reference number, date, acknowledgment of receipt, and
       information for following up of if no response is received).
      Appeals: Prepare information regarding the avenues for appeal and produce posters or flyers to
       display in the MoL Directorates.

       b. Action Plan (costed)

The costed Action Plan in Chapter 6 was developed based on extensive consultations across relevant
departments at the Ministry of Labor in Jordan. The corrective actions proposed include capacity
building activities, purchasing/upgrading of hardware systems, strengthening of communication and
outreach activities, and institutional actions. The proposed costed items are being discussed and
negotiated with other donors collaborating with implementation of the Jordan Economic Opportunities
for Jordanian and Syrian Refugees PfR for financing.

4) Policy Dialogue and Networking:


                                                                                                        9
In addition to the policy and technical dialogue, meetings, and facilitated discussions held during the
institutional and bottom up assessment elaboration, two specific activities were delivered to increase
knowledge sharing and networking among Egyptian clients and a broader community of practitioners:

   Knowledge Event on “GRM and Beneficiary Feedback in Project Implementation, Lessons Learned
    from Egyptian, Regional and Global Experiences?, which took place on April 22-23, 2017 in Cairo,
    Egypt. The main objective of the workshop was to share knowledge about international, regional
    and Egyptian experience in implementing Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs), and to showcase
    lessons learned from recent technical assistance aimed at strengthening redress mechanisms in the
    rural sanitation and health sectors in Egypt. The two-day event was attended by approximately 50
    participants, representing Project Management Unit (PMU) staff from fifteen Egypt project teams
    (both in the pipeline and under implementation), sectoral ministry staff and decision makers, and
    also including the direct beneficiaries of the TA in the Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program
    for Results (SRSSP) and the Healthcare Quality Improvement Project (HQIP).

    During the Day 1, the Knowledge Event introduced the meaning, value and conceptual framework of
    GRM and beneficiary feedback mechanisms; showcased global and regional experiences by drawing
    on examples from developing and developed countries (including the U.S., Australia, Peru,
    Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Palestine, and Turkey). It concluded with a Roundtable Discussion
    comprised of seven high-level decision makers representing different sectors (health, housing, local
    development, water, sanitation, gas and energy) to seek their commitment to empowering GRM
    units and implementing corrective measures. Some of the commitments reached by decision-
    makers included:
        o Need to integrate all sporadic (scattered, isolated) complaints systems in one system
        o Implement different public communications and community outreach techniques
        o Adopt statistical techniques to analyze results of citizen satisfaction surveys and use of data
            as indicator for the quality of serving citizens and to improve the performance.
        o Provide capacity development sessions to staff working on GRM and related departments
        o Strengthen the documentation of complaints, including use of unified templates to collect
            information in all relevant departments
        o Provide incentives for the good service providers
        o Network with other counterparts from different sectors to share experiences

    Day 2 kicked-off with a high-energy role play of participants trying to file a complaint tailored to the
    Egyptian context. The day focused exclusively on the Egyptian experience based on the findings
    from the TA, discussions around commonalities between the Egyptian case studies and global
    lessons learned. The case studies presented by the clients included:

    (i)     The housing sector which highlighted the Inclusive Housing Program for Results and its
            success in developing an effective case management online system, and achieving behavior
            change of staff to adopt the system (rather than returning to paper-based methods).
    (ii)    The social protection sector with the Egypt Labor Intensive Public Works Project,
            implemented by the Social Fund for Development shared its effective techniques of
            mobilizing local community members to ensure that vulnerable populations were reached
            and that overall awareness raising about the system and process was attained.


                                                                                                         10
      (iii)       The irrigation sector through its Farm-level Irrigation Modernization Project, which covers
                  over 30,000 farmers, carried out an assessment to better define the types of complaints and
                  improve its data collection systems. They have been able to establish a complaint center
                  where farmers can walk in and have published various materials (brochures, hotlines)
                  informing farmers where to go.

      Findings from the rural sanitation and health sector support were presented. (See health and rural
      sanitation assessments and Knowledge Event presentations for detailed findings). Event Report,
      including Agenda is attached for more detail). The Event evaluation revealed that the totality of the
      participants (100%) expressed excellent and good satisfaction with the content, its relevance and
      applicability to real life experiences and work, learning modules and delivery, and the quality of the
      trainers5. (See details in Event Evaluation Summary – Knowledge Event zip file).

     Online Platform, C4D – Collaboration for Development
      A public online platform with GRM and beneficiary feedback related materials and additional
      resources was launched ahead of the Knowledge Event in Cairo. The platform (see link below),
      which operates similarly to Facebook, has been developed in both English and Arabic to facilitate
      networking and exchange among participants and a broader community of practitioners. Event
      participants expressed enthusiasm about being able to exchange amongst themselves
      (https://collaboration.worldbank.org/groups/grms-and-beneficiary-feedback-in-project-
      implementation )

These activities contributed to the intermediate outcome, “knowledge deepened? through the
facilitated exchange of best practice with clients. The Knowledge Event evaluations confirmed that the
facilitated exchange and knowledge learning was highly successful, (See Event Evaluation Summary).

      VII.        CROSS CUTTING LESSONS LEARNED

Findings from the assessments carried out in Egypt have been validated by clients and and
complemented by a stocktaking of lessons learned of international experience with GRMs. Key findings
and lessons learned from Egypt are:

             Strategic communications about GRM constitutes a challenge for GRM effectiveness. More
              specifically, this relates to the (i) lack of citizen awareness about multiple uptake channels,
              project objectives as well as citizen rights and entitlements; counterparts’ lack of knowledge
              about the importance of GRM and linkages across departments; and the need for targeted
              women outreach, in particular in the health sector.
             The multitude of GRM uptake channels represents a challenge for clients’ efforts to
              consolidate grievances in a single database for adequate resolution and monitoring. There are
              multiple GRM uptake channels at the central, governorate, local, and project levels. Further, the
              complaints are submitted both informally and formally (i.e. through letters, walk-ins, phone
              calls, complaint boxes, websites, and emails). At times, this may become cumbersome for our
              counterparts to effectively manage the GRM flow.
             A weak system of categorization when registering complaints negatively affects the
              effectiveness of GRM resolution. The assessment revealed the need to bring more clarity in this

5
    Refer to Annex 2: GRM Knowledge Event – List of Materials.

                                                                                                            11
            process, harmonize the format of GRM submission forms across uptake channels and levels, and
            differentiate between complaints and information requests.
           Feedback and follow up on complaints are often challenged by (i) complaint units’ inability to
            leverage their position to request resolution from relevant departments;(ii) vague distinction
            between GRM resolution and responding; (iii) weak enforcement of procedures for feedback
            provision and follow up; and (iv) lack of follow up for complaints that are not resolved.
           Lack of awareness about GRM appeals processes constitutes an issue for complaint resolution
            in these sectors. In many cases beneficiaries do not know of opportunities provided by appeal
            processes or where they can submit their grievances further in case they are not satisfied with
            the outcome of their GRM response.

Key cross cutting recommendations are:

    (i)        Dedicate budget for public awareness campaigns on GRM and project related information
               and roll it out throughout the project cycle;
    (ii)       Increase uptake channels that are culturally sensitive and accessible to vulnerable groups
               and build trust between communities through the use of social intermediaries (i.e
               community liaisons/mobilizers, etc.); and
    (iii)      Improve GRM documentation and classification through strengthening grievance
               registration at local levels, setting categorization and tracking systems, and differentiating
               between resolving and responding to complaints.

The following global lessons were drawn from a stocktaking of best practices, and were also discussed
and validated by Egyptian clients:

     1. Streamlined institutional set-up
Need for institutional streamlining and harmonization of GRM uptake, reporting and resolution
mechanisms: Clear reporting lines are necessary, as are lines of responsibility for resolving issues, with a
minimization of fragmentation of responsibility between offices and levels. Operating procedures,
guidelines and flowcharts should be developed to detail how the grievance redress process will unfold.
These procedures should be harmonized across all levels. For larger projects, a specialized grievance
facilitation unit can be developed.

     2. Devolution of authority
Grievances are best received and responded to at the institutional level closest to end beneficiaries.
These levels should be empowered to respond to and resolve complaints. Only if resolution is not
possible at this level should grievances be sent upward. Local level institutions are responsible for
registering and collating grievances that can, in bulk, be forwarded upward to improve systematic
efficiencies and to set policy.

An added benefit is that often this devolution enables grievances to be resolved by local authorities.
For example, a GRM designed regarding resettlement in the Odra River Basin in Poland was originally
managed at ministry level but due to strong opposition from local communities was reassigned to the
local mayor, who was trusted by the community. Complaints are now addressed in a more timely,




                                                                                                          12
flexible and transparent manner. In the Philippines CCT case, Barangay6 Action teams were created to
provide quick ground-level response to grievances.

    3. Strategic communications are crucial to GRM effectiveness
Beneficiaries need to be informed of uptake channels, project objectives and citizens’ rights in order
to stimulate demand and increase uptake. A well-designed GRM cannot function effectively unless
people are aware of it and how it functions. Similarly, units involved in GRMs need to be better linked
across departments, and adequate budget and expertise should be dedicated to this task. While a strong
communication strategy is necessary, public relations functions should be separate from the function
of receiving and resolving complaints. In the SRSSP, the public relations and grievance resolution
functions are combined, leading to confusion as to which unit is tasked with the resolution of
complaints. In the Philippines CCT a regularized radio program was used to inform beneficiaries of
uptake channels and their right to register complaints and grievance monitoring boards and drop boxes
installed in every Barangay, with advocacy materials placed at strategic locations.

    4. Multiple methods of communication used based on local context
Local context (i.e., income level, gender, illiteracy rates, cell phone penetration) should be a
determining factor in designing communication channels used. Channels may include use of
community mobilizers in low-income, remote areas, where consideration needs to be given to fear of
retribution. Certain segments of the population may need special targeting (i.e., illiterate women). For
example, in Quito, Ecuador, where Internet and cell phone penetration rates are high, a WB project to
install a metro line used Facebook, Twitter, web-based forms, a call center, SMS and e-mail to solicit
feedback. A Smartphone App was developed that includes an input and recording customer service
system that allows service providers to track the resolution of complaints. In the case of the HQIP, at
the health clinics in rural areas, information about grievance redress channels consist of written notices
hung on the PHCs walls only, even though many beneficiaries are illiterate or may have mobility
limitations, especially women. In the SRSSP, links to Community Development Associations were used
to act as an interface between the Water and Wastewater Companies.

     5. Recognition of the need for behavioral change among both service providers and beneficiaries
Understand what the incentive structure for registering and resolving complaints are in order to
develop strategies for behavior change. Incentives for both registering and responding to complaints
are often not in place. Beneficiaries may have a fear of retribution if they register complaints. Similarly,
if complaints are not registered, responded to, or resolved, trust in the system is eroded. To change this
behavior, targeted communications strategies and training of community leaders/groups may be
needed. Managers of service providers also need to recognize the crucial role beneficiary feedback
plays in ensuring services are being delivery properly, and staff should be incentivized and trained to
respond accordingly. Often this means training on the uptake of new systems, and change in behavior
from “case-centric? to “client centric.?

    6. Centralized platforms for capturing and organizing information are needed
Centralized and harmonized data collection and management systems should preferably be located at
the lowest institutional levels. Systems need to be developed to capture information in a standardized
format across all levels. Fragmentation of data capture and lack of standardized formats to capture and
process information is prevalent and needs to be addressed. Best practice points to the use of one

6
    Barangay in the Philippines means local authority, or the equivalent of markaz in Egypt.

                                                                                                         13
comprehensive central platform however, centralized platforms (such as SMS) need to link with local
informal methods of capturing grievance uptake. In the Hubei Yiba Highway Project in China, a
simplified SMS system and matching web interface was designed by consultants and implemented by
the task team, but it was not used by Chinese locals, who preferred to direct their complaints to local
village authorities. Over 95% of complaints were channeled through such traditional mechanisms.

    7. Differentiated system of registering and responding to complaints needed
Systems needs to better capture the clear distinction between responding to a complaint and
resolving a complaint (closing the feedback loop), as well as categorization (types) of complaints .
Registration systems also need to capture when a complaint has been resolved and communicated to
the end beneficiary, and ensure all complainants receive acknowledgement of complaint and feedback
Systems must also ensure a reliable flow of information upward on the number and kind of complaints
received, leading to a continual and timely flow of information to both beneficiaries and providers.

    8. Information Technology (IT) best practice in refining hotlines and other data collection
        systems.
Introduce, where relevant, low-cost or free beneficiary use of mobile technologies, and establish
dedicated call centers that link across and upward to responsible units. Technology based uptake
channels, such as What’s Up, hotlines, etc. need to be well publicized to enable beneficiary usage.
Uptake should include categorization of complaints and be capable of monitoring communication,
including the full communication cycle. For example, in SRSSP, the TA found that the hotlines could only
receive calls made using landlines (and that had not been publicized).

    9. Greater emphasis given to resolution of grievances (closing the feedback loop)
Greater efforts need to be placed on the timely resolution of complaints, not just receipt of complaints
and responding to complaints. Grievances should not be seen as one-off complaints but as part of an
on-going cycle of beneficiary feedback that informs service providers and enables an improvement in
delivery of service. For example, in the HQIP no clear procedures were found for resolving complaints at
MOPH levels.

    10. Reliable and transparent appeals process
An appeals process needs to be in place to ensure beneficiaries have an avenue to pursue if
complaints are not responded to or resolved. The process needs to be well-publicized and streamlined
to ensure responsiveness. In the SRSSP, beneficiaries can appeal to four different agencies, yet it is
unclear what the process is, who will manage it, and an estimated time frame for resolution. The HQIP
does not count with a formal appeals process.

Other lessons (from collective best practice):

       Need for commitment from high levels and adequate budget allocation. Managers should
        view GRMs as a management tool that enables them to improve the efficiency of service
        delivery. As such technological, financial and human resources should be made available for
        implementation.
       Wherever possible, GRMs should build on existing local structures and processes. A best
        practice approach is to conduct a survey upfront of existing formal and informal GRMs and to
        build on them, and to empower local government involvement in the resolution of complaints.
       Staff need to be skilled and professional. Programs to train staff should be initiated, especially
        with regard to uptake of new systems, as well as new innovations in ICT.

                                                                                                       14
   Seek consistent service standards for grievance resolution (guidelines from higher levels to
    ensure harmonization). In most cases consensus around the development of an operational
    manual for GRM helps to ensure consistency.
   Ensure independence of interested parties to bring about fair treatment of cases. Complaints
    should be evaluated objectively on the basis of facts, and action taken appropriate to the level
    of comment or complaint.
   Establish real-time Monitoring and Evaluation systems needed that enable managers to
    identify problem areas and measure results. Such results need to show numbers of complaints
    received, complaints resolved, complaints still undergoing resolution, numbers of complaints
    responded to, etc.
   Simplicity, accessibility and timeliness are key in devising any system, and in ensuring adequate
    uptake by beneficiaries and complaint resolution.
   Participatory and inclusive systems are needed that ensure all project-affected people are
    encouraged to bring grievances and comment to service providers. Special attention should be
    given to ensure poor and marginalized groups, including those with special needs, and able to
    access the GRM.


VIII.   NEXT STEPS AND WAY FORWARD

Significant activities were successfully implemented during the 18-month TA aimed at both
increasing the client’s capacity to design and implement GRMs, and contributed to deepening
knowledge through tailored capacity building activities, participatory workshops, and global,
regional and local knowledge sharing from practical experiences.

In terms of next steps, the following activities are envisioned in each of the supported sectors:

       The rural sanitation sector in Egypt, will continue to strengthen and institutionalized GRM
        through the ongoing Water and Sanitation Program funding supporting SRRSP PfR (currently
        in its second year of implementation). Given that one of the Program’s DLI, is achieving a
        “transparent pro-poor citizen engagement and grievance mechanism? by the second year,
        and responding to “over 50% of received complaints/grievances? by the fifth project year,
        institutionalization of the system and improved satisfactory responses are expected.
        Moreover, the Program’s DLI focuses on other citizen engagement activities, one of which is
        financing citizen report cards to assess citizen satisfaction rates on service delivery. It is
        expected that citizen satisfaction rates will increase as complaints are handled more
        effectively over time.
       The Ministry of Health has publicly committed to printing out the OM/User Guide developed
        through a participatory process and ensure its distribution to all Directorates and all levels.
        This will be financed out of project funds. Additionally, a training plan on rolling out the
        OM/User Guide at all levels is being designed and will be financed by the Project which will
        come to closure end of FY17.
       In close collaboration with the Ministry of Labor in Jordan, a detailed and costed action plan
        was developed to address several gaps that are either directly impeding an effective GRM or
        are contributing to more systemic issues that lead to an increased level of complaints (ie.,
        lack of compliance with labor standards). As such, both hardware and software (soft skills


                                                                                                    15
    training to inspectors) elements have been costed and will be financed by leveraging other
    donor funding in Jordan.
   Lastly, more could be done to support more cross country learning exchanges within the
    MNA Region, as well as within Egypt. The online platform (C4D) has been established to kick
    start this process. The two-day Knowledge Event sparked interested by the Egyptians to
    both continue in-country exchanges, and learn and exchange with others, such as Palestine,
    and Lebanon. The World Bank is well placed to foster these exchanges through the broader
    umbrella supporting the Citizen Engagement agenda in MNA.




                                                                                            16
Annex 1: Brief Descriptions of Selected Projects

Project 1: Egypt Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program-for-Results ($550m)

The World Bank is supporting the Arab Republic of Egypt with a US$550m Program-for-Results (PforR)
credit to implement a Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program (SRSSP) in 2015-2020. The program
aims to strengthen the national sector framework, improve sanitation infrastructure and access for over
800,000 people, and enhance operational systems and practices at Water and Sanitation Companies
(WSCs) in the three governorates of Beheira, Dakahliya and Sharkiya (see Table 1).

    Table 1. Key statistics for the three WSCs: Beheira, Dakahliya and Sharkiya
          Parameter               Beheira         Dakahliya            Sharkiya
    Population                       5,100,000        5,999,000            6,488,000
    Size of Governorate            10,130 km2         3,500 km2            4,180 km2
    Water Connections                  783,000        1,093,000              893,000
    (% of pop. Served)                   (99%)           (100%)                 (96%)
    Connected to Sewer                     26%              79%                   28%
    Water produced                         451               472                  362
    (million m3/year)
    Per capita water                       245               216                  159
    production (l/c/d)
    Staff                                7,333             7,800                5,693
    Source: Support to the three WSCs to establish a complaints and grievance redress mechanism,
     Draft Concept, September 2015.

A “core aspect of the Government’s service delivery improvement strategy? is “strengthening
accountability to citizens?. Citizen engagement is thus also “a key element of the Bank-financed
program? which will support “improved grievance mechanisms…and customers’ complaints handling
mechanisms following best international practices for water and sanitation utilities?.7

The program provides strong financial incentives for the introduction of Grievance Redress Mechanisms
(GRMs) at the three WSCs. It aims for greater decentralization of services at the Governorate level and
increased empowerment and accountability of WSCs. The PforR funds will be released to the Ministry of
Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities (MoHUUC) against “Disbursement Linked Indicators? (DLIs),
and MoHUUC will in turn finance the WSCs according to the related Annual Performance Assessments
(APA). These DLIs/APAs include citizen engagement targets and only if these are met will the full
disbursements to MoHUUC and WSCs be made.

The proposed DLI/APA targets include the institution of a “transparent pro-poor citizen engagement and
grievance mechanism? by the second year, and responding to “over 50% of received
complaints/grievances? by the fifth project year (see Table 2 for what constitutes a well-functioning
GRM). The GRM is also among the key planning elements of the PforR since it contributes to greater
“responsiveness and accountability through stakeholder consultation, timely dissemination of program



7
 The World Bank, Program Appraisal Document on a Proposed Loan in the Amount US$550 Million to the Arab
Republic of Egypt for a Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program for Results, Report No: 97886-EG, July 8,
2015.

                                                                                                            17
information, and responsive grievance redress measures?. The disbursements conditional on these
targets give WSCs a direct financial incentive to introduce and actively use modern GRMs.

Project Funding supporting activity (in-kind or financial):       $3 million from WSP for institutional
strengthening

Project 2: Egypt Healthcare Quality Improvement Project ($75m)

Through the Healthcare Quality Improvement Project (HQIP), the World Bank is providing a US$ 75
million loan to the Government of Egypt to assist primary health care facilities in Egypt's poorest 1,000
villages in meeting national health care quality standards. The project’s closing date is June 2017.

The project has two components. Component one of the project, Family Healthcare Quality
Improvement Program (US$70m), will fund Quality Improvement and Maintenance Plans (QIMP) that
support each participating health center to undertake a phased process of instituting quality
improvements. The process culminates in independently certified accreditation of the health facilities.
Targeting approximately 1,000 Primary Health Centers (PHCs) in five Upper Egypt governorates, the
accreditation program is intended to bring the quality of these facilities up to appropriate internationally
recognized quality standards and to enhance system responsiveness at the family health center/family
healthcare unit.

Component two of the project, Implementation Support (US$5m), will finance the cost of technical
assistance, external financial audits, external independent quality verification and project management
activities of the project. Central to the project is the scaling up of the Ministry of Health and Population
(MoHP)’s Integrated Perinatal Health and Nutrition program supported by the UNICEF. UNICEF has been
requested by the MoHP to support the World Bank-funded project by providing technical expertise
under Component Two for the independent verification process. The purpose of the verification process
is to assess the performance of PHCs against a range of indicators. The achievement of various goals
assessed through the verification will also be used to trigger performance-related financing.

HQIP is implemented in five of the poorest governorates in the country (Assiut, Beni Suif, Minia, Qena,
and Sohag), which are located in Upper Egypt. Three governorates in Upper Egypt (Assiut, Minia and
Sohag) account for 794 of the poorest 1,000 villages in Egypt. In 2013, while the poverty rate in rural
Lower Egypt was 18%, it reached 50% in rural Upper Egypt (CAPMAS). It is expected that approximately
1,000 PHCs will benefit from the project (see Table 1).

Table 1. HQIP Governorates
Governorate         # of Districts*    # of PHCs
Assiut              14                 172
Beni Suif           9                  176
Minia               12                 201
Qena                11                 187
Sohag               19                 305
TOTAL               65                 1,041
*Includes urban and rural districts.

The project has an ambitious Citizen Engagement strategy which consists of the following activities:


                                                                                                         18
    (i)     organization of client satisfaction surveys based on a subsample for independent
            verification;
    (ii)    engagement of civil society organizations in monitoring the implementation of project
            activities;
    (iii)   engagement of civil society organizations in monitoring the quality of service provision;
    (iv)    establishment of a grievance redress mechanism to allow beneficiaries to provide feedback
            to MoHP about the quality of and satisfaction with service provision;
    (v)     establishment of a grievance mechanism for service providers to complain about the results
            of the accreditation assessment;
            establishment of a call center to ensure project beneficiaries’ feedback on any aspect of
            project implementation; and
    (vi)    periodic publishing of the results of accreditation of healthcare facilities.

Project Funding supporting activity (in-kind or financial): USD$5 million for Institutional Strengthening


Project 3: Egypt Natural Gas Households Connections Project ($500m)

The Natural Gas Households Connections Project aims to assist the Arab Republic of Egypt to increase
household access to reliable, lower cost, grid connected natural gas supply. It comprises of three key
components including Component 1: Gas Network Expansion and Household Connections, to finance
investments necessary to expanding the gas networks in the project areas and connecting 1.5 million
households to the distribution networks. Component 2: Financial Support for Household Connection
Charges in Disadvantaged Areas (Estimated Cost: Euro 45 million). The scale-up of the natural gas
connections as envisaged under this project will expand the grid to eleven Governorates that will include
relatively poorer areas of Egypt. To ensure access among vulnerable households and no delay in project
implementation due to consumer affordability, this component will provide financial support for
connection fees for households in disadvantaged and poor areas. The component will be financed by an
EU Grant, managed by AFD. Component 3: Institutional Strengthening, which aims to contribute to the
improvement of the governance structure and fiscal transparency and accountability at EGAS and will
support development of the gas sector regulations.

Component 1 will support the establishment of consumer service centers in the targeted areas to
ensure high quality service to consumers during the project operation stage for the amount of US$25m.
It is envisaged that a minimum of eleven consumer service centers will be established by the LDCs in
their targeted areas (the average cost of establishing a service center is assumed at US$ 2.5 million). In
practice, the CSCs are responsible for collecting customer feedback and complaints however, in practice
capacity is low and funding for client capacity is non-existent, thus capacity enhancement will be
fundamental to ensure improved service delivery.

Project 3 swapped with Project 4: Jordan Economic Opportunities for Jordanian and Syrian Refugees
Program for Results ($300m)

The World Bank Group (WBG) has been asked by the Government of Jordan (GoJ) and the International
Community to support a holistic approach to the Syrian refugees’ influx, which targets both the
Jordanian host communities and the Syrian refugees in Jordan. The parameters of the international
response were defined in the Compact, which was adopted in the “Supporting Syria and the Region
Conference? held in London on February 4, 2016.

                                                                                                        19
Box 1. The Jordan Compact.
The Jordan Compact’s approach is anchored on the following three interlinked pillars in order to support
Jordan’s growth agenda whilst maintaining its resilience and economic stability:
(i) Turning the Syrian refugee crisis into a development opportunity that attracts new investments and
opens up the EU market with simplified rules of origin—all with the aim to creating jobs for Jordanians
and Syrian refugees while supporting the post-conflict Syrian economy;
(ii) Strengthening Jordanian host communities’ resilience to the refugee crisis by adequately financing
public services through grants, in the context of the Jordan Response Plan 2016-2018, in particular the
resilience of host communities; and
(iii) Mobilizing sufficient grants and concessionary financing to support the macroeconomic framework
and address Jordan’s financing needs over the next three years, as part of Jordan entering into a new
Extended Fund Facility program with the IMF.

The WBG is accompanying the process, with $300M Program-for-Results (PforR) financing and about
$2M in advisory services. The PforR supports the Economic Opportunities Aspects of the Compact. The
goal is not just to promote more exports, and more jobs, but also to improve responsible business
practices, help companies raise their environmental, social and governance (ESG) standards, promote
social good, social integration and refugee support. Its Program Development Objective (PDO) is to
improve economic opportunities for Jordanians and Syrian refugees in Jordan. The PforR will also
contribute to the higher-level objectives of Jordan’s Vision 2025, which “charts a path for the future and
determines the integrated economic and social framework that will govern the economic and social
policies based on providing opportunities for all?.

The PforR seeks to provide economic opportunities for both Jordanians and Syrian refugees through:
(a) labor market reform: reforming Jordan’s labor market regulations to grant access to Syrian refugee
workers to the formal labor market and allowing them to legally contribute to Jordan’s e conomic
activity;
(b) investment climate reform: improving Jordan’s investment climate through improving predictability
of regulations and reducing red tape, supporting small businesses and trade facilitation; and
(c) investment promotion: attracting and retaining investments—both domestic and foreign—especially
in manufacturing, in Special Economic Zones (SEZ) that will benefit from preferential access to the
European Union (EU). The foreign investments will most likely come from: (i) the Syrian business
diaspora; (ii) regional investors; and (iii) investors targeting the EU market.

In addition to the three key program results above, the PforR has developed a Program Action Plan
(PAP) which includes 14 actions. The objective of this assessment is to support the GoJ in achieving the
PAP #14, to strengthen the Ministry of Labor’s (MoL) Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) by building
its capacity to identify, track and resolve noncompliance issues and complaints. Specifically, the PAP
states: Strengthen the MoL’s Inspectorate Unit’s capacity to identify, track, and more effectively resolve
noncompliance on labor and environmental standards through the development of IT tools (database
and program) to enable staff to input and monitor data (including development of a baseline data on
labor and environmental compliance to standards); establish linkages with other entities within the MoL
(such as hotline, child labor, operational safety and health [OSH]), Ministry of Environment, and Ministry
of Social Development; and increase effectiveness of their resolution (target date: June 2017)




                                                                                                       20
The technical assessment provided support to the Program through the review and provide
recommendations to develop and strengthen the processes under which MoL handles complaints of all
workers Jordanian, Arab and other foreign migrant workers for improved handling of their issues.

Project Funding supporting activity (in-kind or financial): Supervision mission costs and leveraging
funding from other donors (DFID, UK) to finance costed items to strengthen institutional streamlining of
costed Action Plan, and training proposal for inspectors in Ministry of Labor.




                                                                                                     21
Annex 2: GRM Knowledge Event – List of Materials (Cairo, Egypt *** April 22-23, 2017)
*All materials listed are available in both English and Arabic
General materials:
       Agenda
       One-pager background
       WB GRM Lessons Learned
       Participants List
       Online Platform C4D – slide
       Group Photo
       Evaluation Report
Presentations:
       Key Note Address: Modernizing the Public Sector: Citizen Feedback and Redress Systems
       What do we mean by Beneficiary Feedback?
       Global Lessons: Palestine – Municipal Development Program “Construction of Citizen Service
        Centers?
       International Case: “An Ecosystem Approach? to Reducing Electricity Losses while Increasing
        Customer Satisfaction: Dominican Republic
       International Case: Turkey: A Country Approach
       Egyptian Case: Social Housing PforR
       Egyptian Case: Social Fund for Development
       Egyptian Case: On-farm Irrigation
       Technical Assessment Findings – Rural Sanitation
       Technical Assessment Findings – Health
       Summary of Cross-Cutting and Global Lessons
Resources (these materials only available in English):

       Asian Development Bank – GRM Transport Chapter 2
       CAO Grievance Mechanism
       Case Study – GRM – Philippines
       Grievance Mechanism Assessment
       GRM Example
       Turkey Municipal Report Card Brief
       Checklist for GRM
Caselets (in C4D - online):
       WB appeal process
       WB Behavioral Change (ppt)
       WB Centralized Platform
       WB Institutional streamlining
       WB IT Best Practice
       WB Resolving Complaints
       WB Strategic Communications


                                                                                                      22
