How to Make Grants
a Better Match
for Private Sector
Development

Review of World Bank
Matching Grants Projects




CIIP     Competitive Industries and Innovation Program

Financed by                               in partnership with
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The
World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judg-
ment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long
as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Report design by Voilà Information Design chezvoila.com
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements         VI

Abbreviations and acronyms           VII

Executive summary       1

1.	Introduction  9
   1.1.	Objective      9
   1.2.	  Structure of the report     10

2.	 Background and literature review            11
   2.1.	  Background on MGs  11
   2.2.	  Literature review  13

3.	 Study methodology  17
   3.1.	  Selection criteria  17
   3.2.	  Overall project distribution     18

4.	 Design features of MG schemes  21
   4.1.	  Program scale and number of beneficiaries  21
   4.2.	  Implementing agency  25
   4.3.	  Beneficiary eligibility criteria  29
   4.4.	  Sector focus  37
   4.5.	  Eligible expenses  43
   4.6.	  Selection mechanism  47
   4.7.	  Grant modalities  49
   4.8.	  Provision of diagnostics and TA to firms  57
   4.9.	  Link with other project components  59
   4.10.	 Series of projects  59
   4.11.	 Implementation and disbursement of funds   61

5.	 Design characteristics of successful projects  63
   5.1.	  Features of successful and unsuccessful projects    63
   5.2.	  Econometric analysis  65

6.	 Defining and measuring success  69
   6.1.	   Institutional arrangements for M&E   69
   6.2.	   What do we measure?  69
   6.3.	   Is this the right thing to measure?  70
   6.4.	   Design and implementation tailored to success      71

7.	 Conclusions and recommendations              73
   7.1.	  Economic rationale  74
   7.2.	  Design and implementation  74
   7.3.	  Monitoring & Evaluation  75

References    76

Annex 1: Results indicators used in reviewed projects         78

Annex 2: List of reviewed MG projects implemented by the World Bank Group  79

Annex 3: Correlation between projects’ design features and outcomes    83



IV
Case studies
1: Alternative and complementary instruments                  14

2: Choosing the appropriate implementing agency                    24

3: Large and micro firms in MG schemes             28

4: MG and groups of firms     30

5: Provision of MGs to BDS providers         32

6: MG schemes in agriculture       36

7: Use of MG to foster exports     40

8: Use of MG to purchase equipment           42

9: Competitive allocation of MG         46

10: Multiple MG windows       48
11: Advance payment of eligible expenses                52

12: Provision of services by public institutions             54

13: Matching requirement for initial technical assistance               56

14: Repeated MG projects      58

15: High and low disbursement of MG projects                  60

16: Highly successful and unsuccessful projects               66

17: Randomized allocation of MGs for impact evaluation                  68

18: Economic rationale for MG projects            74




Structure
This document is a systematic review of a number of features of matching
grants schemes to identify whether they are associated with successful
project outcomes or not. The reports successive sections describe different
design features and present relevant case studies of projects implemented by
the Bank for each.




   Case studies                                        Feature description




                                                                               V
Acknowledgements

This report was written by Diana Hristova and Antoine Coste, both in the Trade and Competitiveness
(T&C) Global Practice of the World Bank, under the guidance of Ivan Rossignol (Chief Technical Spe-
cialist, T&C) and Michael Wong (Lead Private Sector Specialist and Program Manager, T&C). The report
benefited from inputs by Iradj Alikhani, Andres Garcia, and Abhishek Saurav, as well as from comments
provided by Francisco Campos, Xavier Cierra, Leonardo Iacovone, David McKenzie, Jose Guilherme
Reis, Sunita Varada, and Panos Varangis.

The team is grateful for the support of the Competitive Industries and Innovation Program (CIIP), a
trust fund in T&C.




VI
Abbreviations
and acronyms
ACP	    African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States Secretariat

BDS	    Business Development Services

CEDF	   Community Economic Development Fund

CPIA	   Country Policy and Institutional Assessment

EMAF	   Export Market Access Fund

FPD	    Finance and Private Sector Development

GDP	    Gross Domestic Product

ICR	    Implementation Completion and Results Report

IEG	    Independent Evaluation Group

ISR	    Implementation Status and Results Report

M&E	    Monitoring and Evaluation

MG	     Matching Grant

MSME	 Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise

PAD	    Project Appraisal Document

PIU	    Project Implementation Unit

R&D	    Research and Development

SME	    Small and Medium Enterprise

T&C	    Trade and Competitiveness

TA	     Technical Assistance

WTO	    World Trade Organization




                                                                      VII
Executive summary

Matching grants (MGs) have been implemented by the World Bank for over two decades. They remain
a very popular instrument for private sector development interventions, despite often challenging
implementation and insufficient evidence of impact. The objective of this study is to synthesize the
current knowledge on MGs and to review the experience with this instrument, as designed and imple-
mented by the World Bank from the early 1990s to the present. In doing so, we hope to equip teams
in charge of ongoing and planned MG operations with a better understanding of the instrument and
to help them choose the design and implementation arrangements that are best fitted to their ob-
jectives. We look at both the “why” and the “how” of MG programs, focusing on those aiming to foster
private sector development and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) competitiveness primarily
through the use of business development services (BDS).

We review a number of core design features and implementation arrangements most often used in
MG schemes across a sample of 106 projects and present an aggregate view of the frequency of their
use, offer descriptive case studies to show how each MG is implemented in practice, and correlate
each feature with success. Based on the evidence available, we find that there is no design blueprint as
no design features are systematically correlated with a specific outcome and that therefore programs
need to be appropriately tailored to local circumstances and capacities to be successful. Table 1 sum-
marizes the different design features we investigated and offers questions that could guide project
teams when selecting features. Based on our descriptive analysis and review of existing studies, we
offer a number of general principles to guide the design and implementation of MG programs.

We also look at how success is defined and question the way the outcome of MG programs is often
assessed. While 75 percent of projects in the sample were deemed to have some degree of success,
the definition of success rarely reflects a measurement of broad and sustainable economic benefits
that would justify the subsidization of private enterprises with public funds. We argue that this is linked
to a common weakness in identifying a sound economic rationale, such as a specific market failure
to be solved, and in subsequently not focusing the design and measurement of the MG on the fund’s
additionality beyond the private benefit of recipients.

We conclude that a robust definition of the economic rationale is a critical prerequisite for the use of
MG programs and should include, among others, an identification of a specific market failure, consid-
eration of alternative instruments, cost-benefit analysis, assessment of the potential for additionality
and spillovers, and a realistic exit strategy. We recommend an equally robust monitoring and evalua-
tion (M&E) system tied directly to the economic rationale, which is essential for real-time assessment
of impact, potential course correction, and learning, and could be utilized to gauge additionality and
sustainability. Increased attention to these elements could help teams make the most of this potential-
ly powerful instrument for private sector development and competitiveness.




                                                                                                         1
Table 1: Options for the design of MG programs



Economic rationale
Main variables and options                  Consideration for teams

Context-specific analytical underpinnings   ¢¢ Has a targeted population clearly been identified? Is there enough in-
and demand assessment                          formation about this group’s needs and about the supply and demand
                                               for BDS? What are the main market failures identified and what would
Project economic and financial analysis
                                               be the impact of lifting them?
(e.g., cost-benefit, least-cost)
Use of complementary or alternative         ¢¢ To what extent is a MG scheme the most cost-effective instrument
instruments                                    available to tackle these market failures and/or foster these spillovers
                                               in this specific context? Can complementary interventions increase
                                               the scope and sustainability of benefits?

                                            ¢¢ Can full or substantial additionality of public MG funds be ensured?
                                               In addition to direct impact on grant recipients, are spillovers likely to
                                               materialize?

                                            ¢¢ What is the exit strategy and how sustainable are project benefits likely
                                               to be? What is the expected impact on supply and demand in the BDS
                                               market at the end of the prog ram? Is there a risk that an increased
                                               demand for BDS results in higher prices rather than higher supply (e.g.,
                                               restrictions on the entry of new providers or on imports of services)?




Program scale and number of beneficiaries
Main variables and options                  Consideration for teams

Amount of the MG fund                       ¢¢ How many MGs will be extended and what proportion of the target
                                               population will this represent?
Number of beneficiaries targeted
Maximum size of a single grant              ¢¢ Is the scale of the program sufficient to have a meaningful impact on
                                               the targeted population? To what extent does the project impact rely
Possibility of multiple grants per             on indirect benefits/spillovers?
beneficiary and maximum cumulative
amount                                      ¢¢ What will be the average and maximum amount of grants? Is this in
                                               line with targeted beneficiaries’ needs?




2
Implementing agency and institutional arrangements
Main variables and options                     Consideration for teams

Agency type (e.g., Project                     ¢¢ Is there an agency with experience with MGs? Is there scope to build
Implementation Unit [PIU], private                public capacity through temporary external assistance before and/or
contractor, professional association, or          during MG implementation?
public-private body)
                                               ¢¢ Does the selected agency have the required technical, human, and
Governance and oversight arrangements             administrative capacity? Is training planned for its staff? Will an MG
Incentive structure (e.g., payment                manual be prepared before implementation?
modalities and performance
                                               ¢¢ Which implementation model is likely to be the most cost-efficient?
requirements)
                                               ¢¢ Are there risks of administrative bottlenecks outside the control of the
                                                  implementing agency?

                                               ¢¢ What is the risk of political capture? Are checks and balances ade-
                                                  quate? Will the private sector be involved in program oversight and
                                                  grant allocation decisions?

                                               ¢¢ What are the incentives for the implementing agency to perform? Are
                                                  there mechanisms in place to ensure that staff of the implementing
                                                  agency are recruited based on qualifications?




Beneficiary eligibility criteria
Main variables and options                     Consideration for teams

Size of firms                                  ¢¢ Do the project’s objectives require to focus on (or exclude) certain cat-
                                                  egories of firms? If yes, what are the design elements needed to adapt
Possibility of group application
                                                  to their specific needs?
Eligibility of BDS providers
                                               ¢¢ Are the eligibility criteria, documentary requirements, and application
Other (e.g., start-up vs. established firms,      procedure clear and transparent? Are they likely to make the program
informal vs. officially registered, domestic      attractive and accessible to the target population? Do they strike the
vs. foreign ownership, public vs. private         right balance between openness and targeting?
ownership, and location)
                                               ¢¢ Are the criteria and application appraisal method directly linked to the
                                                  project objectives? Do they focus on activities not already routinely
                                                  undertaken by firms? Do they maximize the chances of generating
                                                  additionality and spillovers?

                                               ¢¢ Would there be additional economic benefits from allowing joint ap-
                                                  plications and would such applications be likely to be submitted?

                                               ¢¢ Is there a market failure restricting the quantity and quality of BDS sup-
                                                  ply? If yes, could MG be extended to service providers or would other
                                                  interventions be more appropriate?



                                                                                                                           3
Sector focus
Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

Sector restrictions                           ¢¢ Do the project objectives imply a focus on one/several specific sectors
                                                 or activities, including exports? If yes, is this best achieved by restrict-
Focus on exports vs. general
                                                 ing eligibility to corresponding firms or by focusing outreach efforts
competitiveness
                                                 while leaving eligibility criteria open?

                                              ¢¢ If a sector or export focus is adopted, is the program consistent with
                                                 international trade commitments?




Eligible expenses
Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

Eligibility of equipment and capital          ¢¢ Which types of services and activities should be made (in)eligible for
goods, recurrent expenses, etc. in               grant support to best achieve project objectives (e.g., acquisition of
addition to services                             intangible assets such as certification, preparation of feasibility study
                                                 for future investments, and building of new capacities through train-
                                                 ing)? Which services are the most likely to generate additionality and
                                                 externalities?

                                              ¢¢ Is there an economic rationale for financing tangible assets and/or re-
                                                 curring expenses? If yes, should these be restricted to common/public
                                                 goods? Are there better alternative interventions in the short and/or
                                                 medium term that could help firms acquire those assets?

                                              ¢¢ If financing of equipment is justified, are the risks of doing so ade-
                                                 quately addressed (e.g., resale of subsidized goods)? What will be the
                                                 sustainability of the impact after the end of the project?




Selection mechanism
Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

First-come, first-served for eligible firms   ¢¢ What is the likely capacity of the implementing agency to identify the
vs. competitive grant attribution                projects most likely to generate additionality and spillovers?

                                              ¢¢ Which award mechanism is likely to generate the highest take-up?

                                              ¢¢ Which selection mechanism is best suited for the planned project eval-
                                                 uation strategy?




4
Grant modalities
Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

Level of match and number of funding          ¢¢ Is there a need for a single or multiple funding window(s) and/or sub-
windows and fixed versus variable match          sidization rates? Have the pros and cons of each been considered (for
level (over time and across types of             example, administrative costs and targeting)? Should multiple grants
beneficiaries or activities)                     per firms be authorized?
Beneficiary contribution (cash versus         ¢¢ Does the selected level(s) of match strike an adequate balance be-
in kind and partial or full grant                tween several objectives (for example, attractiveness of the scheme,
reimbursement in case of success)                beneficiary commitment, and risks of abuse)? Have other elements of
Modality of payment to beneficiaries (for        program attractiveness been leveraged to reduce the need for an ex-
example, advance versus reimbursement            cessive subsidy level? Is the subsidy level consistent with the expected
basis and tranches upon partial delivery)        additionality and spillovers?

Consultant selection (for example, free       ¢¢ Are the requirements for beneficiaries’ contribution and grant payment
selection by beneficiary provided basic          adequate for their capacity? Are advance payments or partial payment
eligibility criteria are met, selection          for agreed milestones needed for certain firms because of liquidity
from a roster of preapproved providers           constraints? Are the mechanisms in place likely to result in prompt
maintained by the implementing agency,           payment of grants? Is there a significant risk of nonpayment or de-
and mandatory competitive award)                 layed payment by beneficiaries to address?

                                              ¢¢ Are there sufficient providers of quality BDS and should the BDS supply
                                                 side be supported with MGs or another intervention? Is there a lack of
                                                 information on which providers are reliable?




Diagnostic and technical assistance (TA) to beneficiaries

Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

Two-stage application process with            ¢¢ How specific/complex are the projects to be supported through MGs
mandatory diagnostic first phase to              and are many non-eligible applications likely to be submitted?
screen eligible and most-deserving firms
                                              ¢¢ What is the average capacity level of the targeted firms? Do they need
Free or partially free technical support to      support to elaborate/implement a business plan? Is a sufficient pipe-
firms to strengthen general business skills      line of applicants likely to materialize in the absence of such support?
and/or elaborate a business plan to apply
for an MG                                     ¢¢ What human, financial, and material resources are or could be made
                                                 available to provide technical support to applicants and beneficiaries?
Continuous assistance and training
to MG beneficiaries during project
implementation




                                                                                                                          5
Link with other project components

Main variables and options                Consideration for teams

Complementary project components          ¢¢ What external constraints can undermine the impact of the MG
to provide firm-level support and/or         scheme and what interventions could best address them?
address general business environment
constraints (for example, institutional   ¢¢ To what extent will/could synergies between the MG program, other
capacity building, business environment      project components, and/or other projects be leveraged?
and regulatory reforms, and access to
                                          ¢¢ Are the project’s institutional arrangements amenable to coordination
finance)
                                             between different components?
Coordination with other projects and
policies




Series of projects

Main variables and options                Consideration for teams

Follow-up MG schemes building on          ¢¢ Is there experience in the country with MGs, financed by the World
previous country experience                  Bank or other institutions? If yes, have lessons been drawn through
                                             evaluation? What design features should be kept/changed?

                                          ¢¢ Given the country capacity or MG program characteristics, would it be
                                             preferable to start with a limited-scale pilot and subsequently expand
                                             in case of success?




6
Monitoring and evaluation

Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

M&E responsibilities and arrangements         ¢¢ Has M&E been considered as an integral element of the project? Will
(e.g., budget, internal, and/or external)        the implementing agency have adequate resources to perform con-
                                                 tinuous M&E and final project evaluation (e.g., dedicated staff, informa-
Impact evaluation strategy (e.g., ex
                                                 tion system, and M&E manual)? Can internal project M&E be comple-
ante, ex post, experimental, or quasi-
                                                 mented by independent external evaluation?
experimental designs)
                                              ¢¢ Has an adequate results framework been established? Are the indica-
                                                 tors well defined? Do they measure not only output, but also outcome
                                                 and impact? How will the results of M&E be used to adapt the pro-
                                                 gram design during implementation?

                                              ¢¢ Has an evaluation strategy been built from the start in the project de-
                                                 sign? Has baseline data been collected? What are the data reporting
                                                 requirements from beneficiaries? How will data be collected for a com-
                                                 parable group of non-beneficiary firms? Will data be collected after
                                                 project completion to evaluate the evolution of impact over time?

                                              ¢¢ How will the evaluation assess the additionality of funds, the attribut-
                                                 ability of results, the spillovers generated, etc.? Is a randomized design
                                                 for grant allocation politically, financially, and technically realistic?




Other important considerations

Main variables and options                    Consideration for teams

Communication, marketing, and                 ¢¢ What marketing and outreach initiatives are planned to ensure that
stakeholder engagement                           the MG reaches the intended beneficiaries (e.g., type of firm and lo-
                                                 cation)? Have private sector representatives been consulted on the
Ownership and alignment with
                                                 design of the scheme?
government priorities
Project external environment                  ¢¢ Is there broad political ownership for the program and is this likely to
                                                 continue? Is the MG program fully aligned with national development
Design flexibility and adaptation (e.g.,         strategies and policies? Are there adequate mechanisms in place to
scope, eligibility criteria, subsidy level,      ensure interagency coordination?
application procedure, and institutional
arrangements)                                 ¢¢ Is the overall economic environment appropriate for the implemen-
                                                 tation of an MG program and expected to remain so (e.g., macroeco-
                                                 nomic and political stability, business environment, and level of corpo-
                                                 rate depth and competition)?

                                              ¢¢ Are mechanisms in place to collect beneficiaries’ feedback? Is there
                                                 enough flexibility to adapt the program during implementation and
                                                 address any unforeseen issue or erogenous shock?




                                                                                                                          7
Case study




8
1.	Introduction

1.1.	 Objective
MGs have been a staple of development interventions for decades, favored by institutions such as the
World Bank as well as by many governments around the globe. The instrument has been used exten-
sively to support a large number of policies on issues ranging from innovation and entrepreneurship
to agriculture. The objective of this report is to synthesize the current knowledge on MGs and to re-
view the experience with the instrument, as designed and implemented by the World Bank from the
early 1990s to the present.1 In doing so, the report focuses on the main types of projects using MGs,
namely schemes aimed at fostering private sector development and SME competitiveness through
the use of BDS. Despite the accumulated implementation experience, evidence of impact appears to
be weak. A recent Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) review of World Bank SME operations conclud-
ed that “[there is] limited evidence of the benefits of matching grants and advisory services” (IEG 2014).

This study analyzes a number of different design features and implementation arrangements for MGs,
uses descriptive case studies to show how each is implemented in practice, and correlates each fea-
ture with success or failure. The study intends to equip teams in charge of ongoing and planned MG
operations with a better understanding of the instrument and to help them choose the design and
implementation arrangements that are best fitted to their objectives. Given the regional distribution of
matching grants projects, the study will particularly benefit African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) coun-
tries and guide their policy-makers in designing effective enterprise support policies .The full database
with all projects in the sample and information on their various characteristics (e.g., MG amount, op-
erating costs, implementing agency, expected and actual number of beneficiaries, eligibility criteria,
subsidy level, payment modalities, outcome etc.) is available separately for interested readers who can
tabulate the data according to their needs to get more granular information.

For the purpose of this study, an MG is defined as a short-term temporary subsidy targeting knowl-
edge and BDS acquisition by SMEs, which is provided to the private sector on a cost-sharing basis.
BDS typically include a wide variety of nonfinancial services such as labor and management training;
extension, consultancy, and counseling; marketing and information services; or technology develop-
ment and diffusion.




1
 	 Many other international, regional, and national institutions have designed and implemented MG programs in recent de-
cades. Due to time and information constraints, the projects of other development partners are outside the scope of this study.
See annex 1 in Goldberg and Ortiz del Salto (2009) for information about programs implemented by the Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the U. S. Agency for International Development.
                                                                                                                              9
1.2.	 Structure of the report
The structure of the report is as follows: Section 2 provides background on MGs and a brief overview
of the literature on the instrument. Section 3 provides details on the study methodology and how
the sample was selected. Section 4 describes each of the features in turn and provides examples of
implementation in practice. For each of the features analyzed, the section also provides a breakdown
of success or failure in the subset of projects implementing it. Section 5 presents the findings of a re-
gression analysis motivated to identify any correlation between project outcomes and different design
features once various aspects of country context are controlled for. Section 6 delves further into what
the definition of ‘success’ for MG programs generally is, what it should be, and how it can be measured.
Section 7 concludes and the annexes include additional information such as a list of the projects re-
viewed and results indicators used.




10
2.	Background and
   literature review
2.1.	 Background on MGs
MGs have been one of the most common policy tools used by governments and development part-
ners to promote SME competitiveness and growth. Phillips (2001) reports that the first initiatives of this
nature were piloted in Europe starting with Ireland in the early 1960s, while the earliest World Bank
support for such a scheme was in projects in India and Indonesia in 1986. Since then, over a 100 World
Bank projects have been implemented with an MG component. Most of these projects have support-
ed private sector and SME development. A significant proportion supported agriculture and rural de-
velopment in the 2000s, although the number of such projects seems to have declined in more recent
years (figure 2.1).

First-generation projects in private sector and SME development tended to target actual or potential
exporting firms and focus on trade promotion. In comparison, more recent projects have adopted a
broader emphasis on firm-level competitiveness, ranging from basic management capacity for small
firms to innovation and research and development (R&D) (Goldberg and Ortiz del Salto 2009).

Figure 2.1
Approval of World Bank projects with an MG component (fiscal years)
Number of projects

 30

 25

 20

 15                                                                         Private sector development
                                                                            Agriculture
 10

   5

   0
       1991-1995 1996-2000 2001-2005 2006-2010 2011-2015




                                                                                                       11
The theoretical economic rationale for the use of MGs is well understood.2 Campos et al. (2012) pro-
vides a useful synthesis of the possible justifications for the use of public funds through MGs. In a nut-
shell, such subsidies generally aim at addressing a perceived underinvestment by SMEs in BDS within
two main possible contexts:

•	   BDS are a profitable investment, but various market failures prevent firms from purchasing them.
     This can, for instance, be because of the credit constraint faced by SMEs with limited working
     capital, as lenders are reluctant to finance ‘soft’ services that cannot be collateralized and whose
     return on investment is difficult to assess ex ante. SMEs may also be risk averse and avoid invest-
     ing in services with a high but uncertain potential return. Finally, SMEs may not have sufficient
     information on the BDS available and their potential return or on their relative performance com-
     pared with competitors. Similarly, BDS providers may lack information about the type or quantity
     of services demanded, leading to inadequate supply and underinvestment from the providers. By
     providing a mechanism to screen and strengthen business development projects and reduce the
     effective cost of the needed services for SMEs, MG schemes can address some of these market
     failures and catalyze the market for BDS.

•	   The expected private return of investing in BDS might not justify its cost for profit-maximizing
     SMEs, but it could have positive externalities for the economy. Subsidizing the use of such services
     might still be justified in this case as it brings net benefits for the economy at large. This can, for
     instance, be the case if MGs are used by a firm to train workers who then leave to work in other
     companies, or the improvements and innovations introduced by firms as a result of their invest-
     ment in BDS are copied by other firms.

Though the theoretic economic justification for the use of MGs may be convincing, there are serious
potential pitfalls in their implementation. In cases where SMEs are not constrained in their capacity to
purchase BDS and where such services do not have significant positive externalities, subsidizing these
services can create distortions in resource allocation and constitute a public subsidy for a private gain.
The most common criticism of MGs is the risk of limited additionality, meaning that MGs may benefit
firms that would have paid for the services anyway. Finally, if MGs give SMEs only a temporary incen-
tive to procure more BDS but do nothing to solve the inherent market failure that prevented them
from using these services in the first place, the impact of the MG program on the BDS market would
be questionable.




2
 	 This study does not aim to reproduce at length the economic rationale and risks of using MGs to foster SME development.
For a detailed discussion, see notably Biggs (1999), Phillips (2001), Van der Meer and Noordam (2004), and Campos et al. (2012).
12
                                                                            2. Background and literature review




2.2.	 Literature review
Significant work was undertaken in the late 1990s to study the justification and modalities of interven-
tion in BDS markets. A dedicated working group of the Donor Committee on Enterprise Development
organized several conferences on this topic between 1998 and 2000. This resulted in the publication
of a set of basic guiding principles (e.g. root interventions in a serious assessment of the BDS market,
careful use of subsidies to avoid distortions and ensure cost-effectiveness, and focus on sustainability
and impact assessment) (DCED 2001).3

Turning specifically to MGs, a number of studies on the impact of these programs have been carried
out since the early 2000s, most of which attempt to draw lessons learned and best practices. While
earlier reports were mostly nonexperimental assessments based on samples of projects or single case
studies, a few more recent papers present the results of impact evaluations based on randomized de-
sign. This section briefly summarizes some of the most relevant studies to date.4

a. 	 General reviews
Phillips (2001) is one of the first studies providing a comprehensive discussion of MG schemes based
on the experience in developing countries. The provision of reasonable, targeted, transparent, and
temporary subsidies is argued to be justified if it solves market failures, generates positive externalities
in a cost-effective manner, and durably strengthens the BDS market. The study draws mixed con-
clusions from a review of 10 World Bank-funded projects; while outputs for beneficiaries are usually
positive (e.g., sales and exports), doubts are raised regarding the additionality and sustainability of
benefits in the absence of adequate indicators. The study also notes the generally excessive operating
costs and slow implementation of these programs. It concludes by emphasizing the need to step up
efforts to (a) establish a sound economic justification for each MG project grounded in evidence on
local market conditions and (b) develop a cost-effective design, with a few basic principles laid out
(e.g., governance and management arrangements and grant modalities). One design consideration
discussed is the need to balance two objectives: on the one hand, to target the subprojects with the
highest potential for spillovers/additionality (through specific selection criteria and rigorous appraisal
of applications) and, on the other hand, to ensure streamlined procedures to disburse funds quickly
and create momentum for BDS market development.

More recently, Goldberg and Ortiz del Salto (2009) analyzed a sample of MG programs supported by
the World Bank and other donors to identify lessons learned from successful and failed projects and
to derive best practices for program design, based on program documents and interviews with task
managers. The study also identifies the main risks for these types of projects (e.g., limited take-up by
firms, disbursement delays, and fraud) and discusses impact evaluation issues.

Finally, a couple of recent comprehensive reviews addressed MGs as one of several different tools to
support SMEs. The World Bank Group’s IEG published a review of the World Bank’s experience with
targeted support to SMEs over the period 2006–2012 (IEG 2014). It finds that MG projects have gener-
ally achieved successful outcomes, but with frequently serious implementation difficulties. The report
concludes that projects targeting SMEs are often weakly justified and/or have limited potential for
additionality. Piza et al. (2016) reviewed the available literature on the impact of SME development
interventions in low- and middle-income countries. They found evidence that MGs can improve firms’
performance and help create jobs, although the evidence reviewed is generally insufficient to ensure
attributability and cost-effectiveness.


3
 	 See also www.enterprise-development.org/page/bds
4
 	 This literature review focuses on interventions targeting SME development. For a discussion of grant programs in agricultural
and rural development projects, see Van der Meer and Noordam (2004).
                                                                                                                            13
1: Alternative and complementary instruments




           Case study              1
           Alternative and complementary
           instruments
           Beyond MGs, several other related mechanisms, which are                        includes both an MG scheme and a subloan scheme
           outside the scope of this study, have been used to foster                      administered through partner financial institutions.
           private sector growth and productivity gains, including                        Subloans are provided at market rate and borrowers
           vouchers, sub-loans, business plan competitions and reim-                      are expected to cover at least 20 percent of subproj-
           bursable instruments:                                                          ect costs from their own resources. This instrument
                                                                                          has had limited success to date, in a context of excess
           •	   Vouchers:5 Instead of grants paid to a beneficiary on                     liquidity in the banking system.
                a reimbursement basis, some projects have provid-
                ed vouchers for micro firms with limited cash flow                   •	   Business plan competitions: Since 2011, the Nigeria
                to procure basic services. For instance, the Kenya                        Growth & Employment Project (P103499, FY11)
                Micro and Small Enterprise Training and Tech-                             has supported the annual YouWiN! Competition.
                nology Project (P001353, FY1994–2003) featured                            The competition is aimed at aspiring entrepreneurial
                a voucher program for micro firms in the informal                         youth, who are provided with equity funding, training,
                sector, which required a small contribution by bene-                      and mentoring. Results from an impact evaluation
                ficiaries. This project had mixed results, as it allowed                  suggested that the grants have had lasting positive
                over 34,000 beneficiaries to receive training but was                     impact on beneficiaries, including higher business
                affected by significant implementation shortcomings                       survival, sales, profits, and employment (McKenzie
                (World Bank). The Guatemala Competitiveness                               2015).
                Project (P055084, FY01–09) included both an MG
                program for small firms and a voucher scheme for                     •	   Reimbursable instruments: The Mauritius Manufac-
                micro firms to use BDS from prequalified vendors,                         turing and Services Development and Compet-
                who would redeem vouchers for cash after services                         itiveness Project (P112943, FY10–13) was not
                were provided. Vouchers would have had a face value                       implemented because of a change in government
                below market prices to ensure beneficiaries would                         priorities, but the project envisioned an MG scheme
                contribute part of the cost. This scheme was never                        with a ‘classic’ window (50 percent nonreimbursable
                implemented because of lack of commitment from                            grant) and a second window offering ‘payback grants’
                the Government, and the MG scheme also had very                           of 90 percent, to be repaid over several years as roy-
                limited results.                                                          alty on additional sales. Likewise, the Innovation
                                                                                          Serbia Project (P126229, FY12–16) featured an
           •	   Subloans: The Jamaica Private Investment and                              MG scheme to support R&D projects under which
                Export Development Project (P007485, FY1994–                              successful beneficiaries benefiting from higher sales,
                2001) featured an interest-free subloans program                          thanks to the technology developed, would be re-
                to finance up to 80 percent of the cost of an export                      quired to repay up to 120 percent of the financing
                development plan, which was initially intended to be                      received as royalty on sales.
                an MG scheme. This design change made implemen-
                tation more cumbersome at first because of the need
                to find a way to guarantee the subloans. The Vietnam
                Inclusive Innovation Project (P121643, FY13)

           5
            	 See Phillips (2001) for further discussion and references on experi-
           ences with voucher schemes. The study argues that vouchers can yield
           positive results but that they can require costly management arrange-
           ments to provide successful coordination, guard against fraud, and en-
           sure quality service provision.
           14
                                                                                2. Background and literature review




b. 	 Nonexperimental case studies
In-depth case studies of MG projects often utilize both qualitative and quantitative analyses. Several
studies attempt a comparison with a counterfactual by building ex post a control group of similar
non-beneficiary firms, although it is acknowledged that this does not address selection bias concerns.

An early example is the evaluation of the Mauritius Technology Diffusion Scheme by Biggs (1999). The
study finds that, although the program had a sound rationale relevant to local conditions, shortcom-
ings in design and implementation prevented it from selecting the firms and projects with the highest
potential for additionality and externalities, limiting the program’s overall economic benefits for the
Mauritian economy. The study goes on to suggest possible ways to improve additionality and selectiv-
ity of grant financing, as well as the durability of impact on the BDS market.

Gourdon et al. (2011a, 2011b) use a similar approach to evaluate the impact of an export-focused MG
program in Tunisia. They find that, compared to a control group, beneficiary firms had significantly
faster growth of exports volume, destination markets, and employment (especially for new exporters),
although this effect was only temporary. The study also emphasizes the value of planning an ex ante
evaluation design in MG programs.

c. 	 Experimental impact evaluations
The need for more evidence on the impact of MG programs has led some recent programs to incor-
porate experimental designs randomly selecting beneficiaries among eligible firms. This has allowed
the first rigorous impact evaluations of such programs to be conducted for projects in the Republic
of Yemen and Mexico, which are respectively described in McKenzie et al. (2016) and in Bruhn et al.
(2013). In both cases, the studies find some evidence of additional impact of the grants on different
dimensions of performances (for example, innovation activities, productivity, and employment). On
a related topic, Campos et al. (2012) describe various obstacles that prevented other projects from
implementing randomized evaluations of MG programs and derive lessons learned for future project
evaluations.6

The present study builds on this literature and aims to complement it by (a) covering virtually all World
Bank projects with MG components implemented over the last two decades, (b) providing a compre-
hensive discussion of the different options for program design features, and (c) correlating elements of
design/implementation with project outcomes.




	
6
    See case study 17 in section 6.2 for more details on these three studies.
                                                                                                                15
Case study




16
3.	Study methodology

3.1.	 Selection criteria
The sample of projects reviewed in this study was compiled by using the World Bank classification
system of sector and theme codes, which in the absence of a specific MG flag were the closest proxy
for an initial screening of the World Bank portfolio. The authors used relevant sector and theme codes
to filter all active and closed lending operations.7 The resulting few hundred projects were manually re-
viewed for mention of MGs in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), and the final list for review of 106
projects was generated in June 2015. Any changes to project status or the addition of new projects
since then are not reflected in the database. Due to the imperfect nature of the screening, the study
may have missed some projects.

Information on the different MG schemes’ design features and implementation arrangements were
collected from project documents, such as PADs and, where available, MG manuals. The outcomes of
the selected MG projects were assessed using the rating provided in Implementation Completion and
Results Reports (ICRs). Since ICRs do not always assign outcome ratings to specific components, the
authors assigned an implied rating to each operation that was either closed or still active but close to
fully disbursed. This implied rating was deduced from the text of ICRs and Implementation Status and
Results Reports (ISRs) and is the main dependent variable of the analysis in the following sections. In
both cases, these ratings are subjective and based on project-specific pre-identified indicators, and
section 6 discusses in more detail how the projects in the sample define and measure the success of
MG programs.




7
 	 The initial filter included sector codes FZ - General Finance Sector, FH - SME Finance, BT - Public Administration, Industry
and Trade, EV - Vocational Training, YA - Agro-Industry, Marketing, and Trade, and YZ - General Industry and Trade, and the theme
codes 0041 - Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Support, 0044 - Other financial and private sector development, 0045 - Export
development and competitiveness, 0048 - Technology diffusion, 0049 - Trade facilitation and market access, 0039 - Infrastructure
for private sector development, 0066 - Education for the knowledge economy, 0099 - Other private sector development, and
0076 - Rural non-farm income generation.
                                                                                                                             17
3.2.	 Overall project distribution
The 106 projects in the sample are very unevenly distributed between the six regions. Over half of all
the MG projects in the sample are in Africa, followed by 21 percent in Latin America (figure 3.1).

Figure 3.1
Regional breakdown of the sample of MG projects


                      Africa
 Latin America & Caribbean
      Europe & Central Asia
          East Asia & Pacific
                 South Asia
  Middle East & North Africa

                               0%   10%           20%         30%        40%   50%    60%    Share of projects


To put this regional distribution in perspective, we looked at only the subset of projects in the sample
that were mapped to the former Finance and Private Sector Development (FPD) Network and com-
pared the distribution of FPD MG projects to the overall distribution of FPD projects over the same
period (figure 3.2). We note that the use of MG instruments is heavily biased toward Africa, a distribu-
tion that does not reflect the general regional breakdown of the overall FPD portfolio.

Figure 3.2
Regional breakdown of FPD projects

                                          All FPD projects   FPD MG projects


                      Africa

      Europe & Central Asia

 Latin America & Caribbean

          East Asia & Pacific

                 South Asia

  Middle East & North Africa

                      Other

                               0%   10%           20%        30%         40%   50%    60%    Share of projects




18
                                                                                                                    3. Study Methodology




Of the 106 projects in the sample, 73 projects have an assigned rating for the MG facility and the dis-
tribution is shown in figure 3.3. Overall, 75 percent of the implemented MG facilities have received
positive development outcome ratings, while 25 percent were rated Unsatisfactory, Moderately Unsat-
isfactory, or were not implemented.

Figure 3.3
Breakdown of the sample projects by MG component rating
                              Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory



                                     100%       80%      60%      40%       20%       0%       20%      40%       60%      80%      100%      Share of
	                                                                                                                                             projects



The regional breakdown of rates of success is presented in figure 3.4. All projects in Middle East and
North Africa have a positive rating, but with only four observations. East Asia and Pacific has the lowest
success rate with 50 percent positive ratings, but with only six observations. Of the regions with more
projects implemented, Latin America and the Caribbean has 80 percent of successful projects, fol-
lowed by Africa with 73 percent.

Figure 3.4
Success rates by region
                     Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                                             Observations
    Middle East & North Africa                                                                                                                       4
        Europe & Central Asia                                                                                                                        6
                   South Asia                                                                                                                        5
    Latin America & Caribbean                                                                                                                       15
                    Average                                                                                                                         73
                        Africa                                                                                                                      37
            East Asia & Pacific                                                                                                                      6
                              100% 80%           60%      40%      20%       0%       20%      40%      60%       80% 100%                        Share of
                                                                                                                                                  projects




                                                                                                                                                         19
Case study




20
4.	Design features of MG
   schemes
4.1.	 Program scale and number of beneficiaries
There is a wide variety in the scale of MG projects approved by the World Bank since the 1990s. The
two largest amounts dedicated to MGs were for agricultural development projects in Mexico ($343
million, FY1999–2003) and Nigeria ($331 million, FY09). Without these outliers, the size of MG facili-
ties averages $11.5 million, with 17 percent of projects above $20 million and 24 percent below $3
million.8 Even excluding the two very large projects mentioned, the average is significantly higher for
agricultural projects ($25 million) than for private sector development projects ($7.9 million), which is
explained by the frequent focus on rural infrastructure in the former category.

Likewise, there is a large spread in the number of beneficiaries targeted by MG programs, from a few
dozens to several thousands, with the average reaching around 450 and the median 240.9 Using pop-
ulation and gross domestic product (GDP) size as proxies, there is only a partial correlation between
targeted numbers of beneficiaries and the size of the private sector. At the extremes, one recent proj-
ect in Vietnam (90 million inhabitants) expected to extend 38 MGs, while an earlier project for Cabo
Verde (0.5 million inhabitants) was planning on reaching 200 beneficiaries. While countries with a
large population and economy like Indonesia and Pakistan have benefited from some of the largest
MG projects, these have remained disproportionately small in comparison with the projects in smaller
countries. The maximum cumulative MG funding that a single beneficiary can receive varies from a
few thousands of dollars to several hundreds of thousands,10 with an average of $112,000 and a medi-
an of $76,000. When restricted to projects focusing on providing BDS or financing-related expenses to
single SMEs, the average is around $80,000 and the median $60,000.




8
 	 Based on funds to be used as MGs, excluding operating costs. The amounts used correspond to final amounts, taking into
account additional financing or reduced envelopes decided at project restructuring in case of good or disappointing program
performances.
9
 	 To maintain comparability, this is computed for projects targeting individual firms or associations. This excludes agricultural
projects, which tend to either support alliances or ’productive partnerships’ between actors in a small number of value chains or
large numbers of smallholders with small MG amounts for each.
10
  	 It is not always clear from project documents whether the maximum size of a single grant is also the cumulative maximum
amount that can be received by a single beneficiary with several grants.
                                                                                                                               21
Case study




22
There can be a sound rationale for targeting a limited number of beneficiaries, even in large countries.
This depends notably on the main objective of the program, types of projects to be funded, absorp-
tion capacity of the local private sector, and so on. Some projects may purposely aim at extending a
relatively small number of grants because of their focus on a specific geographic area/sector or on
niche activities such as R&D (this is the case of the Vietnam project cited above). For instance, a recent
project in Ethiopia aims at fostering linkages between firms in two industrial zones and the local pri-
vate sector through the provision of MGs. These local conditions justified making firms with up to 500
employees eligible and setting the maximum size of MGs for a single firm at $400,000. In other con-
texts, setting relatively low limits for the size of individual grants and the maximum amount that can
be received by a single firm can be a way to favor smaller firms, which are likely to have less-expensive
projects.

There is rarely an explicit discussion of the critical size required for MG schemes to have the demon-
stration effects and public good benefits that should justify this use of public resources, for example
in projects’ economic analyses. In the absence of such demonstration, the risk is that MG schemes be
added automatically and that their size and targeted number of beneficiaries be driven more by the
remaining funds in the total project envelopes that have not been attributed to other components.




                                                                                                       23
2: Choosing the appropriate implementing agency




  Case study
                      2
  Choosing the appropriate
  implementing agency
  In the case of the Nicaragua – MSME Development                In a fragile context, the Afghanistan New Market De-
  Project (P109691, FY08–15), a competitive selection            velopment Project (P118053, FY11), approved in 2011,
  process to manage the MG facility was considered but           has successfully piloted the use of MGs in the country. Giv-
  rejected to align with the Government’s strategy to            en the lack of experience within the Ministry of Commerce
  strengthen ministries. Despite initial plans to implement      and Industry, an international consulting firm was hired
  the program through a unit of the Ministry of Economy,         competitively to undertake full management of the facility
  there were prolonged discussions within the Government         under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry’s oversight.
  on the best-suited implementing agency after the project       While the hiring of the firm took 15 months to complete,
  had already become effective. The MG program was even-         the pace of MG approval and disbursement quickly in-
  tually transferred to another ministry and started with a      creased since then and most of the $11.8 million available
  20-month delay. Nevertheless, thanks to a one-year project     in grants have been committed with encouraging impact
  extension, combined with the diligence of the implemen-        on beneficiaries. The management contract amounted to
  tation team and World Bank support, this component ex-         $5.5 million, including staff, operating costs, and M&E, and
  ceeded most of its targets.                                    the project also set aside resources for business plan sup-
                                                                 port services ($0.8 million), communication and marketing
  The administration of the MG component under the Ethi-         ($0.3 million), and core skills development workshops
  opia Private Sector Development Capacity Building              ($0.2 million), setting total operating costs at 38 percent.
  Project (P050272, FY05–13) was delayed by almost two           Despite the contracting of the facility’s management, the
  years due to inadequate capacity and flexibility of the des-   requirement that all reimbursement claims made by ben-
  ignated implementing agency within the Ministry of In-         eficiaries be processed through the Government’s slow
  dustry. The program only started to show progress after its    public financial management system has been highlight-
  responsibility was transferred to a newly established semi-    ed as a cause of significant reimbursement delays limiting
  autonomous administration fully staffed with competitive-      the program’s impact. The authorities have nonetheless
  ly recruited employees (Ethiopia Competitiveness Facility),    expressed their satisfaction with the program and are con-
  with the oversight of a steering committee headed by           sidering a second phase to scale it up after 2016.
  the Government and involving key private stakeholders.
  This delay required an 18-month extension of the project,
  which eventually achieved satisfying results.




  24
                                                                                                   4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.2.	 Implementing agency
The implementation of MG schemes is typically done by a PIU also responsible for other project com-
ponents (often specially hired and not civil servants), by a dedicated private manager contracted by
the PIU, by other public or private entities, such as a private sector association, or through a variety of
other ad hoc arrangements (for example, public and public-private bodies in charge of enterprise de-
velopment, export growth, or innovation). In the sample, private management is the dominant model
(49 out of 106 projects), followed by PIUs (28 out of 106 projects) and private sector associations (11
out of 106 projects).11

Several arguments have been advanced to suggest that contracting a private operator to manage MG
schemes would lead to better outcomes, the main ones being (a) a perceived higher efficiency of the
private sector, especially where public sector capacity is weak and (b) independence in the selection
of grantees (Goldberg et al. 2009). The first argument is not supported by the ratings of MG compo-
nents in our sample: the rating is moderately satisfactory or higher for all but one scheme managed
by a PIU (and another one was not implemented), while a quarter of contracted schemes were rated
moderately unsatisfactory or lower (slightly above the sample average). Overall positive ratings for
projects with private contractors were 72 percent, compared to a sample overall of 77 percent, while
88 percent of projects managed by PIUs received a positive rating. An independent selection process
is certainly a legitimate consideration, though adequate governance and oversight arrangements of
publicly managed MG schemes (for example, participation of the private sector in the selection com-
mittee) and transparent communication can minimize the risk of political capture.

Figure 4.1
Success rate by type of implementing agency
                 Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
										                                                                                                                              Observations12

Project Implementation Unit                                                                                                                   16
                      Other                                                                                                                     9
                Association                                                                                                                     9
                Contractor                                                                                                                    36
                          All                                                                                                                 70
                                      60%        40%         20%         0%         20%         40%        60%         80%       100%      Share of
                                                                                                                                           projects




11
  	 In a number of cases, the management of the MG scheme was planned to be contracted at the design stage, but was even-
tually implemented by the PIU. In other cases, private management is limited to the hiring within the PIU of specialized consul-
tants to manage the MG component. Both cases might bias upward the proportion of projects classified as privately managed.
12
  	 As elsewhere in this section, when analyzing outcome distribution, the total number of observations will be presented for
each feature, because, owing to missing data, not all features will have information available for all 73 projects with ratings.

                                                                                                                                                    25
Case study




26
                                                                                    4. Design feature of MG schemes




On the other hand, private management has been criticized as inflating operating costs and failing to
build local capacity in the case of contracting to foreign consultants. The data confirms that operating
costs tend to be higher for projects involving a private manager (23.8 percent of available funds on
average) than for projects managed by a PIU (19.8 percent).13 In one extreme case in Cambodia, the
fee of the contracted international consulting firm ended up being twice as high as all disbursements
made to beneficiaries of the MG scheme. However, simple percentages can be misleading in the ab-
sence of a breakdown of operating costs. In particular, projects providing eligible firms with training
and TA for business plan preparation may have justifiably higher operating costs (see case study 2 be-
low). Moreover, in several cases where it was decided to contract management firms, factors outside
their control (e.g., inadequate preparation and obstacles with the contract award) resulted in severely
delayed start of activities.

Overall, the choice between public, private, and alternative forms of management should depend on
local circumstances and opportunities. Irrespective of the nature of the implementing agency, the
focus should be on ensuring that it has the appropriate capacity (technical, human, and administra-
tive), incentives, and governance arrangements (including oversight and audit) to efficiently manage
an MG scheme or that these will be built before the start of the project. In several cases in the sample,
insufficient capacity required a change of agency during implementation, leading to major delays. In
cases where contracting is deemed desirable, a clear allocation of roles and responsibilities between
the private operator and supporting public institutions is needed. Finally, even the best public or pri-
vate agency will not be successful if tasked to implement a poorly designed and prepared MG scheme
that is not adapted to local conditions. In this regard, involvement of the private sector in the design of
the project is highly advisable, even if the public sector remains responsible for program management.




 	 It is often difficult to get a clear view of the level of operating costs, either because project documents do not mention
13

them or because initial figures underestimate actual implementation costs. This review has used only information available in
the PADs and ICRs.
                                                                                                                            27
3: Large and micro firms in MG schemes




     Case study
                           3
     Large and micro firms in MG
     schemes
     The Moldova Competitiveness Enhancement Project                    The Ecuador International Trade and Integration
     (P089124, FY06–13) featured a $1.2 million MG facility             Project (P040106, FY1998–2003) featured an Entre-
     designed to promote the use of metrology, standardiza-             preneurial Learning and Innovation Fund for SMEs and a
     tion, testing, and quality services by the private sector,         Grassroots Growth Fund pilot program for micro business
     with the objective to strengthen its competitiveness               with less than 12 employees, both of which provided
     both in export and domestic markets. The facility’s scope          MGs. The project financed 30 percent of eligible expenses
     was later expanded to cover a broader array of BDS with a          under the Entrepreneurial Learning and Innovation Fund
     $1.5 million additional financing. While focused on SMEs,          but 50 percent under the Grassroots Growth Fund. The
     the program’s eligibility criteria did not include any size        other half was expected to be self-financed by micro busi-
     restriction and targeted firms with a strong track record          nesses or to be supported by the local nongovernmental
     of successful business in foreign and/or local markets.            organizations providing the services. The program reached
     The matching proportion (50 percent) was the same for              3,900 micro businesses through 106 projects, significantly
     all beneficiaries and the maximum grant size was set rel-          exceeding initial targets. About 40 percent of beneficiaries
     atively low at $10,000. The program exceeded its original          were women and 56 percent of all beneficiaries were in ru-
     targets and provided grants to 479 firms. While most were          ral areas across 21 provinces. An evaluation reported good
     SMEs, large firms accounted for about 25 percent of the            results in terms of increased sales/exports and improved
     total with a larger share for the original quality certification   business skills, although outcomes varied depending on
     window. The scheme has been credited for its positive              the quality of the sponsor nongovernmental organization.
     impact in terms of fostering an increased use of metrology,        While some organizations performed well, others were
     standardization, testing, and quality services, although it is     overstretched by commitments to too many projects and
     unclear from project documents to what extent this ap-             failed to fully address individual client needs. This points
     plied to both SMEs and large firms.                                to the challenge of implementing a program with a large
                                                                        number of (very) small beneficiaries.




     28
                                                                                                        4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.3.	 Beneficiary eligibility criteria
a. 	 Size of beneficiaries
Generally, MG programs target SMEs, as this category of firms is thought to be less likely to appropri-
ately value BDS and to have less capacity to pay for them than large firms. About 47 percent of proj-
ects in the sample explicitly restrict eligibility to SMEs,14 either through a strict size restriction, by giving
priority to SMEs, or by including separate windows for SMEs and other types of firms (e.g., exporters
of any size). A number of projects do not mention any size restrictions and a few explicitly allow large
firms to apply for MG funding. The eligibility threshold for SMEs varies largely, and depends on country
or ad hoc definitions, and often involves a ceiling with regard to the number of employees (usually
between 50 and 250) and/or other criteria (e.g., maximum annual turnover). A minority of projects
explicitly target micro or one-person businesses, sometimes with dedicated funding instruments
such as matching vouchers. These firms are likely to have lower absorptive capacity, making it difficult
to compare the impact of MG targeting them with interventions focusing on SMEs. On the contrary,
some projects include a minimum number of employees to exclude such micro firms. In some cases,
employment or turnover ceilings were modified during implementation to increase the reach of the
program.

Here again, the optimal eligibility criteria for a specific project depend on its main objective and local
environment (characteristics of the private sector, administrative capacity). While targeting SMEs as
opposed to large firms is arguably a more justifiable use of public funds through MGs, the level and
breadth of eligibility criteria must be carefully set (and revised during implementation, if necessary), as
they influence the program’s results with regard to implementation and impact. Generally speaking,
making larger firms eligible would require explaining why subsidized grants are needed to change
their practices and incentives. As shown in figure 4.2, limitation by size had no bearing on the success
rate of projects, with 77 percent of projects with no explicit size limitations receiving positive ratings,
compared to 76 percent of projects limiting size and 77 percent of all projects in this sample.

Figure 4.2
Success rate by limitation of size
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Yes                                                                                                                     34

 No                                                                                                                      30

 All                                                                                                                     64

        100% 80%           60%       40%      20%       0%       20%      40%      60%       80% 100%           Share of projects




 	 It is likely that other projects without such explicit restriction in their PAD introduced it in the MG manual and during imple-
14

mentation.
                                                                                                                                    29
4: MG and groups of firms




 Case study           4
 MG and groups of firms

 Supported jointly with the U.K. Department for Inter-          The Haiti Business Development and Investment
 national Development, the Fund for New Market De-              Project (P123974, FY13) was launched with a compo-
 velopment for the West Bank and Gaza (P110526,                 nent designed to provide MGs to both single micro, small,
 FY08–11) encouraged groups of firms with common                and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and groups of firms. A
 new market/product development plans to apply for MGs          restructuring of the project in December 2015 doubled
 through higher percentage of subsidy and grant ceiling         the envelope allocated to MGs from $4 million to $8 mil-
 (70 percent and $100,000, compared to 50 percent and           lion and shifted the focus exclusively to the provision of
 $50,000 for single firms). The rationale provided was nota-    grants to groups of MSMEs in the same value chain to
 bly that doing so would foster cooperation between firms,      access new services and increase the quality of their prod-
 create synergies, and stimulate learning. The project was      ucts. The matching contribution by each MSME will vary
 planning to encourage firms submitting similar individual      based on a weighed score of employment and turnover.
 applications to develop joint proposals and to engage          The restructuring also aimed at reducing the number of
 directly with business representative associations to iden-    MGs and increasing their value, to increase their impact
 tify potential consortia. Prospective areas for cooperation    and reduce transaction costs. Two windows were intro-
 included the development of shared marketing material,         duced: (a) MG for Business Improvement to increase value
 acquisition of market information, training on certification   chain productivity and competitiveness (up to $100,000
 or export development, and so on. The consortia were           per value chain, with a minimum involvement of four
 required to (a) be made up of at least three firms, each of    MSMEs) and (b) MG for Common Services to develop lo-
 which would benefit equally from the project and contrib-      gistical and other services that require economies of scale
 ute the same amount; (b) be formalized through a Mem-          ($500,000 to $1.5 million, with a minimum involvement of
 orandum of Understanding signed by all members; and            60 MSMEs). This new approach is expected to lead to the
 (c) appoint a lead firm responsible for handling communi-      development of at least 20 mostly agricultural value chains
 cation and financial transactions with the Facility for New    and to be more inclusive by covering the country’s poor-
 Market Development and for redistributing their share of       est regions.
 the MG to each partner firm. At closing, the project had
 supported 36 consortia and 567 single firms. The project’s
 evaluation noted that this modest success stemmed from
 the difficulty to identify mutually beneficial projects be-
 yond simple activities, such as joint participation in trade
 fairs. It concluded that this approach was worthwhile but
 that (a) expectations in terms of number of joint ventures
 should be kept low and (b) technical support to interested
 firms to plan such ventures might matter more than addi-
 tional financial incentives.




 30
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




b. 	 Groups of beneficiaries
A large majority of MG projects allow groups of firms and/or professional associations to apply for
a common project or to benefit jointly from BDS. Around 72 percent of projects in the sample al-
low group beneficiaries, 9 percent do not, and the rest do not explicitly specify whether groups are
eligible. Virtually all of the agriculture projects in the sample allow groups (for example, productive
partnerships between a lead agribusiness and producers groups), while private sector development
projects more frequently restrict eligibility to single firms. Projects sometimes include separate win-
dows for single firms and groups, with varying grant modalities (e.g. higher/lower maximum grant size
or matching percentage).

Several reasons can be advanced to justify the eligibility of groups of firms or associations to MG
programs, such as fostering linkages and cooperation between firms, improved access to services for
firms with limited financial resources, reduced program administration cost, etc.

Programs accepting applications from groups of firms can have requirements regarding the nature of
the partnership (e.g., formalization through a Memorandum of Understanding), designation of a lead
firm representing the consortia, and the contribution of individual members. A matching contribution
from each firm is generally required to ensure their commitment to the success of projects, which can-
not solely be financed through association funds. The eligibility of groups of firms has consequences
on the administration of MG schemes and the nature of the grant agreements signed with beneficia-
ries, although this is rarely adequately addressed in program documents.

Fifty-six projects were rated for outcome and had information available on whether groups of firms are
allowed or not. Though the sample size is quite small, 88 percent of projects that do not allow groups
of firms had a positive rating versus 75 percent of projects that do.

Figure 4.3
Success rate by allowing groups
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory


 Yes                                                                                                                     48

 No                                                                                                                       8

 All                                                                                                                     56

        100% 80%           60%       40%      20%       0%       20%      40%      60%       80% 100%           Share of projects




                                                                                                                                     31
5: Provision of MGs to BDS providers




Case study            5
Provision of MGs to BDS
providers
The Mozambique Enterprise Development Project                   Under the Nigeria Micro, Small and Medium Enter-
(P049874, FY00–06) featured a Technical Learning in             prise Project (P083082, FY04–12), it was decided to
Firms component focused on building the technical capa-         use MGs exclusively in a ‘BDS Fund’ aiming at strength-
bilities of local firms. In addition to a classic demand-side   ening BDS providers’ capacity to provide services in the
MG scheme, this component included a $2 million MG              quantity, price, and quality range required by MSMEs, as
window targeting providers to increase the private supply       well as to develop new BDS products in targeted industry
of business and technical training. This was expected to        value chains and states. The project supported 69 BDS
focus on (a) existing local or overseas-developed training      providers who provided training to around 3,360 MSMEs,
courses for which a local market has not yet developed          exceeding the original target of 20 and 1,000, respectively.
and (b) additional training courses for which an unmet          Cost recovery by supported BDS providers was relatively
market demand can be demonstrated. The second win-              low at 50 percent, as they reported difficulties in getting
dow for providers was seen as needed to reach the small-        MSMEs to pay for their services, because of lack of resourc-
est firms which would be difficult to support on a one-to-      es as well as perceptions that World Bank-funded govern-
one basis and for whom generic training in basic business       ment programs should not require payments.
skills can yield substantial returns. The initial targets of
200 training events and $2 million in grants were largely       The Mali Growth Support Project (P080935, FY05–
exceeded, with 3,160 training events and $3.69 million in       13) was initially planning to fund a demand-side MG pro-
grants disbursed. As an example of activities supported,        gram, which was never implemented. However, the proj-
280 small consultancies and individuals outside Maputo          ect supported some non-MG activities to strengthen the
were trained as Microsoft-certified engineers. The project’s    supply of BDS, including a STEP program aimed at training
evaluation nonetheless noted that issues were faced re-         young graduates to become BDS consultants for micro
garding the quality/relevance of some training and that         businesses. Around 1,300 such businesses received basic
evaluating the final impact of the program was made dif-        training under the project (for example, bookkeeping and
ficult by the absence of monitoring data on the status of       marketing), which they partly had to pay for.
trainees following the courses.




32
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




c. 	 Service providers
While most MG programs attempt to develop BDS markets and increase the use of such services by
subsidizing potential users, some projects also aim to address the supply side by making service pro-
viders eligible for MGs. This is intended to subsidize the cost of providing BDS services and to improve
the diversity, quality, and marketing of these services. A few projects in Africa have also intended to
provide MGs to financial institutions to incentivize them to develop their capacity to lend to SMEs, but
these components have met limited interest and were dropped. Just like for service users, using MGs
for BDS providers could be justified, provided a clear market failure leading to undersupply or inade-
quate supply can be identified, there is confirmed interest/demand from those firms, selection criteria
ensure additionality of the resources to be provided, etc. As an alternative, other projects have opted
not to make service providers eligible for subsidies, but instead to strengthen their capacity directly
through training. In both cases, the objective is to increase the quality and diversity of BDS available to
SMEs, as opposed to recycling existing services.

In the sample, about 26 percent of projects make service providers eligible, 35 percent do not, and 39
percent do not make this clear in available project documents. Despite the perception that support
to BDS providers was not featured in the first wave of MG projects in the 1990s and has only appeared
later on (Goldberg and Ortiz del Salto 2009), there is no clear trend on this aspect over time and a large
proportion of recent projects either rejects MGs to BDS providers or does not explicitly include them in
the scope of the program. Depending on the project, BDS providers can be eligible just like any other
private business or through a dedicated funding window, possibly with different matching percent-
age, maximum grant size, etc.

Of the 65 projects that have explicit information available on whether service providers are eligible for
the MG or not, 45 projects also have an outcome rating. Surprisingly, 88 percent of projects that do
not allow MGs to service providers have successful outcomes versus 71 percent of projects that do.
This may have more to do with the complexity of implementation arrangements for multiple windows
and varied eligibility criteria, or alternatively, the projects that do not allow service providers may have
more accurately diagnosed the market failure to be on the demand side.

Figure 4.4
Success rate by eligibility of provider
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Yes                                                                                                                     21

 No                                                                                                                      24

 All                                                                                                                     45

        100% 80%           60%       40%      20%       0%       20%      40%      60%       80% 100%           Share of projects




                                                                                                                                     33
Case study




34
                                                                       4. Design feature of MG schemes




d. 	 Other eligibility criteria
A number of other eligibility criteria are defined in most MG projects, with the purpose to reach the
desired type of beneficiaries that will maximize impact. Some projects give higher weight to appli-
cations submitted by certain types of firms (e.g. women-owned businesses). Experience has shown
that there can be a trade-off between the level of requirements and the reach of the program, which
should be carefully assessed during project preparation and rebalanced if needed during implementa-
tion. The most frequent eligibility criteria include the following:

•	   Firm age: Eligibility is generally restricted to firms with a minimum time in operation (for example,
     two years) to the exclusion of start-ups. In cases where project objectives justify making start-ups
     or very young firms eligible, other requirements can usefully be set to ensure the good use of
     funds, such as solid business experience of the owner and/or the capacity to prove the medi-
     um-term commercial and financial viability of the venture.

•	   Registration: Documenting company status is usually a requirement, although depending on the
     context, this can range from simple registration on some public registry of companies to fully
     formal status, evidence of compliance with tax obligations, and so on. While such requirements
     can facilitate tracking of beneficiaries and can constitute an incentive to formalize, they should be
     adapted to local circumstances and not be so stringent as to disqualify a majority of SMEs.

•	   Ownership: Some projects specify a minimum share of domestic ownership (usually 50 percent)
     and/or domestic registration. Moreover, eligibility is generally restricted to private or majority-pri-
     vate companies.

•	   Other: (a) Existence of a sound financial management system, accounting documents, and a sta-
     ble financial situation; (b) absence of previous public funding for the same activities; (c) conditions
     on association structure for programs accepting applications by groups of firms or consortia (for
     example, minimum number of members, governance structure, and presence of both agribusi-
     ness and smallholders for agricultural projects); (d) location in specific geographical areas covered
     by the project; and (e) proof of land rights for agricultural projects.




                                                                                                          35
6: MG schemes in agriculture




Case study
                      6
MG schemes in agriculture

MG funds in agriculture or agribusiness projects tend to        The Zambia Agricultural Development Support Pro-
address different market failures and objectives compared       gram (P070063, FY06–14) aims to advance smallholder
to traditional private sector development funds. The two        agriculture commercialization along value chains. The MG
project examples below highlight some of these differenc-       facility supports this objective by offering financial resourc-
es, such as the use of the grant to finance equipment or to     es for the development of innovative business linkages
encourage the development of productive alliances.              between smallholders and other actors along the value
                                                                chains. The grant provided ‘seed’ capital for promoting the
The objective of the Mali Agricultural Competitiveness          introduction of new products and processes that improve
and Diversification Project (P081704, FY06–15) is to            the competitiveness of agricultural production by small-
improve the competitiveness of supply chains in tradition-      holder farmers. The grant considered three main catego-
al and nontraditional agricultural crops through targeted       ries of windows with a varying degree of match: extension
investments to remove critical constraints, improve pro-        and technology development (50 percent match); studies
ductivity and efficiency, and improve and build organiza-       and pilots (60 percent match); and capacity building for
tional and institutional capacities along the supply chains.    associations, cooperatives, and farmer groups (75 percent
The MG fund supports the dissemination of adapted new           match). The facility was demand-driven and proposals did
technologies for small farmers. The fund is targeted at         not have a commodity or geographical focus. It combined
smallholders, under 0.5 ha, and covers 70 percent of the        innovation with a focus on partnerships with smallholders.
cost of infrastructure works linked to the introduction of      Eligible applicants would include (a) organized producer
new and improved technologies for irrigation or post-har-       associations and related smallholder organizations with
vest techniques. The project justifies the use of an MG         developed or developing linkages to agricultural value
on the grounds that even though investments could be            chains and supporting the development of smallholder
profitable, they typically exceed the self-financing capacity   farmers; (b) agribusinesses linked with smallholders, in-
of small farmers and cannot be financed on a credit basis       volved in processing, trading, and marketing of agricultural
due to the long amortization period. The project financed       and food products/commodities that help to improve the
125 investment subprojects and microenterprises to be-          growth and competitiveness of smallholder farmers; (c) in-
come profitable SMEs. It is unclear from existing project       put suppliers; (d) nucleus commercial farms working with
documentation how the impact and sustainability of the          smallholders; and (e) publicly and privately funded agri-
MG fund will be assessed; the ICR for the project is forth-     cultural and industrial institutions and trusts. At closing, 29
coming.                                                         subprojects were implemented and 30 innovative tech-
                                                                nologies were introduced, either directly to smallholder
                                                                farmers at the production stage or further down the value
                                                                chain as part of the processing chain of agricultural com-
                                                                modities. The ICR provides some evidence of impact with
                                                                regard to MGs facilitating access to new export markets
                                                                by a couple of the recipients, but apart from that, there
                                                                is limited information on the overall adoption of the new
                                                                technologies or their sustainability and impact.




36
                                                                                 4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.4.	 Sector focus
a. 	 Sector restrictions
Of the 106 projects under review, 22 are agribusiness projects. Agribusiness MG facilities are structured
differently from MGs in private sector development projects. Case study 6 provides more detail on the
typical design features of agribusiness MGs using two project examples. The rest of the section dis-
cusses sectoral focus among only the remaining 84 projects that are not agribusiness projects.

Of the 84 remaining projects, 47 list at least one sector of focus for the MG facility. Of those that do,
very few actually restrict the fund to certain sectors, and when they do, those tend to be sectors or
value chains that have been pre-identified by the Government, World Bank, or other donors as having
the highest potential for growth, job creation, or exports, based on the overall objective of the oper-
ation. Two examples of projects that restrict the fund to pre-identified sectors include the Argentina
Unleashing Productive Innovation Project (P106752), with a focus on biotechnology, nanotechnology,
and information and communication technology, and Republic of Congo Support to Economic Diver-
sification Project (P118561) with a focus on six value chains: agribusiness, transport and logistics, wood
transformation, construction material, tourism and hospitality, and arts and crafts. The remaining proj-
ects that list specific sectors do not explicitly restrict the fund to them, but rather target these sectors
while still remaining open for applications from others. A number of projects present a negative list of
activities, which is the standard exclusion list of activities that the World Bank does not finance, such as
alcohol, weapons, tobacco, and gambling.

A few projects that focus on exports reference World Trade Organization (WTO) requirements as a rea-
son not to restrict sectors for the MG fund. To satisfy the requirements of the framework agreement of
the WTO, grants are defined as nonactionable subsidies because they are not specific. Specificity un-
der WTO rules typically involves “targeting of geographic regions or economic sectors and paragraph 2
of Article 8, principally the exception for research activities carried out on a contract basis for industrial
research and for precompetitive development activity.”15 In at least one case, the World Bank discontin-
ued an MG fund on the belief that the fund violates WTO rules, which had come into existence since
the project was approved.16

Figure 4.5 gives a breakdown of the frequency with which specific sectors are listed in the program
documents of the 47 non-agribusiness projects that list at least one sector of focus. The frequency of
focus appears to be evenly split between Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing, Manufacturing, and Ser-
vices.

Figure 4.5
Frequency of sectors
Standard Industrial Classification (siccode.com/en/siccode/list/directory)

                                     Services                                                      48
                               Manufacturing                                                 43
             Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing                                               43
                                  Retail Trade       3
                                      Mining         3
                                 Construction        3
                             Wholesale Trade     1
 Transportation, Communication, and others       1


 	 Cambodia Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness (P089196), PAD, page 35.
15

 	 Trinidad and Tobago Business Expansion and Industrial Restructuring Project (P008100), Borrower’s comments to ICR.
16


                                                                                                                        37
Case study




38
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




Of the 84 projects that are not agribusiness MGs, 57 have both outcome ratings and information on
whether at least one sector was targeted. Whether specific sectors were targeted seems to make no
difference to the margin between positive and negative outcome, with 70 percent of projects receiv-
ing positive ratings regardless of whether or not they target sectors. There does seem to be a differ-
ence in the edges of the distribution, with 15 percent of projects that do not target a sector being
highly satisfactory versus 3 percent of those that do, while on the other end, 20 percent of projects
targeting sectors are unsatisfactory versus 7 percent of those that do not.

Figure 4.6
Success rate by sector targeting
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Yes                                                                                                                     30

 No                                                                                                                      27

 All                                                                                                                     57

        100% 80%            60%      40%      20%       0%       20%      40%       60%      80% 100%           Share of projects




                                                                                                                                     39
7: Use of MG to foster exports




  Case study                7
  Use of MG to foster exports17

  The Cambodia Trade Facilitation and Competitive-                               The project disbursed grants to 65 enterprises and asso-
  ness Project (P089196, FY05–13) aims to promote eco-                           ciations, 13 of which were new exporters. The ICR esti-
  nomic growth by reducing transaction costs associated                          mates that on average firms benefiting from the grants
  with trade and investment, introducing transparency in                         generated $275.5 for every $1 spent. The ICR judged the
  investment processes, and facilitating access of enterpris-                    fund to have made satisfactory progress in helping firms
  es to export markets. The MG facility funds 50 percent of                      access new markets, though it noted that the return on
  the cost to enterprises for achieving market standards                         the grants was much higher in some sectors (such as rice)
  or evidence of compliance with those standards. Those                          than others and suggested that a focus on a single sector
  standards include product quality standards, core labor                        may exhibit larger returns. The evaluation also points out
  standards, organic product standards, and safety or en-                        that the management fee for the consulting firm im-
  vironmental standards. The fund will include TA to help                        plementing the scheme was nearly double the amount
  enterprises prepare an export plan and an MG for eligible                      disbursed to beneficiaries. The consulting firm evaluated
  activities undertaken within the framework of such a plan,                     proposals, provided TA, and helped prepare export plans.
  such as acquisition of information (including software and                     As much as this support had a successful outcome, the ICR
  reference material), trips by entrepreneurs to explore spe-                    points out that given the high upfront costs of evaluating,
  cific export opportunities and buyers, mailing of samples,                     a lesson for future operations is to involve government
  promotion material, and other necessary miscellaneous                          counterparts in the process to increase capacity and sus-
  expenses.                                                                      tainability and reduce management costs, as well as to
                                                                                 allow a longer time frame for implementation to allow the
                                                                                 fund to support less-developed companies for which the
                                                                                 decision to export would be strategic.




   	 For more examples of export-oriented MGs, see also case studies 13 and 14 presenting the series of three Tunisia Export Development projects.
  17


  40
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




b. 	 Focus on exports
Of the 106 projects in the sample, 17 are export-focused and restrict the use of the MG fund to export-
ers, potential exporters, or suppliers to exporters. One of those projects restricts access to exporters to
a single window of the MG, while the others are entirely export only. In addition to the 17, three other
projects heavily focus on exporters or on developing export markets but do not restrict access to the
fund. In the sample, 67 projects have outcome ratings and information on whether beneficiaries are
limited to exporters. There does not appear to be any difference in the margin of positive ratings with
77 percent of projects restricted to exporters having positive ratings compared to 74 percent of proj-
ects that are not restricted to exporters, suggesting that as long as the eligibility of activities is cus-
tomized to serve the development objective, there is nothing about exports that is intrinsically more
suitable to support through MGs.

Figure 4.7
Success rate by exporter targeting
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Yes                                                                                                                     13

 No                                                                                                                      54

 All                                                                                                                     67

        100% 80%           60%       40%      20%       0%       20%      40%      60%       80% 100%           Share of projects




                                                                                                                                     41
8: Use of MG to purchase equipment




  Case study            8
  Use of MG to purchase equipment

  The Sri Lanka Sustainable Tourism Development                  The project took two and a half years from the start of
  Project (P113709, FY10-14) aimed to strengthen the             preparation to effectiveness in 2011, at a time of rapidly
  institutional framework for the tourism sector to facilitate   changing environment following the end of the civil war
  environmentally and socially sound investments. The MG         in 2009. The government asked to restructure the project
  facility aimed to contribute to the Project Development        and enhance its effectiveness by reallocating most of the
  Objective by improving and extending the product con-          funds from the other two components to the MG. In spite
  tent and supply chains of SMEs and reimburse 50 percent        of the restructuring, the fund did not disburse and the
  of general business support toward certification, training,    project was ultimately canceled in 2014. The ICR highlights
  promotion, and so on.                                          the design of the MG fund as the main design flaw leading
                                                                 to the cancellation of the operation, and more specifically
                                                                 the provision for 50 percent match for refurbishment and
                                                                 purchase of equipment. This led to a significant oversub-
                                                                 scription with requests totaling more than three times the
                                                                 amount of available funds, but also posed serious gover-
                                                                 nance risks as equipment could be resold for a significant
                                                                 profit. The government also faced accusations of favoritism
                                                                 from the firms that did not receive funding as the grants
                                                                 were awarded on a first-come, first-served basis with fairly
                                                                 wide eligibility criteria.




  42
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.5.	 Eligible expenses
As defined in the scope of this study, the MG instrument under investigation is a short-term subsidy
for nonfinancial services and as such does not include funding for working capital or regular operating
expenses, and only one project in the sample allows funding for small works for a coffee washing and
drying facility.18 Whether funding for equipment should be allowed has been the subject of much
debate for private sector development-type MGs. As noted in section 4.4, MG facilities in agribusiness
projects on the other hand almost always allow the financing of equipment due to the different na-
ture of market failures and the different objectives of those operations. For this reason, we have ex-
cluded the 22 agribusiness projects from the discussion of eligible expenses below.

Of the remaining 84 projects, only 22 allow the financing of equipment, and in most cases, the eligible
types of equipment are very specific and limited. Innovation or science and technology projects often
allow the funding of specialized R&D equipment (for purchase or leasing), raw materials, or incremen-
tal permanent working capital, but still disallow land, civil works, housing, or operating expenses. In
other cases, the MG fund only allows testing and quality control equipment. The MG instrument en-
tails a subsidy with public funds and as such is best suited for the financing of public goods, or private
goods with positive spillovers or externalities, or for the removal of market failures. Innovation projects
often meet this criterion given their potential positive spillovers as well as the uncertain returns on
investment that make credit financing difficult. Most other types of equipment, however, fall under
the category of marketable private goods and as such should be financed on a commercial basis. The
argument can be made that, in fragile or low-income countries where credit is almost nonexistent for
firms, MGs can be primarily used as a way to overcome credit constraints in the absence of a mecha-
nism to fix the financial sector in the short term. This could in turn justify making capital expenditures
eligible for financing through grants. However, this involves specific risks (for example, resale of a sub-
sidized movable asset at market price) and raises questions regarding the sustainability of any impact
after the end of the project, which would have to be addressed at the concept stage. Case study 8
highlights some of the potential pitfalls of unjustified funding of equipment.

The 50 projects that have information on whether equipment is allowed also have outcome ratings.
Of those, 55 percent allowing equipment are rated moderately satisfactory and above compared to 74
percent of projects that do not.

Figure 4.8
Success rate by equipment eligible
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Yes                                                                                                                     11

 No                                                                                                                      39

 All                                                                                                                     50

        100% 80%           60%       40%      20%       0%       20%      40%      60%       80% 100%           Share of projects




 	 Haiti Business Development and Investment Project (P123974).
18


                                                                                                                                     43
Case study




44
                                                                              4. Design feature of MG schemes




With regard to services, most MGs allow a wide array of BDS, including technical and management
consultancies, design and implementation of marketing campaigns or export plans (for projects di-
rected at exporters), market research, quality control and certification, business planning, productivity
enhancement, production processes and product design, and travel and trade fairs. Although one
MG program can support different types of projects, a distinction can be made between grants (a)
for feasibility and design (for example, technical study and business plan) and for implementation of
standards, software, machinery, and so on and (b) for acquisition of an intangible asset (for example,
International Organization for Standardization certification) and for the building of new capabilities
through training. Most projects in the sample provide a list of eligible activities to be funded but rarely
restrict the specific type of service as long as it is relevant to the firm’s business plan. One exception is
a project19 in the Republic of Congo that excluded TA with direct implications for investments, such as
feasibility studies and engineering designs. This, however, was changed during the restructuring and
small equipment for select value chains was also allowed.




 	 Republic of Congo Support to Economic Diversification Project (P118561).
19


                                                                                                          45
         9: Competitive allocation of MG




Case study            9
Competitive allocation of MG

The Nicaragua Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise                The project reached 864 firms, which constituted 9.3 per-
Development Project (P109691, FY08–15) aimed to                 cent of all firms with the minimum level of registration
improve the competitiveness of MSMEs and the business           required by the project. Although no impact evaluation
climate that affects them. The MG component assisted            was conducted, the ICR compared the recipients with
enterprises with pre-investment activities, such as busi-       trends among nonparticipants and rated the fund satisfac-
ness plans and feasibility studies, which would allow them      tory based on the level of sales, the introduction of new
to apply for commercial credit. Rather than substituting        products and processes, and the implementation of quali-
commercial credit, the value added of the fund is to create     ty enhancements.
a large number of bankable SMEs. In addition, the fund
finances investment activities and complements commer-
cial credit by focusing on themes where bank financing is
not viable.

The grants were awarded competitively through a series
of rounds with different technical focus (such as quality
enhancements and certification, innovation, labor training,
clean technologies, or resolving value chain bottlenecks
for a specific sector). One benefit of the competitive selec-
tion mechanism was the regular and predictable nature
of the rounds, which allowed firms to plan ahead their
participation in subsequent rounds. The evaluation com-
mittee orders the proposals in each round based on their
estimated impact on the national economy, and grants are
awarded down the ordered list until funds for the particu-
lar round are exhausted.




46
                                                                     4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.6.	 Selection mechanism
Out of the 106 projects in the sample, 85 have explicitly specified the type of selection mechanism
based on which grants were awarded to beneficiaries, and the vast majority of them, 80 projects, use
a first-come, first-served selection mechanism that awards grants in order of application to any firm
that passes the pre-identified eligibility criteria. Only five projects have a true competitive selection
mechanism that assigns scores to each proposal and gives grants to the top scoring firms down the
list until the money allocated for that round runs out. While selecting the ‘best’ projects is intuitively
appealing, the capacity of the implementing agency to do so can be questioned, especially if projects
are evaluated on the basis of their additionality and spillover potential, as we argue should be the
case, rather than simply growth potential. On the other end, a competitive selection mechanism could
generate more interest if the grants are perceived to be limited and their awarding time-bound. Case
study 9 looks at an example of a project with competitive selection. Due to the small number of proj-
ects choosing to select grantees with a competitive process, it is hard to assess whether the choice of
selection mechanism actually brings any systematic benefits.

The type of selection mechanism could also have some implications for the design of impact evalua-
tions. A competitive selection seems more amenable to techniques such as propensity-score match-
ing or regression discontinuity design using a score threshold while both competitive and first-come,
first-served could be used for randomized control trials based on oversubscription design.




                                                                                                       47
10: Multiple MG windows




Case study           10
Multiple MG windows

The recently closed The Gambia Growth & Competi-                The Honduras Enhancing Competitiveness: Trade
tiveness Project (P114240, FY11–16) initially planned           Facilitation and Productivity Improvement Project
an MG Facility with four different windows with different       (P070038, FY04–11) intended to use MGs for multiple
objectives and funding levels: (a) horticulture out-grower      activities in several components and subcomponents,
scheme, (b) quality assurance program for the groundnuts        each with different objectives and rules. MGs were notably
sector, (c) use of BDS by MSMEs, and (d) support to banks       to be used to (a) incentivize MSMEs to purchase services
and financial institutions to lend to MSMEs. The second         provided by new centers for technological innovation
and fourth windows were dropped at project restructuring        to be established for the textile, wood, and artisan crafts
due to low interest, unfocused delivery, and insufficient       industries; (b) help selected government agencies imple-
awareness creation. The MG component was refocused              ment administrative reforms; (c) improve the quality of
on out-grower schemes in selected value chains (mango,          private and public laboratories and encourage firms to
vegetables, and poultry), as well as BDS support to MSMEs.      adopt quality systems and obtain quality certification; and
                                                                (d) encourage firms to train their workforce. These different
The Pakistan Economic Revitalization of KP and FATA             MG schemes had limited results and several changes were
Project (P124268, FY12 features three MG windows                made at restructurings, including to reduce MG funds.
accounting, respectively, for 70, 20, and 10 percent of         Under the first activity, only the center for crafts was es-
total funding: (a) rehabilitation to provide direct support     tablished and $21,000 were spent on MGs for MSMEs to
to crisis-affected SMEs in restarting their operations, (b)     use its services (the center was unsuccessful in attracting
upgrade support to SMEs or groups of SMEs (not only             larger companies that would have paid the full price). MGs
crisis-affected), and (c) capacity building and BDS. The        were found to be an inadequate tool to foster administra-
third window includes provision of training under the In-       tive reforms by government agencies and were discontin-
ternational Finance Corporation’s Business Edge program         ued. Finally, the improvement of private and public lab-
and training of local Business Edge trainers. This design       oratories turned out to require investment in goods and
allowed the project to support both traditional MG activi-      works, which were not adequately addressed by the MGs.
ties (second and third windows) and to restart companies        The project evaluation notes that insufficient justification
in crisis-affected areas through the more flexible first win-   was provided for the need to subsidize firms to introduce
dow (for example, possibility of advance payment to ben-        quality certification and train workers.
eficiaries, higher subsidy level and maximum grant size for
individual firms, capital expenditures eligible, and in-kind
contributions allowed). As of November 2015, the project
had supported over 1,000 SMEs under this window, signifi-
cantly above the initial target.




48
                                                                       4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.7.	 Grant modalities
a. 	 Level of match
The level of subsidization of beneficiaries’ projects is a central element of MG programs, which involves
trade-offs between several dimensions (e.g. attractiveness of the scheme, commitment of the bene-
ficiary, additionality of resources, and risks of abuse). While the grant level should not be set too low
for the program to have a strong catalytic effect, other key design characteristics, such as simple appli-
cation procedures and streamlined reimbursements, can matter equally or more for its attractiveness.
Generally speaking, it can be argued that a high subsidy proportion should be justified by a high ad-
ditionality and/or spillover potential. However, an evaluation of the Kenya Voucher Program by Phillips
and Steel (2003) offers a model of long-term market impact at different levels of subsidy and argues
that the higher the subsidy the lower the likely long-term impact as a proportion of subsidy cost as it
may lead to ‘adverse selection’ of initial participants who are unlikely to be able to purchase the service
at full cost. Even though the level-setting is hardly scientific, it should still be based on an analysis of
the specific conditions and objectives, but few projects explain the economic rationale for the level of
matching adopted.

Two-thirds of the projects in the sample have a fixed cost-sharing proportion, generally set at 50 per-
cent although some projects provide a match from 60 up to 95 percent. In a few cases, this percent-
age was modified at project restructuring to increase take-up. The rest of the projects includes variable
rates and/or separate funding windows for different types of beneficiaries (e.g. micro vs. medium firms
and firms vs. associations), project amounts, types of activities, and firm location. Some projects also
allow multiple MGs per firm but reduce the percentage of subsidy for each successive grant. In some
cases, the project design was very complex, with four to five different funding windows or separate
MG schemes in different project components, each with their own rules, criteria, implementation ar-
rangements, etc. Targeting different types of projects through distinct funding windows can increase
a program’s capacity to reach the intended beneficiaries, but this should be balanced with the cost
and ease of administration. There is some evidence in the sample that administration costs may be
moderately higher for projects with variable than fixed percentage match (24 percent and 20 percent,
respectively).

To tabulate the outcome ratings, we looked at the projects with fixed matching rates and isolated only
the matching rate for firms (and not for associations, or other eligible types of beneficiaries). Only 67
projects had a fixed matching rate for firms, and the vast majority of those were fixed at 50 percent.
The distribution was 47 projects fixed at 50 percent, 15 projects fixed at over 50 percent, and only five
projects fixed below 50 percent. Only 50 of those projects had an outcome rating, so the sample size
is heavily skewed toward 50 percent, and there was no significant difference in outcome ratings be-
tween 50 percent match (74 percent positive) and over 50 percent match (83 percent positive).




                                                                                                         49
Case study




50
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




Figure 4.9
Success rate by level of match
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Over 50%                                                                                                                 6

 50%                                                                                                                     38

 Under 50%                                                                                                                6

 All                                                                                                                     50

        100% 80%            60%      40%       20%       0%      20%       40%      60%      80% 100%           Share of projects


While MG beneficiaries are in most cases expected to bring their contribution in cash, some projects
allow contributions in kind and a few others require beneficiaries to contribute to a local fund to fi-
nance future common projects (mostly rural development). Finally, a couple of projects experimented
with repayment of the grant as royalties on additional sales or licensing generated.




                                                                                                                                     51
11: Advance payment of eligible expenses




   Case study          11
   Advance payment of eligible
   expenses
   The Nicaragua Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise             The Ghana Private Sector Development Project
   Development Project (P109691, FY08–15) included              (P000960, FY1995–2000) featured a Technology and
   a $8.6 million MG component for MSMEs. SMEs were only        Enterprise Development Fund, which provided MGs to
   eligible for reimbursement of the grant portion based on     SMEs which had limited impact. One of the issues identi-
   proof of expenditure and verification that the activities    fied in the project evaluation was the decision by the fund
   were completed. Based on the experience from a project       manager to pay consultants up front instead of reimburs-
   supported by another donor and considering the large         ing companies for services they procured. This resulted
   proportion of micro businesses in the private sector,        in a significant number of clients not paying for services,
   advance payment was authorized for firms with five em-       paying late, or paying a lower-than-required amount and
   ployees or less. Advances were to follow a predefined        generated disputes.
   disbursement schedule and be conditional on proof that
   the previous disbursement had been adequately spent.
   The project exceeded its targeted number of beneficiaries,
   although the respective proportions of micro businesses
   and SMEs are unclear.




   52
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




b. 	 Type of payment
In the sample, 72 projects have information about the payment modality of the grant. About two-
thirds of them provide MGs only on a reimbursement basis, meaning that beneficiaries who sign an
MG agreement need to first advance the full cost of services and receive the grant reimbursement
only after the service is rendered and appropriate evidence has been submitted to the program ad-
ministrator. A minority of projects work on the basis of advances to beneficiaries (11 percent), same
time payment to providers (14 percent), or a combination of these three methods for different types
of beneficiaries or project sizes (11 percent). An argument used to justify advance payments is the
limited capacity of SMEs to advance the full price of services due to low cash flow. While this may be
true for the smallest and weakest micro and small firms, advances entail higher risks of abuse and
should be used with the appropriate governance considerations. Some projects try to avoid imposing
an excessive cash flow burden on beneficiaries by allowing beneficiaries to submit several requests for
partial reimbursement for agreed milestone activities. On the other hand, teams should be careful to
select reimbursement without ensuring that there is sufficient institutional capacity to swiftly process
payments, as cumbersome procedures or inefficient implementing agencies may lead firms to wonder
when or whether they will be repaid, which can discourage take-up. A project20 in the sample had an
interesting payment arrangement, where the match to cooperatives was set at 30 percent. The other
70 percent were taken out as a loan from the partner financial institutions administering the program,
and the 30 percent match was only disbursed once the loan was paid off.

A tabulation of projects with reimbursement (74 percent positive) versus all the other arrangements
discussed above (78 percent positive) does not show any significant difference in outcome rating.

Figure 4.10
Success rate by type of payment
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Reimbursement                                                                                                           35

 All other                                                                                                               18

 All                                                                                                                     53

        100% 80%            60%      40%      20%        0%      20%      40%       60%      80% 100%           Share of projects


A majority of projects allow beneficiaries to submit multiple applications for MGs over the duration of
the program, although some projects set a limit of one or two MGs per firm. In both cases, a maximum
cumulative amount of grant is generally established, which ranges from as low as $1,000 to as high as
$400,000, depending on the project scope and type of beneficiary.




 	 Kyrgyz Republic Agribusiness & Marketing Project (P049724).
20


                                                                                                                                     53
12: Provision of services by public institutions




Case study         12
Provision of services by public
institutions
A series of two Croatia Science and Technology Proj-          The Indonesia Industrial Technology Development
ects (P080258, FY06–11/P127308, FY13) has aimed               Project (P003978, FY1996–2002) aimed at commer-
at fostering investment in technology and innovation by       cializing public R&D institutions by creating incentives for
SMEs by offering MGs to finance applied research projects     them to become more demand-driven, increasing sales of
subcontracted to participating public R&D institutions and    technology services to the private sector, and encourag-
universities. One objective was to increase collaboration     ing competition between public and private technology
and trust between SMEs and public R&D institutions and        providers. The project included an MG scheme for SMEs,
help the latter expand their industry network and out-        which was marketed to and preregistered both public and
reach. Under the first project, 22 projects were supported,   private institutions. The scheme had limited results due
with MGs amounting to €2 million for projects totaling        to various design and implementation issues. Few grants
€4.7 million. This program was expanded under the ongo-       were disbursed and SMEs had limited demand for services
ing follow-up project.                                        provided by public R&D institutions. In this regard, the
                                                              project’s evaluation noted that such institutions were gen-
                                                              erally ill-equipped to provide services to SMEs with limited
                                                              technical capacity and less sophisticated needs than their
                                                              usual larger clients.




54
                                                                                   4. Design feature of MG schemes




c. 	 Consultant selection
The selection of a consultant who can provide good-quality services to grant beneficiaries is essential
to the success of an MG program. Several options are available when designing programs, the most
common ones being the following:

•	   Free selection: The fund manager generally verifies that the selected provider has appropriate
     credentials, that prices charged are in line with market realities, and that there is a genuine arm’s-
     length relationship with the beneficiary to minimize the risk of abuse. Vetted providers can then
     be added to a non-mandatory list of providers. Programs can also provide support to beneficiaries
     to identify reliable service providers. Public institutions are rarely eligible or targeted as service
     providers for MG programs, although a few exceptions are presented in case study 12.

•	   Selection from a roster:21 A list of prequalified consultants is maintained by the fund manager and
     beneficiaries can only be reimbursed for services provided by firms on this list. Training courses
     are sometimes provided for consultants who want to operate under the program. Alternatively,
     consultants can be required to have a specific certification to be eligible.

•	   Competitive award: MG programs can request beneficiaries to award contracts competitively
     through different methods (for example, shopping and competitive local tender) depending on
     the amount or type of activities. This can be combined with the requirement to select potential
     providers from a roster.

Depending on the context, there can be a dearth of quality service providers or a high variance in
quality with limited information to single out good providers. The most appropriate selection mecha-
nism should be determined taking these considerations into account, and other ways to improve the
quality of supply should be explored where needed (for example, extending MG eligibility to providers
and leveraging a complementary component targeting the BDS supply side).




 	 In the Kyrgyz Republic Agribusiness & Marketing Project (P049724), the MG fund hires and trains local consultants from
21

whom the beneficiaries can choose. If international consultants are needed, the fund hires them as well and lets them choose
which local consultant to pair with.
                                                                                                                           55
13: Matching requirement for initial technical assistance




     Case study         13
     Matching requirement for initial
     technical assistance
     Under the first and second Tunisia Export Develop-             companies in industrial zones and local firms through
     ment Projects (P055814, FY1999–2005/P071115,                   an MG program, the Business-to-Business Linkage Fund.
     FY04–13), the provision of MGs through the Export Mar-         Eligible firms can apply for grants on the basis of a linkage
     ket Access Fund (EMAF) followed a two-stage process with       development plan. Firms that do not have the capacity
     (a) the preparation by SMEs of an export plan and (b) the      to develop such a plan on their own can receive support
     application for MGs to support the activities and services     from a consulting firm hired by the Business-to-Business
     required by export plans. Under the first project, $1.5 mil-   Linkage Fund, but are required to finance at least 30 per-
     lion was reserved for the provision of TA to develop export    cent of the cost of these services if full support is needed.
     plans. EMAF cofinanced 70 percent of the cost of enter-        In addition, the fund manager’s responsibilities include
     prises diagnostic and export plan preparation if requested,    the provision of assistance to prospective clients in com-
     while the remaining 30 percent were paid by firms. The         pleting grant applications, as well as free hand-holding
     project also provided extensive TA and general training to     services to beneficiary firms in the implementation of their
     beneficiaries during the implementation stage. The sec-        linkage development plans.
     ond project did not continue this cost-sharing approach
     for export plan preparation but increased the emphasis on
     TA, training, and implementation support for firms, allocat-
     ing $4 million for these purposes. Both projects attracted
     a high demand from the private sector and were credited
     with positive, if temporary, results with regard to export
     growth and use of export services by SMEs.

     The Ethiopia Competitiveness and Job Creation Proj-
     ect (P143302, FY14) aims at fostering linkages between




     56
                                                                                                         4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.8.	 Provision of diagnostics and TA to firms
Of the full sample of 106 projects, the majority of MG programs (61 percent) provide some form of
diagnostic and/or support to SMEs, or are part of a broader project which does, although almost 40
percent of projects do not seem to feature such assistance. Given the limited capacity of most SMEs in
low-income countries, this can prove to be a crucial element to ensure that (a) only the most deserv-
ing firms are identified and obtain MGs and (b) selected beneficiaries are able to make the most of the
subsidy and external consulting services provided. Common forms of diagnostic or support for poten-
tial MG beneficiaries include:

•	     Two-stage application process with a mandatory initial diagnostic to verify eligibility, ensure that
       the most promising firms are selected, and help firms avoid putting significant efforts into devel-
       oping a proposal if they are not eligible (for example, export readiness assessment for projects
       focusing on improving SMEs’ access to external markets).

•	     TA to SMEs to prepare sound business plans that can be used to apply for MGs. In some cases, this
       assistance is provided freely, while in others, applicants have to pay for a share of the cost involved
       (see case study 13).

•	     Complementary project component to train SMEs and create a pipeline of applicants for MGs.

•	     Continuous provision of TA and training to MG beneficiaries, from application to project imple-
       mentation. This can sometimes represent a sizeable proportion of MG schemes’ administrative
       costs.

The types of support listed above have various degrees of intensity, which apart from having different
implications on administration costs arguably also have a different degree of effect on outcomes. The
review did a binary analysis of whether or not any type of diagnostic or TA was offered.22 The positive
effect of a diagnostic appears to be quite strong, with 83 percent of projects offering it having positive
outcomes compared to only 60 percent of projects that do not. Thus, despite the budgetary implica-
tion of offering extra, often free, TA, the data seems to strongly support an argument for including it in
the project design.

Figure 4.11
Success rate by provision of diagnostic
Not implemented Unsatisfactory Moderately unsatisfactory Moderately satisfactory Satisfactory Highly satisfactory
                                                                                                                    Observations
 Yes                                                                                                                     48

 No                                                                                                                      25

 All                                                                                                                     73

        100% 80%            60%      40%      20%        0%      20%      40%       60%      80% 100%           Share of projects




22
  	 Caveat: Given the budgetary and design implications of providing dedicated TA or a diagnostic to beneficiaries, projects
that did not explicitly mention these elements in their PADs were assumed not to offer them. To the extent that some projects
featured diagnostics or TA that were not mentioned in project documents, the data may slightly misrepresent the true break-
down.
                                                                                                                                     57
14: Repeated MG projects




    Case study         14
    Repeated MG projects

    The first, second, and third Tunisia Export Develop-            after the intervention and no evidence of spillovers were
    ment Projects (P055814, FY1999–2005; P071115,                   found (Cadot et al. 2015; Gourdon et al. 2011a, 2011b).23
    FY04–13; P132381, FY14) have been implemented
    since 1999 to improve the trade environment in Tunisia          The CEDF was launched in end-2015 with a $22 million
    and the export competitiveness of firms in the country.         MG allocation and $1.5 million to administer the scheme
    Among other components, the three projects have fea-            (6 percent of the total, compared to 29 percent and 15
    tured an MG scheme (respectively, EMAF I and II and the         percent for the first and second projects, respectively).
    Community Economic Development Fund [CEDF]) to sub-             The targeted number of beneficiaries was significantly
    sidize the cost of consultant services required to enable       increased to 2,000 firms. The project drew the lesson from
    an SME to access new markets, on the basis of an export         its predecessors at several levels:
    development plan prepared with TA provided under the
                                                                    •	   Implementation arrangements: While EMAF I and II
    scheme.
                                                                         relied on international contractors, the CEDF’s man-
    The first EMAF (1999–2004) disbursed around $10 mil-                 agement was attributed to CEPEX, a public export
    lion in MGs, with $4 million allocated to the provision              promotion agency, with the explicit objective to build
    of assistance to SMEs and administration of the fund.                more durable institutional capacity to administer MG
    Exceeding the target of 350, 595 SMEs benefited from the             programs in the country. Temporary support to CEPEX
    scheme, and the project was deemed a major success.                  from a consultant was planned specifically on the MG
                                                                         program, and a whole project component was dedi-
    The EMAF II (2005–2010) had a higher allocation of                   cated to building this agency’s overall capacity.
    $16.6 million for grants, and received an additional financ-
    ing of $6 million due to stronger-than-anticipated de-          •	   M&E: An amount of $0.5 million was allocated to es-
    mand. Again, $4 million were allocated to administer the             tablish an M&E system of the MG scheme by following
    scheme and accompany firms, an amount that remained                  enterprises throughout the project implementation
    constant with the additional financing. While the program            period, including a control group identified ex ante.
    was similar overall, some design refinements were in-                This was consistent with the recommendation made
    cluded (for example, increased scope of eligible activities,         by the evaluators of the second EMAF to build impact
    increased provision of TA to firms, allowing associations to         evaluation ex ante in the project’s design.
    apply, and higher maximum grant size). The initial target
                                                                    •	   Economic impact: An increased emphasis was put
    of 500 SMEs and 40 professional associations was in-
                                                                         by the Government on the objective to maximize
    creased to, respectively, 1,000 and 50 after the additional
                                                                         economic benefits from the scheme rather than only
    financing, and was eventually exceeded as 1,239 firms
                                                                         financial benefits of private firms. The CEDF scheme
    and 93 associations received grants. An ex post impact
                                                                         was designed with these concerns in mind, by primar-
    evaluation of the project concluded that it had statistically
                                                                         ily targeting sectors and firms with a high potential to
    significant positive effects on beneficiaries with regard to
                                                                         increase economic diversification, foster innovation,
    short-term export growth and diversification, especially for
                                                                         create skilled employment, reduce geographic dispar-
    first-time exporters. However, no difference between ben-
                                                                         ities, and so on.
    eficiary and non-beneficiary firms were found three years
                                                                     	 Cadot et al. (2015) suggest that the impact of the EMAF II program
                                                                    23

                                                                    may have been transient because it did not lead to the enhancements in
                                                                    product quality or sophistication, which could have strengthened com-
                                                                    petitiveness durably. Notwithstanding its transient effect, the program is
                                                                    deemed to have been cost-effective because it generated two Tunisian
                                                                    dinars of private profits per Tunisian dinar of program expenditure, and
                                                                    the additional corporate tax revenue just covered the public cost of the
                                                                    program.
    58
                                                                    4. Design feature of MG schemes




4.9.	 Link with other project components
MG components are more often than not part of larger projects with other components. Their allo-
cated amounts can represent anywhere between a few percent and all of the total project amount,
averaging around a third. In the sample reviewed, the other most common components dealt with
institutional capacity building (60 percent of projects), business environment and regulatory reforms
(51 percent), and access to finance (34 percent).

Synergies can clearly be exploited between the support directly provided to SMEs through MGs and
other initiatives to improve the business environment. For instance, Phillips (2001) made the case for
coordinating grants for know-how with a public goods element and credits for traditional bankable
investments. Likewise, investment climate reforms could aim at reducing the supply-side constraints
and market failure that undermine firms’ capacity and willingness to procure BDS.

In practice, however, there rarely seem to be strong links between MGs and other components. For
instance, the program document of the Tunisia Third Export Development Project (P132381) noted
that the efficiency and sustainability of the previous two projects was undermined by the lack of syn-
ergies between components (MGs and export finance guarantee facilities). It was decided for the third
project to modify institutional arrangements to ensure synergies.



4.10.	Series of projects
The 106 projects with an MG component reviewed for this study were implemented in 64 different
countries. Out of these, 3 countries (Mexico, Nigeria, and Zambia) had 4 projects each, 8 countries had
3 projects, 17 countries had 2 projects, and 36 countries had only 1 project. While for some countries
this corresponds to operations with limited mutual links (for example, rural development and SME
competitiveness projects), in others, series of similar follow-up operations were implemented (for ex-
ample, Colombia, Croatia, Lesotho, Moldova, and Tunisia).

One could think that design and implementation experience allows later projects to have more favor-
able outcomes than earlier ones in the same country. While this indeed seems to have been the case
for some countries, there is no systematic trend and in some cases the opposite is found. This may
be explained by the fact that insufficient lessons are drawn from previous experiences, that broader
exogenous factors influence the outcome, or that repeat projects are precisely prepared where good
results were achieved in the past.




                                                                                                     59
15: High and low disbursement of MG projects




     Case study          15
     High and low disbursement of
     MG projects
     The Moldova Competitiveness Enhancement Project                 The Guatemala Competitiveness Project (P055084,
     (P089124, FY06–13) adopted a two-staged approach                FY01–09) featured an MG ($5 million) and micro vouchers
     to support SME through MGs. It initially featured a $1.2        ($1 million) component, respectively, expected to benefit
     million MG facility designed to extend 100 to 140 grants        300 SMEs and 10,000 micro businesses by supporting
     to firms, focusing on quality upgrading and international       investment in BDS to increase competitiveness. Only one
     certification. Based on good results, the facility’s size was   round of MGs was initiated, and 448 enterprises applied
     later increased with a $1.5 million additional financing. As    for funding. After an intensive vetting process, four com-
     foreseen in the original project document, its scope was        panies received grant funding, equivalent to 2 percent of
     expanded to cover a broader array of BDS (e.g., upgrade         available funding. No additional competition was held, as
     labor skills and management practices and introduce new         several rounds of bidding did not lead to the contracting
     products). The program exceeded its original targets and        of a suitable implementation agency that had the capac-
     provided grants to 479 firms. The scheme was deemed a           ity and knowledge to roll out the component on a larger
     success and was credited with having played an important        scale throughout Guatemala. Likewise, the micro voucher
     role in the development and consolidation of the consult-       scheme was never implemented. The project suffered
     ing services sector in Moldova on both the demand and           from the lack of commitment by successive governments,
     supply side.                                                    and the internal review of the project also faulted its overly
                                                                     complex and ambitious design. The MG/micro voucher
                                                                     schemes were initially the largest component of the World
                                                                     Bank project, and the bulk of funds were canceled or redi-
                                                                     rected to other project activities. Around the same period,
                                                                     an Inter-American Development Bank MG project was un-
                                                                     dermined by similar implementation arrangement issues,
                                                                     and an Inter-American Development Bank study conclud-
                                                                     ed that Guatemala lacked important preconditions for a
                                                                     successful rollout of MGs.




     60
                                                       4. Design characteristics of successful projects




4.11.	Implementation and disbursement of funds
The capacity of MG schemes to disburse the funds allocated and reach the expected number of ben-
eficiaries has often been retained as the main measure of success, although as argued in this report,
these measures of output do not imply positive outcome and impact. It is nonetheless useful to look
at the average performance of MG schemes with regard to disbursement as an indicator of imple-
mentation quality. Out of the 55 closed projects for which information was found on both the initial
amount allocated to MGs and the amount actually disbursed, the average disbursement rate reaches
slightly over 80 percent. Interestingly, no obvious correlation is observable between the size of the
MG facilities, or the country’s development level (proxied with GDP per capita), and their capacity to
disburse fully.

Some projects with disbursement difficulties have reacted by reducing the MG amount, sometimes
by as much as 80 percent, or even by dropping the MG component altogether. Other projects have
attempted to increase take-up by relaxing eligibility criteria, increasing the level of subsidy to make the
scheme more attractive, simplifying application procedures, or providing technical support to prepare
applications. However, over a dozen projects disbursed two-thirds of funds or less at closing (with five
projects disbursing less than 20 percent). On the other hand, some MG schemes received additional fi-
nancing to adapt to higher-than-anticipated demand, in some instances doubling the initial allocation.

The targeted number of beneficiaries varies largely depending on several factors, including project
size, country size, and type of subprojects supported, with the objectives ranging from a handful of
R&D projects to several thousands of microenterprises. Among the 70 projects that specified a target-
ed number of beneficiaries at appraisal, the average number was just under 800 beneficiaries and the
median 225. Among the 38 closed projects for which both initial target and actual number of bene-
ficiaries were found, the latter represented on average 129 percent of the former, meaning that initial
targets are often exceeded (and are sometimes revised upward at project restructuring) (figure 4.12).

Figure 4.12
Targeted versus actual number of MGs

    MG scheme

Actual number of grants (log)

10,000




 1,000




   100




    10
         10                     100          1,000                 10,000
                                            Targeted number of grants (log)




                                                                                                        61
Case study




62
5.	Design characteristics of
   successful projects
5.1.	 Features of successful and unsuccessful projects
This section looks at the design features of projects at the tail end of the outcome distribution. Among
the 75 closed projects in the sample, 6 were deemed highly satisfactory and 8 were deemed unsatis-
factory.

The outcome of the MG component is generally, but not always, correlated with the overall outcome
of the project (four of the eight unsatisfactory MG schemes were part of broader projects rated mod-
erately satisfactory or higher). There are no evident differences between successful and unsuccessful
projects with regard to size of MG facility, implementing agency, share of operating costs, country
characteristics, and so on. With regard to design features, T 5.1 would suggest that the former tend
to be simpler (for example, well-identified implementing agency, single funding window, and few
restrictions on eligibility), to include BDS providers, and to explicitly provide assistance to beneficiary
firms. Overall, however, there is no evident design feature or combination of features that seems to be
correlated with outcome among the highly satisfactory and the unsatisfactory projects in the sample.
Table 5.1 maps out their design features and case study 16 provides examples.




                                                                                                         63
Table 5.1
Main design features of successful and unsuccessful projects

                                                                  Restrictions for      BDS
                                                        Funding     Applicants       Providers      TA to
 Project          Years    Implementing Agency          Windows   Size    Sector      Eligible   Beneficiaries

 Highly Satisfactory Projects
 Mauritius     1994–1999   Private contractor
 (P001918)
                                                           1                            l             l
 Uganda        1996–2003   Private contractor
 (P035634)
                                                           1                            l             l
 Madagascar    1997–2003   Private contractor
                                                           1
 (P001555)
 Tunisia       1999–2005   Private contractor
 (P055814)
                                                           1       l        l           l             l
 Uganda        2005–2013   Private association
 (P083809)
                                                           1                            l             l
 Mali          2006–2015   Private contractor
 (P081704)
                                                           1       l        l           l             l
 Unsatisfactory Projects
 Ghana         1995–2000   Partnership ministry/           1
 (P000960)                 nonprofit                               l        l           l
 Zimbabwe      1996–2003   Four different agencies         4
 (P035628)                                                                  l                         l
 Zambia        1997–2003   Private contractor              1
 (P044324)                                                                              l             l
 Guatemala     2001–2009   Private contractor              1
 (P055084)                 planned but not found                   l                    l             l
 Senegal       2003–2012   Private contractor              1
 (P051609)                                                                  l
 Honduras      2004–2011   Private contractor              5
 (P070038)                                                                  l                         l
 Zambia        2005–2012   Private contractor              1
 (P071407)                                                                  l
 Sri Lanka     2010–2014   Ministry at design, trans-      2
 (P113709)                 ferred to public bank                   l        l
                           during implementation




64
                                                        5. Design characteristics of successful projects




5.2.	 Econometric analysis
a. 	 Model
We used a linear multivariate regression (detailed in annex 3) to assess the extent to which the design
features discussed in section 4 are systematically correlated with the development outcomes of MG
programs, controlling for country-specific conditions. The dependent variable is the outcome rating
for the MG scheme, which was directly extracted from ICR and ISR documents or inferred based on the
information provided in these documents.

The variation in project outcomes is examined as a function of country conditions and project-specif-
ic design characteristics. With regard to country conditions, the control variables are GDP per capita
(current U.S. dollars), Index of Economic Freedom, Doing Business - distance to frontier, Country Policy
and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) score (1 to 6, higher is better), and agriculture, value added (per-
centage of GDP). For each control variable, the value is assigned for each individual project for the year
when the project was approved (or the closest available), which means that multiple projects in the
same country will have different control values if they were approved in different years. Since the CPIA
score is relevant only for IDA countries, controlling for it significantly limits the number of observations;
so each of the models was run with and without the CPIA score.

With regard to project-specific design characteristics, nine independent variables were tested in nine
separate models, captured in a series of dummies, except for the level of match which is numeric. The
variables are PIU, size limit, groups, service providers, sector restrictions, equipment, level of match,
reimbursement, and diagnostic. The variable characteristics and the regression results are presented in
annex 3.

b. 	 Findings
•	   Other things being equal, there is no significant association between any of the country variables
     and outcome. One exception is the Index of Economic Freedom, which is very slightly but signifi-
     cantly positively correlated with outcome in the two models that control for reimbursement.

•	   Project design features that show a statistically significant correlation with outcomes are:

     --   The project being implemented by a PIU is significantly and positively correlated with out-
          come when CPIA scores are also controlled for. Thus, in IDA countries, when institutional and
          economic management aspects of the economy are controlled for, projects implemented
          by a PIU are associated with a unit higher rating on outcome measures. This association
          becomes insignificant if CPIA is not controlled for, which increases the sample to include all
          countries. A plausible explanation is the difficulty in procuring large international contracts
          in low-capacity environments, which can cause delays and affect implementation, or alter-
          natively the added importance of knowing the local context, which may make PIUs more
          successful in IDA countries.




                                                                                                          65
16: Highly successful and unsuccessful projects




   Case study             16
   Highly successful and unsuccessful
   projects
   For some successful projects, there were indications that      On the contrary, other projects were deemed to have had
   gains extended beyond direct beneficiary firms and were        no or minimal durable impact on the BDS market and on
   sustainable. For instance, the Uganda Private Sector           SME productivity. The Zambia Enterprise Development
   Competitiveness Project (P035634, FY1996–2003)                 Project (P044324, FY1997–2003) was less successful
   disbursed $3 million to 538 firms (well above the initial      with its MG component, which only disbursed less than
   target of 300) through the Business Uganda Development         half of its $2.5 million allocation for a variety of reasons
   Scheme to support capacity building. Around 40 percent         linked to project design and the broader economic en-
   of the beneficiary firms were located outside the capital,     vironment. Given the importance of a few large firms in
   Kampala, and 16 percent were managed by women. A               the Zambian economy, the scheme was intentionally
   survey of beneficiaries indicated that the grant and TA pro-   designed to encourage a higher use of BDS even by large
   vided were crucial for most firms to undertake their proj-     firms and those which could pay for these services. In
   ects and had significantly contributed to increased sales,     the end, only 63 companies received grants, 7 of which
   improved management systems, and new market knowl-             received 42 percent of funds. Some of the largest grants
   edge. It was estimated that sales growth for beneficiaries     went to the strongest companies in the country, which
   had been 40 percent higher than that of firms outside the      had already invested their own funds in similar activities.
   scheme. Maybe more importantly, about two-thirds of the        This outcome was unintended, and the program failed to
   beneficiaries surveyed indicated their willingness to pay      reach smaller beneficiaries despite substantial commu-
   the full price for future use of similar BDS.                  nication efforts. While the depressed economic context
                                                                  and complex reimbursement procedures did not help,
                                                                  the main cause of the low performance was the failure to
                                                                  adapt the scheme to Zambia’s lack of corporate depth at
                                                                  the time.




   66
                                                     5. Design characteristics of successful projects




    --   Reimbursement as a method of payment is not correlated with outcome when CPIA is con-
         trolled for, but is negatively correlated with outcome and significant when CPIA is not con-
         trolled for. So in IDA countries, all things being equal, reimbursement does not seem to be
         systematically linked with outcome, while in the full sample of rated projects, it seems to be
         negatively correlated with outcome. A possible explanation could be that processing delays
         linked with reimbursement negatively affect disbursement or repayment uncertainly affects
         initial take-up.

    --   Having a diagnostic is positively correlated with outcome and associated with an increase of
         0.8 unit of development outcome when CPIA is controlled for. It remains positively correlated
         with outcome even when CPIA is not controlled for, though the coefficient goes down to half
         a unit of development outcome and the R squared is also lower—it explains only 8 percent
         of the variation in outcome versus 18 percent when CPIA is controlled for.

The findings regarding implementation by a PIU and having a diagnostic reflect and confirm the tab-
ulations discussed in section 4. Reimbursement shows only a marginally lower share of positive out-
comes in the tabulations, though the regression analysis shows it as significant when country variables
are controlled for in the full sample of projects.




                                                                                                     67
17: Randomized allocation of MGs for impact evaluation




  Case study          17

  Randomized allocation of MGs
  for impact evaluation
  Despite the theoretical ease of implementing a random-            term effects, the results of which are reported in McKenzie
  ized evaluation of MG programs, there have been more              et al. (2016). MGs do appear to have resulted in additional
  failed attempts than successfully completed randomized            innovation activities being undertaken by firms. For in-
  evaluations of MG schemes. Campos et al. (2012) describe          stance, beneficiaries were more than twice as likely to in-
  attempts to conduct such evaluations for seven programs           troduce a new product as firms in the control group. They
  in six African countries, which failed due to a mix of im-        were also more likely to do more marketing, introduce
  plementation delays, lack of political will to allow random       new accounting systems, make a capital investment, or
  assignment, and low program take-up. Several factors              use a consultant. However, data limitations prevented the
  contributing to these outcomes are highlighted, including         authors from assessing impacts on employment or sales.
  political economy issues, overly stringent eligibility criteria   Several conclusions are drawn: (a) attention in design to
  that do not take account of where value added may be              make the application process better for firms can lead to
  highest, lack of attention to detail in ‘last mile’ issues, in-   high take-up and make it feasible to evaluate through a
  centives facing project implementation staff, and the way         randomized oversubscription design, (b) there is some
  impact evaluations are funded. The authors draw lessons           evidence that MGs can have additional impact beyond
  from these experiences for both the implementation and            what firms would do anyway, and (c) further evaluation on
  the possible evaluation of future projects.                       a larger scale is needed to measure other key outcomes
                                                                    such as employment and sales and whether the grants
  Taking these lessons into account, the Yemen SME Revi-            also involve externalities for other firms.
  talization and Employment Pilot Project (P143715,
  FY13–16) planned to randomly allocate screened SMEs               Another successful randomized trial of a regional MG pro-
  either to process to receive an MG or to a control group          gram for SMEs in Mexico was conducted a few years ago,
  to later be able to conduct a proper evaluation of the            the methods and results of which are reported in Bruhn et
  program’s additional impact on beneficiaries’ performance         al. (2013). This analysis notably concluded that the consult-
  and employment levels. Demand largely exceeded the                ing interventions had a positive short-term impact on the
  number of grants available, allowing this randomized al-          productivity and return on assets of firms in the treatment
  location at publicly held events. While this program was          group, as well as on employment several years after the
  interrupted by the civil war in early 2015, a partial impact      program.
  evaluation was nonetheless carried out to measure short-




  68
6.	Defining and measuring
   success
6.1.	 Institutional arrangements for M&E
Unequal efforts and resources are dedicated by projects to ensure sound M&E arrangement for the
MG schemes. While fund managers generally have the responsibility to monitor the use of funds and
report on outcomes, this is sometimes more of an afterthought without specific resources allocated to
M&E. However, other projects follow best practices by including M&E from the start as a constitutive
component of the program. For instance, an impact assessment unit was one of the three compo-
nents of a project in West Bank and Gaza (P110526), for which a separate M&E Handbook specifying
the approach to track client projects and measure results was prepared alongside the Grants Manual.
Likewise, a project in Afghanistan (P118053) made detailed M&E arrangements, notably featuring a
dual system with (a) internal M&E (including regular supervision monitoring and rating of each project
under implementation, portfolio management at the aggregate level, and initial qualitative and quan-
titative impact assessment of each completed project)and (b) annual contracting of independent ex-
ternal M&E services for both randomized and representative sampling impact evaluations to continue
several years after projects are completed. Importantly, these arrangements must detail the resources
and staffing allocated to M&E and clearly spell out the reporting obligations of beneficiaries. Ideally,
continuous M&E from the start of the project should allow the continuous adaptation of program
design (e.g., eligibility criteria, matching requirement, and authorized activities) to address issues that
surface during implementation and maximize impact.



6.2.	 What do we measure?
We extracted from the reviewed projects all indicators used to measure the MG scheme. Nine projects
had no indicators at all to measure the MGs, and a further 16 projects had only output indicators, such
as number of grants awarded or volume disbursed. This means that a quarter of the projects in the
sample had no meaningful indicator with which to gauge success. 24

The other 75 percent of projects used a combination of outcome and impact measures and at the
highest levels of their results chains measured firm-level impacts such as jobs, sales, or productivity
growth. The type of assessments used to measure firm-level impact also vary significantly from project
to project. Satisfaction surveys for a sample of beneficiaries seem to be accepted as the basis for out-
come ratings in ICRs, even though they have serious attribution issues and do not have a counterfac-
tual with which to compare reported impacts. The best practice to establish causality and attribution
and address potential endogeneity concerns is to plan an impact evaluation from the beginning by
randomly allocating firms to the treatment (that is, receiving a grant) and control groups and collect-
ing baseline data, although this is rarely done due to the cost and complexity of such undertakings
(see case study 17 for examples of failed and successful attempts). In the absence of ex ante random-
ized allocation of MGs, some projects have attempted second-best ex post strategies, such as collect-


 	 Annex 1 to this report includes a list of results indicators used to measure the MG schemes in the reviewed sample.
24


                                                                                                                         69
                                                                                    6. Defining and measuring success




ing information on a control group selected ex post,25 or by randomly selecting a control group of
similar non-beneficiary firms and controlling for observable differences with the treatment group with
regard to size, age, sector, and so on.26



6.3.	 Is this the right thing to measure?
As discussed above, attribution of firm-level impacts to MG programs is difficult to establish. In addi-
tion, there is very little data on how sustainable firm-level impacts are. There are few rigorous longitu-
dinal studies of MG beneficiaries and consequently, little is known about whether there is a time lag
to observe the benefits from MGs or conversely whether observed benefits disappear over time (IFAD
2012), which presents an additional challenge for measurement, particularly post-project close. But
even if firm-level impacts are established, is that the right level at which to measure the success of MG
programs?

As explained in section 2, the theoretical economic case for MGs and the conditions needed to justify
them have been well understood for a long time. However, the justification for the use of this instru-
ment is rarely well articulated in the reviewed projects. Common issues in projects’ MG justification
include the absence or poor quality of (a) demand assessment and information about the local BDS
market, (b) discussion of the specific market failures or the generation of public economic gains that
the use of an MG would address, and (c) economic analysis of the project’s costs and benefits com-
pared with a counterfactual without the project or the potential use of a different instrument. Even
when some of these elements are included in project documents, they are sometimes formulated in
generic terms, without sufficient efforts to confirm their validity for the specific context of the proj-
ect.27

If an adequate economic rationale for the instrument is missing, many projects subsequently fail to
set adequate objectives for the MG, which makes it difficult to measure their success through an M&E
framework. For example, in the case of innovation grants, the economic rationale is generally tied to
the positive spillover effects of innovation that make its benefits hard to appropriate for specific firms
and thus make them underinvest in innovation activities. Thus, the ultimate measure of success for
such an intervention would be to try to establish whether the program had a positive catalytic effect
on the level of innovation in the country or use proxies to gauge the level of spillovers from recipient
firms to other firms and the larger economy. In projects that are not directly funding innovative activ-
ities, the most typical justification for the use of public funds to subsidize private firms is one or many
of a series of market failures, both from the supply as well as demand side, that result in an underde-
veloped market for BDS. Yet, very few projects attempt to measure their impact on the market for BDS
and whether the fund, which is intended to be temporary, has had additionality through a demonstra-
tion effect and has catalyzed the market and moved it to a higher and sustainable equilibrium.28 On
the contrary, several projects that had good intermediate outcomes nonetheless noted an absence

25
  	 See for instance the report prepared by a third-party consulting company for the West Bank and Gaza Fund for New Market
Development (P110526): “Facility for New Market Development (FNMD) to Strengthen the Private Sector in the Occupied Pales-
tinian Territories – Final Evaluation”, May 2012, Triple Line Consulting, available at: www.oecd.org/derec/unitedkingdom/8_Evalu-
ationFacilityNewMarketDevelopmentFNMDStrengthenPrivateSectorinOccupiedPalestinianTerritories.pdf.
26
  	 See for instance the impact evaluation of the EMMAF II MG facility implemented in the context of the second Tunisia Export
Development Projects (P071115), presented in Cadot et al. (2015) and Gourdon et al. (2011a, 2011b). For an earlier example on
Mauritius, see Biggs (1999).
27
  	 Van der Meer and Noordam (2004) also emphasized that World Bank projects generally did not provide enough evidence
on the economic justification for the use of MGs, paid little attention to potential distortive effects on markets, and lacked rigor-
ous cost-benefit or cost-effectiveness analyses. The authors notably argue that “loose claims of market failure can easily result in
misguided interventions with grants” and discuss alternatives to grants to address various types of constraints on private invest-
ment.
28
  	 See annex 1; only four projects out of the 106 have any indicator measuring the fund’s effect on the market for BDS.
70
                                                                              6. Defining and measuring success




of increased willingness or capacity of firms to pay the full price of services, the absence of a supply
response from local service providers, or increased prices with higher demand due to inelastic supply.
Almost none of the reviewed projects conduct or refer to a demand assessment of the targeted popu-
lation of firms to try to identify the precise market failure that is causing the perceived low productivity
or low value addition, or lack of growth. Consequently, most lack specific objectives for the MG facility
and thus do not select results metrics that can adequately measure the fund’s additionality.

Inadequate efforts to ensure the project has a strong economic rationale increase the risks of low
grant take-up by targeted beneficiaries, or incorrect targeting that limits additionality compared to
what firms would have paid for anyway, absence of sizeable or durable impact on the BDS market, and
so on. On the other hand, well-designed projects that are adequately tailored to local circumstances
and capacity have been able to show significant additionality, sustainability, and demonstration ef-
fects.

For this reason, the first step for task teams should always be to establish a strong economic justifi-
cation for the project (Phillips 2001). This principle is not specific to MG projects but is worth empha-
sizing given the deficiencies presented above. This implies (a) dedicating sufficient resources during
preparation to collect information, allowing a real reflection on the current obstacles to BDS use as
well as the potential for additionality/externalities and (b) justifying that grants are the best available
tool to address these constraints. The preparation of a cost-benefit analysis and computation of an
economic rate of return are difficult in the case of MGs (for example, difficulty to assess spillovers and
unknown effective demand for grants). However, Van der Meer and Noordam (2004) provide some
useful economic principles and highlight a couple of projects that conducted ex ante cost-benefit
analyses. At the very least, a qualitative discussion of the economic justification for the project with
references to the impact of previous projects in comparable contexts should be provided.



6.4.	 Design and implementation tailored to success
Once a sound economic rationale has been established for the use of MGs to address specific con-
straints, the scheme should be designed in a way that directly addresses these constraints and maxi-
mizes economic gains from the project, through the choice of eligibility criteria, grant modalities, type
of projects supported, and so on.

The reviewed projects often provide insufficient details on implementation modalities and their justifi-
cation before project launch. Program documents sometimes contain limited specific information and
fail to link implementation modalities with the economic rationale for the project.29 A detailed imple-
mentation manual to guide the implementing agency’s actions is usually put together during the
project preparation phase and its adoption is usually added as an effectiveness or disbursement con-
dition, along with the establishment of an MG review committee and recruitment of a fund manager.
However, some projects have postponed these steps until after effectiveness and have considered the
elaboration of the MG manual as a project output. This is a potential risk for implementation and has
been highlighted as a source of delays and implementation difficulties in several projects, for instance
in Senegal in the 1990s and more recently in Sri Lanka.




 	 Here again, Van der Meer and Noordam (2004) already noted that the frequent lack of information in the project documents
29

means that much decision-making is left for the implementers.
                                                                                                                       71
18: Economic rationale for MG projects




Case study           18
Economic rationale for MG
projects
The Bangladesh Export Diversification Project                  activities that were already routinely accomplished by
(P049790, FY1999–2004) is a good example of efforts            the private sector, credit constraints often precluded in-
to provide an economic justification for the use of MGs. As    vestments recommended by consultants, there was no
part of project preparation, a detailed needs assessment       observed increase in SMEs’ willingness to pay for BDS,
and demand analysis were prepared for key export sectors       and the small number of grants extended was unlikely to
based on firm surveys, meetings with firms and profes-         have affected the BDS market in the country) (World Bank
sional associations, and letters of potential beneficiaries    2005).
expressing interest in the scheme. Project documents also
included a detailed description of the scheme’s objectives     Likewise, in his evaluation of the Technology Diffusion
and implementation modalities. The project had good            Scheme supported under the Mauritius Technical Assis-
outcomes and was credited with having encouraged               tance Project to Enhance Competitiveness (P001918,
greater use of export support services, resulting in greater   FY94–99), Biggs (1999) concludes that the project had a
development of new products and diversification into           good justification and was well managed, but that short-
new markets for beneficiaries.                                 comings in design and implementation prevented it from
                                                               maximizing additionality and selectivity and hence seri-
Project documents for the Burkina Faso Competitive-            ously limited its economic benefits in practice. It is note-
ness & Enterprise Development Project (P071443,                worthy that the self-evaluation prepared at project com-
FY03–14) also included a detailed discussion of market         pletion deemed the Technology Diffusion Scheme ‘highly
failures and firms’ needs, adapted firm and project selec-     satisfactory’ on the basis of the project’s outputs.
tion criteria to focus on additionality and spillovers, and
carried out a cost-benefit analysis of the MG component.       The MG component of the Zambia Enterprise Develop-
The project which benefited from additional financing          ment Project (P044324, FY1997–2003) was deemed
during implementation had good results, exceeding its          unsatisfactory due to low disbursement and limited ad-
targets and improving the performances of beneficiaries.       ditionality/selectivity (grants went mostly to some of the
                                                               largest Zambian companies). Several factors likely contrib-
There are also several examples of projects for which insuf-   uted to this outcome, from the depressed economic situ-
ficient attention to the economic rationale for the project    ation and high level of uncertainty at the time the project
and design led to disappointing results.                       was promoted to the excessively complex procedures for
                                                               small businesses. However, the ICR emphasized the lack of
A detailed review of the Indonesia Industrial Technol-         corporate depth in Zambia (meaning that the scheme was
ogy Development Project (P003978, FY1996–2002)                 designed without due consideration for the small size of
partly blamed the MG scheme’s poor economic benefits           the private sector) and noted the need for more rigorous
on its insufficient analytical underpinnings and design        analytical work and market investigation before appraisal.
shortcomings (for example, many subprojects financed




72
7.	Conclusions and
   recommendations
After over two decades of use in development projects, rigorous evidence of the impact of MGs is
weak. They have channeled hundreds of millions of dollars to SMEs in dozens of countries, often with
positive results. Compared to the earlier efforts to improve enterprise technical capabilities through
services provided by central public institutions (Briggs 1999), the current demand-driven nature of
MGs, which lets private operators decide which services they want to invest in, represents a desirable
evolution. However, experience has shown that MGs can also be difficult to implement and that they
rarely yield the type of broad and durable economic benefits that would justify the subsidization of
private enterprises with public funds.

For the most part, the general principles that should guide the design and implementation of the MG
programs were laid out in the early 2000s (Biggs 1999; DCED 2001; Phillips 2001; Van der Meer and
Noordam 2004). Several studies have completed our understanding of the conditions under which
this instrument is more likely to work or not. However, the efforts dedicated to establish a sound
rationale for the MG schemes and to design and implement them with due consideration for local
circumstances often remain insufficient. Given the long list of potential difficulties at different levels
of MG implementation (e.g., take-up level, administrative inefficiency, fraud, and political capture), a
more thorough discussion of risks specific to the MG component would also be warranted in project
documents.

It is worth (re)emphasizing some of these principles concerning (a) the economic rationale, (b) the
design and implementation, and (c) the M&E of the MG programs:




                                                                                                        73
7.1.	 Economic rationale
MGs should only be used when they are determined to be the most adapted and least-cost tool to
reach the project objective in the specific local context. In some cases, other tools such as cash trans-
fers might be better suited to subsidize poor entrepreneurs. The use of subsidy must be based on a
sound economic rationale, generally the tackling of a well-identified market failure, and directed at
clear beneficiary groups with a verified demand. The intervention’s capacity to have a broad and du-
rable impact on both the supply and demand for BDS should be presented, with an explicit analysis
of the potential for additionality and spillovers and a realistic exit strategy. Based on these elements,
a rigorous economic analysis should be prepared early on. All of this requires to dedicate more time
and resources to design and particularly to the analytical underpinnings that inform it than is typically
done. Experience has shown that failing to do so is likely to result in suboptimal outcomes, such as
limited additionality and spillovers, weak demand and disbursements, unintended consequences on
the BDS market (e.g., price increase if the supply is inelastic), or nonsustainable impact if the project
does not address binding constraints for SMEs (e.g., access to credit to finance intangible BDS).30



7.2.	 Design and implementation
There is no universal blueprint that can be applied for MG schemes, and much depends on the project
objectives and local conditions. None of the design features considered in this study has been found
to have a systematic impact on outcomes, which means that programs need to be tailored to local
circumstances and capacities. The functioning of the MG programs should be clearly presented in
project documents (and MG manuals drafted early), but the schemes should remain flexible enough
to adapt to unforeseen difficulties as well as to changing environments and external shocks. This study
has attempted to present the pros and cons of different design modalities. Based on anecdotal evi-
dence and lessons learned from past experience, several general considerations are worth keeping in
mind for the design of the MG schemes:

i.	   Although no causal relationship is established, the design modality that seems to be most often
      correlated with positive outcome is the provision of personalized TA to beneficiary firms before,
      during, and after the application stage. An active MG scheme seems to be better at supporting
      beneficiaries and increasing their odds of successfully completing the projects.

ii.	 Implementing agencies can be public or private/international, although the progressive strength-
     ening of local capacities is advisable where possible. They should in all cases be free from political
     interferences and have the technical capacity to implement the program before its launch. Broad
     stakeholder engagement, transparent communication, and involvement of the private sector in
     the grant attribution process can help minimize the risk of political capture.

iii.	 Generally speaking, beneficiaries should be able to select their service providers, although the
      choice can be limited to a roster of providers meeting basic eligibility criteria to ensure quality of



30	 These principles apply to interventions targeting SMEs in general. As put by IEG (2014), “A credible theory of change for SME
interventions must be focused on leaving a sustainable supply of the service (such as financing, BDS, or training) by establishing
well-functioning markets and institutions, not simply providing a temporary supply of benefits to a small group of firms during
a project’s lifespan. The scale of gaps identified for SME services, especially finance, dwarfs the direct benefits the World Bank
Group can deliver. Thus, targeted interventions need to be strategic, leveraging resources to produce broader benefits for in-
stitutions and markets. Targeted support for SMEs needs to be firmly rooted in a clear, evidence-based understanding of what
distinguishes an SME and how the proposed support will sustainably remove the problems that constrain SMEs’ ability to con-
tribute to employment, growth, and economic opportunity.”
74
                                                                               7. Conclusions and recommendations




     services. The MG administrators can nonetheless play an active role to help them identify good
     providers as well as to minimize the risk of fraud or conflict of interest.

iv.	 MGs should be awarded based on objective and transparent criteria, including proven capacity
     to implement the project as well as demonstration of the additionality of resources (as discussed
     above, this additionality should be estimated not based on private returns but based on returns to
     public funding such as demonstration effects, spillovers, and so on).

v.	 The level of subsidy should be sufficiently attractive for targeted beneficiaries but should not be
    so high that it reduces SMEs’ ownership.

vi.	 Application and disbursement procedures should be streamlined and in line with beneficiaries’
     capacities, so as to avoid discouraging them from applying or imposing an excessive administra-
     tive burden.

vii.	 Marketing and communication campaigns with a clear and accessible messaging geared toward
      SMEs can help increase take-up.

viii.	 There is often scope for synergies with other project components that can ease some of the sup-
       ply-side constraints that could undermine the breadth and sustainability of benefits from MGs.



7.3.	 Monitoring & Evaluation
This is an essential but often neglected element of MG programs, which is directly linked to the defini-
tion of the economic rationale discussed above. A solid monitoring system is required to identify po-
tential issues in the disbursement of funds and execution of subprojects as well as to minimize the risk
of fraud. Evaluation systems are essential both during the project’s life, for a preliminary assessment of
impact and to adapt the design if needed, and after completion to assess the attributable economic
benefits. From the beginning, this notably supposes (a) establishing a sound results framework, which
is directly linked to the market failure the project aims to address (with measurable and attributable
outcome and impact indicators) and (b) allocating sufficient human and financial resources to M&E to
determine baseline and continuous data collection mechanisms for beneficiaries and control groups,
and so on. It is good practice to complement the internal M&E systems of the implementing agency
with independent performance evaluations. Finally, rigorous impact evaluations (based on random-
ized allocation of grants or other quasi-experimental methods), while costly and complex to carry out,
can yield valuable information for future operations and should be considered where possible.31




31
  	 McKenzie (2011) discusses the technical difficulties in carrying out statistically valid evaluations of SME programs, which typ-
ically target a small number of heterogeneous firms. The recommendations are to try to better target beneficiaries to increase
homogeneity and to collect more detailed and frequent data on them.
                                                                                                                                75
References

Biggs, Tyler. 1999. “A Microeconometric Evaluation of the Mauritius Technology Diffusion Scheme
  (TDS).” Regional Program on Enterprise Development Discussion Paper 108, World Bank, Washington,
  DC.

Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2013. “The Impact of Consulting Services on Small
  and Medium Enterprises – Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Mexico.” Policy Research Working
  Paper 6508, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Cadot, Olivier, Ana M. Fernandes, Julien Gourdon, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2015. “Are the Benefits of Export
  Support Durable? Evidence from Tunisia.” Journal of International Economics 97 (2): 310–324.

Campos, Francisco, Aidan Coville, Ana M. Fernandes, Markus Goldstein, and David McKenzie. 2012.
  “Learning from the Experiments that Never Happened.” Policy Research Working Paper 6296, World
  Bank, Washington, DC.

DCED (Donor Committee on Enterprise Development). 2001. “Business Development Services for
 Small Enterprises: Guiding Principles for Donor Interventions.” http://www.enterprise-development.
 org/page/bds.

Goldberg, Michael, and Daniel Ortiz del Salto. 2009. “Matching Grants: A Review of Matching Grants
  Systems in Private Sector Development Projects.” Unpublished Memo. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Gourdon, Julien, Jean-Michel Marchat, Siddarth Sharma, and Tara Vishwanath. 2011a. “Can Matching
  Grants Promote Exports? Evidence from Tunisia’s FAMEZ II Programme.” In Where to Spend the Next
  Million? Applying Impact Evaluation to Trade Assistance, edited by Olivier Cadot, Ana Fernandes,
  Julien Gourdon, and Aaditya Mattoo, 81–106. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2011b. “Ex-Post Impact Evaluation of an Export Promotion Matching Grant: Tunisia’s Second
 EMAF.” MENA Knowledge and Learning Quick Notes Series No. 40, World Bank, Washington, DC.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014. The Big Business of Small Enterprises – Evaluation of the
  World Bank Group Experience with Targeted Support to Small and Medium-Size Enterprises, 2006–
  2012. Washington, DC: World Bank.




76
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2012. Matching Grants: Technical Note. Rome,
   Italy: International Fund for Agricultural Development.

McKenzie, David. 2011. “How Can We Learn Whether Firm Policies Are Working in Africa – Challenges
 (and Solutions?) for Experiments and Structural Models.” Policy Research Working Paper 5623, World
 Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2015. “Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship – Experimental Evidence from
 a Business Plan Competition.” Policy Research Working Paper 7391, World Bank, Washington, DC.

McKenzie, David, Nabila Assaf, and Ana Paula Cusolito. 2016. The Additionality Impact of a Matching
 Grant Program for Small Firms: Experimental Evidence from Yemen. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Phillips, David. 2001. “Implementing the Market-Based Approach to Enterprise Support: An Evaluation
  of Ten Matching Grant Schemes.” Policy Research Working Paper 2589, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Phillips, David, and William F. Steel. 2003. “Evaluating the Development Impact of Demand-Side Inter-
  ventions for BDS Markets: Kenya Voucher Program.” Small Enterprise Development 14 (4). Pp 39-48.

Piza, Caio, Tulio Cravo, Linnet Taylor, Lauro Gonzalez, Isabel Musse, Isabela Furtado, Ana Cristina Sierra,
   and Samer Abdelnour. 2016. “The Impact of Business Support Services for Small and Medium Enter-
   prises on Firm Performance in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review.” 3ie Grantee
   Final Review. London: International Initiative for Impact Evaluation.

Van der Meer, Kees, and Marijn Noordam. 2004. “The Use of Grants to Address Market Failures – A
  Review of World Bank Rural Development Projects.” Agriculture and Rural Development Discussion
  Paper 27, World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2005. Project Performance Assessment Report – Indonesia Industrial Technology Develop-
 ment Project (P003978). Report No. 32733. Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2005. Project Performance Assessment Report – Kenya Micro and Small Enterprise Training
 and Technology Project. Report No. 32657. Washington DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                        77
78
     Annex 1:
     Results indicators used in reviewed projects
     The 106 projects used a total of 293 indicators with different wording. We have matched each custom indicator as closely as possible to a generic wording. The table presents
     the frequency of use of each of the indicators at output, outcome, and impact levels.

      Output                                  No.   Outcome                                                                No.   Impact                                          No.   Long Term      No.
      Number of funded projects/enterprises   67    Share of beneficiaries satisfied with functioning or result of grant   15    Sales revenue/turnover of beneficiaries         36    Jobs           27
      Value of dollars disbursed              17    Share of beneficiaries with operational or managerial improvements     13    Value of exports of beneficiaries               21    Income          5
                                                    Share of grants successfully implemented                               11    Value of private sector investment              11    Unemployment    1
                                                    Number of research consortia/productive alliances created               4    Value added per worker/productivity             11
                                                    Number of beneficiaries obtaining certification/star classification     4    Number of beneficiaries accessing new markets   10
                                                                                                                                 Number of beneficiaries introducing new
                                                    Value of procurement contracts signed by beneficiaries                  3                                                    10
                                                                                                                                 products or processes
                                                    Number of recipients obtaining commercial credit                        3    Profitability of beneficiaries                   6
                                                    Number of firms drafting/completing/implementing export
                                                                                                                            2    Output per dollar spent in grant                 4
                                                    development plans
                                                    Value spent by beneficiaries on BDS                                     2    Export share in sales/GDP                        2
                                                    Share of female-owned/managed businesses supported with
                                                                                                                            2    Number of patents                                1
                                                    advisory services
                                                    Share of beneficiaries still operating at the end of project            1    Composition of exports, more nontraditional      1
                                                    Number of service providers operating in project area                   1
                                                    Share of cost recovery by participating BDS providers                   1
                                                    Share of service providers posting gains in activity and range of
                                                                                                                            1
                                                    services
     Annex 2:
     List of reviewed MG projects implemented by
     the World Bank Group32
                                                                                                                     FY              FY                                     Amount      MG amount ($,     Implied MG
      Project ID    Project Name                                                     Country              Region     Approved        Closed     Status      GP        (USD, millions)       millions)*         Rating
      P118053       New Market Development                                           Afghanistan          SAR        2011            n.a.       Active      T&C                   22              11.2              S
      P105101       Local Development Project                                        Angola               AFR        2010            n.a.       Active      SPL                  81.7                4            n.a.
      P106752       Unleashing Productive Innovation Project                         Argentina            LCR        2009            n.a.       Active      T&C                  150                60            n.a.
      P038883       Enterprise Export Development                                    Argentina            LCR        1996            2000       Closed      T&C                  38.5               27              S
      P008279       Enterprise Development Project                                   Armenia              ECA        1997            2003       Closed      F&M                  16.8                3            MU
      P146994       Trade Promotion and Quality Infrastructure                       Armenia              ECA        2015            n.a.       Active      T&C                   50                 3            n.a.
      P049790       Export Diversification                                           Bangladesh           SAR        1999            2004       Closed      F&M                   32                12            MS
      P039882       Private Sector Project                                           Benin                AFR        2000            2008       Closed      F&M                  30.4                4            MU
      P087925       Land for Agricultural Development Project                        Bolivia              LCR        2008            2015       Closed      Ag                    15               7.8            MS
      P120139       Pernambuco Rural Economic Inclusion                              Brazil               LCR        2012            n.a.       Active      Ag                   100              80.2            n.a.
      P071443       Competitiveness & Enterprise Development Project                 Burkina Faso         AFR        2003            2014       Closed      T&C                  30.7              5.5              S
      P119662       Bagre Growth Pole Project                                        Burkina Faso         AFR        2011            n.a.       Active      T&C                  115                11            n.a.
      P074055       Growth & Competitiveness Project                                 Cabo Verde           AFR        2003            2010       Closed      F&M                  11.5              1.8              S
      P107456       SME Capacity Building and Economic Governance                    Cabo Verde           AFR        2010            2015       Closed      T&C                   4.5              0.7            MS
      P089196       Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness                           Cambodia             EAP        2005            2013       Closed      F&M                   10               1.6            MS
      P133021       Value Chain Support Project                                      Chad                 AFR        2014            n.a.       Active      T&C                  10.2              2.5            n.a.
      P060270       Enterprise Reform Project                                        China                EAP        1999            2006       Closed      F&M                    5               n.a.            NI
      P006870       Export Development                                               Colombia             LCR        1993            2000       Closed      F&M                   50                36
      P041642       Productive Partnerships Support Project                          Colombia             LCR        2002            2009       Closed      SURR                  32              40.1              S
      P104567       Second Rural Productive Partnerships Project                     Colombia             LCR        2008            2015       Closed      Ag                    30              24.8              S
                                                                                     Congo, Democrat-
      P092724       Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support                                       AFR        2010            n.a.       Active      Ag                   120                30
                                                                                     ic Republic of
                                                                                     Congo, Democrat-
      P071144       Private Sector Development and Competitiveness Project                                AFR        2004            2014       Closed      T&C                  120                 2            MU
                                                                                     ic Republic of




79
     32	 Some projects that are still active may nonetheless have an implied rating for the MG component, if that component has already disbursed and been discussed in ISRs.
80
                                                                                                                FY         FY                              Amount      MG amount ($,    Implied MG
     Project ID   Project Name                                                     Country             Region   Approved   Closed   Status   GP      (USD, millions)       millions)*        Rating
                                                                                   Congo, Repub-
     P118561      Support to Economic Diversification Project                                          AFR      2011       n.a.     Active   T&C                 10                5            n.a.
                                                                                   lic of
     P043736      Private Sector Development TA                                    Cote d’Ivoire       AFR      1998       2005     Closed   F&M                 12               3.6           MU
     P115398      SME Revitalization and Governance                                Cote d’Ivoire       AFR      2010       2015     Closed   T&C                 15                3              S
     P080258      Science & Technology Project                                     Croatia             ECA      2006       2011     Closed   F&M                 40               1.5             S
     P127308      Second Science & Technology Project                              Croatia             ECA      2013       n.a.     Active   T&C                26.2                            n.a.
     P040106      International Trade and Integration Project                      Ecuador             LCR      1998       2003     Closed   F&M                 21               10              S
     P040824      Competitiveness Enhancement                                      El Salvador         LCR      1996       2004     Closed   F&M                 16               2.3             S
     P050272      Private Sector Development Capacity Building Project             Ethiopia            AFR      2005       2013     Closed   T&C                 24              5.75           MS
     P098132      Tourism Development                                              Ethiopia            AFR      2009       2016     Closed   T&C                 35                3            n.a.
     P143302      Competitiveness and Job Creation Project                         Ethiopia            AFR      2014       n.a.     Active   T&C                250              12.3           n.a.
     P114240      Growth & Competitiveness                                         Gambia, The         AFR      2011       2016     Closed   T&C                 12               4.6           n.a.
     P000960      Private Sector Development                                       Ghana               AFR      1995       2000     Closed   F&M                 13               1.9             U
     P085006      Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Project                       Ghana               AFR      2006       2014     Closed   T&C                 45               7.2           MS
     P055084      Competitiveness Project                                          Guatemala           LCR      2001       2009     Closed   F&M                20.3               5              U
     P128443      MSME Development Project                                         Guinea              AFR      2013       n.a.     Active   T&C                 10               4.2           n.a.
     P123974      Business Development and Investment Project                      Haiti               LCR      2013       n.a.     Active   T&C                 20                4            n.a.
     P101209      Rural Competitiveness Project                                    Honduras            LCR      2008       n.a.     Active   Ag                  30              19.3             S
                  Enhancing Competitiveness: Trade Facilitation and Productivity
     P070038                                                                       Honduras            LCR      2004       2011     Closed   F&M                28.1             3.96             U
                  Improvement Project
     P076467      Chattisgarh District Rural Poverty Reduction Project             India               SAR      2003       2010     Closed   Ag                112.6             98.3
     P084792      Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project                       India               SAR      2005       2015     Closed   Ag                 154             23.13             S
     P003978      Industrial Technology Development                                Indonesia           EAP      1996       2002     Closed   F&M                 47               6.2           MU
     P048715      Information Infrastructure Development Project                   Indonesia           EAP      1998       2004     Closed   T&ICT              34.5              8.4           MS
     P007485      Private Investment & Export Development                          Jamaica             LCR      1994       2001     Closed   F&M                 35               4.6           MS
     P147665      Foundations for Competitiveness and Growth                       Jamaica             LCR      2015       n.a.     Active   T&C                 50               4.5           n.a.
     P049721      Agricultural Competitiveness Project                             Kazakhstan          ECA      2005       2012     Closed   Ag                  24             26.69           MS
     P085007      Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Competitiveness Project      Kenya               AFR      2005       2012     Closed   F&M                 22                5              S
     P049724      Agribusiness and Marketing                                       Kyrgyz Republic     ECA      2005       2013     Closed   Ag                  8.1              1.3             S
                                                                                   Lao People’s Dem-
     P130512      Second Trade Development Facility Project                                            EAP      2013       n.a.     Active   T&C                  4               1.2           n.a.
                                                                                   ocratic Republic
     P088544      Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification      Lesotho             AFR      2007       2013     Closed   T&C                 8.1               1              S
                                                                                                      FY         FY                            Amount      MG amount ($,    Implied MG
     Project ID   Project Name                                                  Country      Region   Approved   Closed   Status   GP    (USD, millions)       millions)*        Rating
                  Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversi-
     P144933                                                                    Lesotho      AFR      2014       n.a.     Active   T&C              13.1             0.75           n.a.
                  fication Project
     P001555      Private Sector Development & Capacity Building                Madagascar   AFR      1997       2003     Closed   F&M              23.8              6.8           HS
     P113971      Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor Project 2                Madagascar   AFR      2015       n.a.     Active   T&C               50                5            n.a.
     P083351      Integrated Growth Poles                                       Madagascar   AFR      2006       2015     Closed   T&C             129.8               1              S
     P103773      Business Environment Strengthening Technical Assistance       Malawi       AFR      2007       2013     Closed   F&M               15               1.6           MS
     P001747      Private Sector Assistance                                     Mali         AFR      1993       2002     Closed   F&M               12                             MS
     P080935      Growth Support Project                                        Mali         AFR      2005       2013     Closed   T&C               55              3.66            NI
     P081704      Agricultural Competitiveness and Diversification Project      Mali         AFR      2006       2015     Closed   Ag               46.4              9.9           HS
     P001918      Technical Assistance Project to Enhance Competitiveness       Mauritius    AFR      1994       1999     Closed   F&M               7.7             2.68           HS
                  Manufacturing and Services Development and Competitive-
     P112943                                                                    Mauritius    AFR      2010       2013     Closed   T&C               20                8             NI
                  ness
     P048505      Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project                 Mexico       LCR      1999       2003     Closed   Ag              444.5             343              S
     P068290      E-Business for Small Business Development Project             Mexico       LCR      2004       2008     Closed   F&M              58.4             16.4           n.a.
     P044531      Knowledge and Innovation                                      Mexico       LCR      1998       2006     Closed   Ed               300               30            MU
     P089865      Innovation for Competitiveness 1st Phase APL                  Mexico       LCR      2005       2011     Closed   F&M              250             29.59             S
     P089124      Competitiveness Enhancement Project                           Moldova      ECA      2006       2013     Closed   F&M               9.8              1.2             S
     P144103      Second Competitiveness Enhancement Project                    Moldova      ECA      2015       n.a.     Active   T&C               45                3            n.a.
     P049874      Enterprise Development                                        Mozambique   AFR      2000       2006     Closed   F&M               26              12.2             S
     P106355      Competitiveness and Private Sector Development                Mozambique   AFR      2009       2016     Closed   T&C               25              6.46             S
     P127303      Integrated Growth Poles Project                               Mozambique   AFR      2013       n.a.     Active   T&C              100               24            n.a.
     P109691      Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development                Nicaragua    LCR      2008       2015     Closed   T&C               20               6.2             S
     P127204      Competitiveness & Growth Support                              Niger        AFR      2012       n.a.     Active   T&C               50               11            n.a.
     P095210      Agro-Pastoral Export and Market Development Project           Niger        AFR      2009       n.a.     Active   Ag                40               13            HS
     P083082      Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Project                    Nigeria      AFR      2004       2012     Closed   F&M               32               12              S
     P103499      Growth & Employment                                           Nigeria      AFR      2011       n.a.     Active   T&C              160               28            n.a.
     P063622      Second National Fadama Development Project                    Nigeria      AFR      2004       2010     Closed   Ag               100              58.2             S
     P096572      Third National Fadama Development Project (Fadama III)        Nigeria      AFR      2009       n.a.     Active   Ag               250            186.07
     P124268      Economic Revitalization of KP and FATA                        Pakistan     SAR      2012       n.a.     Closed   T&C               20               14              S
     P064918      Rural Productivity Project                                    Panama       LCR      2007       2015     Closed   Ag               39.4             19.8
     P002262      Private Sector Development                                    Rwanda       AFR      1994       2001     Closed   F&M               12               1.5           MS
     P002376      Private Sector Capacity Building                              Senegal      AFR      1995       2002     Closed   F&M              12.5               5              S




81
82
                                                                                                           FY            FY                                  Amount      MG amount ($,    Implied MG
      Project ID   Project Name                                                  Country         Region    Approved      Closed    Status     GP       (USD, millions)       millions)*        Rating
      P051609      Private Investment Promotion SIL (FY03)                       Senegal         AFR       2003          2012      Closed     F&M                   46               3              U
      P083609      Agricultural Markets & Agribusiness Development Project       Senegal         AFR       2006          2015      Closed     Ag                    35
      P126229      YF Innovation Serbia                                          Serbia          ECA       2012          2016      Closed     T&C                   10               3              S
      P096105      Rural and Private Sector Development                          Sierra Leone    AFR       2007          2016      Closed     Ag                    30             12.1
      P048606      Industrial Competitiveness & Job Creation                     South Africa    AFR       1997          2005      Closed     F&M                   46            24.47           MS
      P113709      Sustainable Tourism Development Project                       Sri Lanka       SAR       2010          2014      Closed     T&C                   18              4.6             U
      P110588      Revitalizing the Sudan Gum Arabic Production and Marketing    Sudan           AFR       2010          2013      Closed     Ag                     7             0.75             S
      P085009      Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness                           Tanzania        AFR       2006          n.a.      Active     T&C                   95              6.3             S
      P122326      Private Sector Development Support Project                    Togo            AFR       2011          n.a.      Closed     T&C                   13             1.75           n.a.
                                                                                 Trinidad and
      P008100      Business Expansion and Industrial Restructuring Project                       LCR       1992          1999      Closed     F&M                   27             1.45           MS
                                                                                 Tobago
      P055814      Export Development                                            Tunisia         MNA       1999          2005      Closed     F&M                   35              10            HS
      P071115      Export Development II                                         Tunisia         MNA       2004          2013      Closed     F&M                   36            22.55             S
      P132381      Third Export Development Project (EDP III)                    Tunisia         MNA       2014          n.a.      Active     T&C                   50              22            n.a.
      P035634      Private Sector Competitiveness                                Uganda          AFR       1996          2003      Closed     F&M                 12.3               3            HS
      P083809      Private Sector Competitiveness II                             Uganda          AFR       2005          2013      Closed     F&M                   70              4.4           HS
      P130471      Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project            Uganda          AFR       2013          n.a.      Active     T&C                  100               7            n.a.
      P121643      Inclusive Innovation Project                                  Vietnam         EAP       2013          n.a.      Active     T&C                   55              33            MU
      P108885      Agriculture Competitiveness Project                           Vietnam         EAP       2009          2014      Closed     Ag                  59.8             10.6           MS
                                                                                 West Bank and
      P110526      Fund for New Market Development                                               MNA       2008          2011      Closed     F&M                  1.2              1.2           MS
                                                                                 Gaza
                                                                                 Yemen, Repub-
      P143715      SME Revitalization and Employment Pilot Project                               MNA       2013          2016      Closed     T&C                    3             2.43           MS
                                                                                 lic of
      P044324      Enterprise Development                                        Zambia          AFR       1997          2003      Closed     F&M                   45              2.5             U
      P071407      Support for Economic Expansion and Diversification (SEED)     Zambia          AFR       2005          2012      Closed     F&M                 28.2            2.127             U
      P070063      Agricultural Development Support Program                      Zambia          AFR       2006          2014      Closed     Ag                  37.2               3              S
      P102459      Irrigation Development and Support Project                    Zambia          AFR       2011          n.a.      Active     Ag                   115            15.46
      P035628      Enterprise Development                                        Zimbabwe        AFR       1996          2003      Closed     F&M                   70              5.6             U

     Note: * At approval, excluding any additional financing or restructuring;

     AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LCR = Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia Region;

     HS = Highly satisfactory; S = Satisfactory; MS = Moderately satisfactory; MU = Moderately unsatisfactory; U = Unsatisfactory; NI = Not implemented; n.a. = Not applicable;

     Ag = Agriculture; Ed = Education; F&M = Finance and Markets; SPL = Social Protection and Labor; SURR = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; T&C = Trade and Competitiveness; and T&ICT = Trans-
     port and ICT.
Annex 3:
Correlation between
projects’ design features and
outcomes
The following model is to be estimated:


MG development outcome = a + bX + iZ + e
where X is the vector of country-level variables, Z is a vector of project-level variables, and e is the
random error term, normally distributed.

The development outcome is measured by implied ICR outcome rating and ranges from 1 (not imple-
mented) to 6 (highly satisfactory). There are no highly unsatisfactory projects in the sample. Ordinary
least squares regression is used for the estimation.

The means, minimum, maximum, and standard deviations of each of the variables are presented in
table A3.1. Table A3.2 presents the results. In cases where running the estimation with the CPIA score
and without the CPIA score made a difference to the significance, both cases are presented. In cases
where it did not, the case displayed is when CPIA is controlled for.

Table A3.1: Means and standard deviations of variables in the analysis
                                                                  Standard
 Variables                                              Mean      Deviation     Minimum      Maximum
 Outcome                                                 4.18        1.31           1             6
 Country
 GDP per capita (current U.S. dollars) (in log)          6.93        1.04         4.83          8.97
 Index of Economic Freedom (out of 100)                  56.7        6.6          38.3          76.3
 Doing Business (distance to frontier, out of 100)       53.3        10.2         30.2          73.4
 CPIA (scale 1–6)                                        3.4         0.45          1.8           4.3
 Agriculture, value added (percentage of GDP)            20.8        12.8          2.6          54.8
 Design feature (for each binary variable yes=1)
 PIU                                                     0.22        0.42           0             1
 Size limit                                              0.53        0.50           0             1
 Groups                                                  0.85        0.35           0             1
 Service providers                                       0.47        0.50           0             1
 Sector restriction                                      0.62        0.49           0             1
 Equipment                                               0.39        0.49           0             1
 Level of match                                         50.59        9.65          30            80
 Reimbursement                                           0.66        0.48           0             1
 Diagnostic                                              0.66        0.48           0             1




                                                                                                           83
     Table A3.2: Regression analysis results




84
                        Predictor                                                                                                  Models
                                                            PIU (CPIA                            Service                                                                   Reimbursement                      Diagnostic
                                                   PIU      excluded)    Size Limit   Groups    Providers    Sector#   Equipment#     Level of Match    Reimbursement      (CPIA excluded)     Diagnostic   (CPIA excluded)
          Constant                                3.362       1.471        0.944      -0.437      4.253        2.23       -1.209            -2.025           2.657              4.656           -0.782           0.598
          Country
          GDP per capita (current U.S. dollars)
                                                  -0.368      0.290        -0.046     -0.069      -0.035      -0.173       0.048            -0.227           -0.166             -0.081           0.101            0.369
          (in log)
          Index of Economic Freedom (out of
                                                  0.050       0.023        0.043       0.060      -0.008      0.041        0.068            0.060            0.079*             0.061*           0.036            0.018
          100)
          CPIA (scale 1–6)                        0.361         ---        0.415       0.405      0.607       0.254        0.209            0.443            0.192                ---            0.600             ---
          Agriculture, value added (% of GDP)     0.010       0.029        0.017       0.034      -0.002      0.010        0.045            0.032            0.015               0.013           0.019            0.030
          Doing Business (distance to frontier,
                                                  -0.026      -0.024       -0.017     -0.010      -0.039      -0.001      -0.016            -0.026           -0.046            -0.058**          -0.033          -0.031
          out of 100)
          Design feature
          PIU                                     1.042**     0.338          ---        ---         ---         ---         ---               ---              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Size limit                                ---         ---        0.041        ---         ---         ---         ---               ---              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Groups                                    ---         ---          ---      -0.428        ---         ---         ---               ---              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Service providers                         ---         ---          ---        ---       0.155         ---         ---               ---              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Sector                                    ---         ---          ---        ---         ---       -0.327        ---               ---              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Equipment                                 ---         ---          ---        ---         ---         ---       -0.007              ---              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Level of match                            ---         ---          ---        ---         ---         ---         ---             0.005              ---                ---              ---             ---
          Reimbursement                             ---         ---          ---        ---         ---         ---         ---               ---            -0.534             -0.809*            ---             ---
          Diagnostic                                ---         ---          ---        ---         ---         ---         ---               ---              ---                ---           0.852**          0.604*
          R squared                               0.178       0.049        0.087       0.139      0.055        0.09        0.20              0.15             0.25               0.22             0.18            0.09
          Number of observations                    47          68           41         38          31          37          32               31                35                 49               47              68

     Note: # 22 agriculture projects have been excluded; *** p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05; and * p < 0.


     1	
         See Phillips (2001) for further discussion and references on experiences with voucher schemes. The study argues that vouchers can yield positive results but that they can require costly management arrangements to
     provide successful coordination, guard against fraud, and ensure quality service provision.
     2	
          As elsewhere in this section, when analyzing outcome distribution, the total number of observations will be presented for each feature, because, owing to missing data, not all features will have information available
     for all 73 projects with ratings.
     3	
         Cadot et al. (2015) suggest that the impact of the EMAF II program may have been transient because it did not lead to the enhancements in product quality or sophistication, which could have strengthened com-
     petitiveness durably. Notwithstanding its transient effect, the program is deemed to have been cost-effective because it generated two Tunisian dinars of private profits per Tunisian dinar of program expenditure, and
     the additional corporate tax revenue just covered the public cost of the program.
85
Funding for the report and companion papers was provided by



CIIP        Competitive Industries and Innovation Program

Financed by                                                   in partnership with



www.theciip.org
