                               Report No: ACS4024
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                       Resource Mobilization for HCFC
                                      Phase-out and Climate Mitigation
                                                Co-benefits
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                   A Study Prepared for the Executive Committee
                                              of the Multilateral Fund


                               April 2015
                               GCCMP



                               Document of the World Bank
                                     Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

      This study was supported by the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol through decision
63/24 of the Executive Committee and was submitted to the 71st meeting of the Executive
Committee. The report was produced by a Team from the Climate Change Group including Philippe
Ambrosi, Laurent Granier (Task Team Leader), Richard Hosier, Dominique Isabelle Kayser, Christopher
Warner, and Jiaoni Zhou.

       The team would like to acknowledge with thanks the guidance and leadership offered by Karin
Shepardson, Program Manager, GCCIA, as well as the vision and input proffered by Steve Gorman,
former manager for the Unit, who was the early driving force behind the work. Helpful contributions
were offered at various stage of report preparation from colleagues across the World Bank Group:
Leon Biaou, Keisuke Iyadomi, and Nuyi Tao (Carbon Finance Unit), Jane Ebinger and Samuel Oguah
(Climate Policy and Finance Team), Mary-Ellen Foley and Thanavat Junchaya (Montreal Protocol
Team), Johannes Heister and Erik Pedersen (East Asia and Pacific Region, Social Environment and
Rural Sustainable Development), Jie Li, (South Asia Region, Disaster Risk Management and Climate
Change), Ashok Sarkar (South Asia Region, Energy Unit), Chandra Shekhar Sinha (Latin America and
the Caribbean Region, Energy Unit), Jasneet Singh (Eastern Europe and Central Asia Region, Energy
Unit), Feng Lui (Sustainable Energy Department, ESMAP), Concepcion Aisa-Otin and Issam
Abousleiman (Treasury, Banking Products), Charles Di Leva and Yuan Tao (Environmental and
International Law), and Lucas Bossard and Alan Miller (IFC, Climate Finance and Policy), as well as
from Cecilia Mercado, Secretariat of the Multilateral Fund.

Standard Disclaimer:
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                          ii
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                                       KEY MESSAGES
        This study seeks to identify potential investment opportunities and sources of co-
financing to meet the additional costs of energy efficiency and climate mitigation benefits
associated with HCFC phase-out projects supported by the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal
Protocol. As it stands, the Multilateral Fund only supports eligible incremental costs related to
ozone depleting substances, and does not fund the additional costs of additional energy
efficiency related improvements. Currently therefore, the Multilateral Fund does not directly
incentivize the uptake of the most energy efficient technology, leading to missed opportunities
to enhance support to ozone depleting substances phase-out projects which would have
maximized associated climate mitigation outcomes, and risking technology lock-in. The paper
explores strategies that can maximize synergies with climate financing in general and in
combination with the World Bank’s energy efficiency and climate mitigation portfolios.

        An analysis of impacts and benefits shows that savings related to electricity, whether
at the individual consumer level or from avoided generation capacity, dominate. When
comparing the direct climate benefit arising from reductions in emissions associated with the
replacement of HCFCs (given the intrinsic global warming potential of the refrigerant) with the
indirect benefit associated with energy savings from the newer equipment (from the lower
electricity consumption), the value of the indirect benefit is larger. In any event however, from
a country perspective, it is more often energy security benefits that drive policymaking directed
at the Ref/AC sector, with climate mitigation and ODS phase-out as secondary objectives only.

       There are, in principle, a number of sources of financing that address energy efficiency
in developing countries that could, potentially, be leveraged to finance the additional climate
benefits associated with HCFC phase-out. Challenges arise however with respect to timing,
approach, and implementation:

              No sources of funds were identified that could provide the type of predictable
               funding that would allow countries to plan on securing funds in accordance with
               the timeframe of their compliance obligations under the Montreal Protocol.
              Climate financing traditionally takes a demand-side approach offering incentives
               to end-users to reduce their energy use, while the Montreal Protocol typically
               works with equipment manufacturers to replace ODS in production processes.
              Multisource financing can add to transaction costs and elevate governance and
               decision risks in interdependent financing operations.

       A dedicated funding window for financing ozone-climate co-benefits, including HFC
avoidance, could be explored. Existing funds such as the Climate Investment Funds could be
used or modified so that resources could be earmarked to ensure predictability and
accountability of funding and timing so as to blend with Multilateral Fund funding as seamlessly
as possible. In parallel and additionally, seed money could be made available through the
Multilateral Fund or others to offer incentives for Parties to pursue energy efficiency / climate



                                             iii
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


mitigation linkages; for example to support energy audits in cases where there are good
prospects for follow-up climate finance.

       Generally, bringing together various sources of financing increases transaction costs .
Any effort to promote multi-source financing should acknowledge the same and strive to
streamline implementation and management procedures of such a blended operation in order
to eliminate, or strongly limit, additional project and financial management and reporting
requirements and keep transaction costs low.

        Good strategic planning and inter-sectoral coordination at the country level are crucial
to ensure that policies are aligned and possibilities to leverage financing are optimized.
Parties should be encouraged to ensure that their second phase HCFC Phase-out Management
Plans include a broad and strategic overview of on-going and planned investments for climate
mitigation and energy efficiency so that the Montreal Protocol interventions can be
mainstreamed within these larger on-going programs. The overall domestic climate change and
energy policy and regulatory environment, including Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions
(NAMAs) and Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) where relevant, should be
providing the framework for the mainstreaming of HCFC phase-out. Linkages should be made
with potential new sources of climate finance and greenhouse gas mitigation instruments,
including the Green Climate Fund and potentially new carbon market-based instruments which
the Partnership for Market Readiness supports. In many countries, this would require strong
coordination and collaboration across sectors and ministries, as well as careful consideration of
Agencies’ comparative advantage.

        World Bank investments for clean energy are growing, and offer scope for inclusion of
Montreal Protocol objectives in energy-related activities. World Bank Group commitments to
finance energy efficiency have stood at approximately $1.5 billion per year for the past five
years. In addition, a review of the overall World Bank portfolio reveals that projects that could
represent up to $3.5 billion, or 8.7% of the Bank’s portfolio, across a variety of sectors could
offer opportunities for linkages with the Montreal Protocol agenda. Further analysis of these
opportunities would allow key sectors with strong potential for synergies, such as energy but
also health and agriculture, to be targeted and alerted of opportunities, including through
appropriate information and guidelines. Sustainable (green) procurement practices could also
actively be promoted in these sectors. A principal challenge here that goes beyond mere
alignment of procedures would lie in aligning Multilateral Fund financing with Bank lending,
given the different business models at play. Additional Montreal Protocol “integration” funds
could be set aside to blend in with World Bank or other IFI funds as a way to magnify impact
and help countries meet compliance targets.

       A review of financial flows related to climate change underlines the preponderance of
domestic private sector investment. Indeed, in some key countries, this is the largest source of
climate finance, pointing to the importance of interventions that target the domestic private
sector. The World Bank could therefore explore with its client countries opportunities for
synergies between the Montreal Protocol agenda and Development Policy Lending operations,


                                             iv
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


which could help set the enabling policy environment in the country with interventions
targeting standards setting and regulatory framework for example. There may also be further
scope for synergies with investments by the International Finance Corporation which should be
explored.

        The study provides an overview of the use of carbon finance in the past and outlines
potential future opportunities for its use. The Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism
has had limited success in reducing investment barriers related to less mature technologies and
large scale, long-term, investments and, in its current form, imposes significant transaction
costs and risks on project developers. On the other hand, the CDM has been successful in
dissemination of mature technologies and projects that offered short-term large greenhouse
gas reductions. In the near term in any event, carbon finance is not available to support energy
efficiency or other types of financing at the nexus of the Montreal Protocol/climate change
agenda given the severe downturn of the global carbon market associated with the economic
downturn in countries that had been the engines of demand for carbon credits: carbon market
mechanisms and systems as currently configured do not present a reliable financing option to
support the phase out of HCFCs, especially in middle-income countries.

       The outlook nonetheless is promising with respect to the development of domestic
carbon markets and frameworks that could support this agenda. We expect that market-
based instruments will play a role in future GHG mitigation efforts at the international and
domestic levels and that new climate finance instruments such as the Green Climate Fund will
become accessible more broadly and, in pursuing green growth, could be tapped to support a
broader co-benefits agenda. The international community and countries around the globe are
looking at the next generation of carbon markets. The emergence of new climate finance
instruments which could better support energy efficiency and related ODS phase-out efforts
can be an opportunity for the Montreal Protocol community to align objectives and instruments
and plan synergies in future operations. For example, Mexico’s plan to develop and implement
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions targeted at the refrigeration sector may offer a useful
model for others. Other domestic instruments, some supported by the World Bank’s
Partnership for Market Readiness, may become available over time, and, once mature, financial
engineering tools and approaches outlined in this study should be applicable.

        In conclusion, the current development of new GHG mitigation and financing
instruments can be seen as an opportunity for early discussion and engagement towards more
tailored tools that will make co-financing for co-benefits easier to achieve in the future.




                                             v
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….….ii

Key Messages…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….………………….iii

List of Acronyms…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…………………….viii

1. Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….….……..…..….1

2. Sector Background……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….........……..3

3. Financing Instruments for Climate Change Mitigation, Energy Savings and Emissions …………..……...…6
   Reduction
     3.1. Overview of Climate Finance Instruments………………………………………………………………….……...……..6
     3.2. Overview of Climate Finance Flows…………………………………………………………………………….…….……….7
     3.3. Carbon Finance………………………………………………………………………………………………….………………..…..12
     3.4. Current Status of Carbon Markets…………………………………………………………………………………………...16
     3.5. Emerging Domestic and International Schemes.…………………………….…………………………………………17

4. Opportunities for Synergies: Building on Experience……………………………………………………………………….20
    4.1. Experience with Multi-Source Financing: the “Chiller Replacement” Cohort of Projects…………..20
    4.2. Some Relevant Models for Phasing out HCFC-22 in the Residential Sector……………………………….23
    4.3. Driving ODS Phase-out through Energy Efficiency in the Non-residential Sector…….…………………27
    4.4. Using Carbon Assets to Enhance Investments in Montreal Protocol Projects……………………………29

5. Additionality and Options for Profit Sharing……………………………………………….……………………………………32

6. Investment Opportunities……………………………………………….………………………………………..………………………34
     6.1. Energy Efficiency Financing at the World Bank………………………………………………………………………...34
     6.2. Identification of Opportunities for Linkages with the Montreal Protocol Agenda and………………39
          Points of Entry in the World Bank Program
     6.3. Potential Linkages with the International Finance Corporation (IFC)…………………………………………44

7. Overall Conclusions and Recommendations…………………………………………………………………………………….46

8. References………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..50

Annex I: Sector Background………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..53
Annex II: Climate Finance Instruments…………….………………………………………………………………………………….55
Annex III: Carbon Finance Concepts…..…………………………………………………………………………………………………60
Annex IV: Experiences with Carbon Finance Related to the Montreal Protocol…………….……………………..67
Annex V: Review of Experiences with Multi-Source Financing: the “Chiller Replacement”
          Cohort of Projects……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…70
Annex VI: Opportunities for Synergies – Models and Examples…………………………………………………………....80




                                               vi
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Tables

Table 1: Montreal Protocol HCFC consumption control measures……………………………………………………………2
Table 2: Back-of-the-envelope estimate of the energy efficiency and climate mitigation related…………….5
         impacts of a program addressing 1 million energy efficient room air conditioners
Table 3: Possible financing partners – a non-exhaustive list………………...………………………………………………..10
Table 4: Energy efficiency financing needs, tools and examples; financing instruments available………….11
Table 5: Examples of relevant country undertakings under the Partnership for Market Readiness………..19
Table 6: Main barriers to investments in energy efficiency……………………………………………………………………35
Table 7: Delivery models for energy efficiency financing that have been used in World Bank…………….…36
         Projects
Table 8: Examples of sectors and World Bank interventions potentially relevant to the MP agenda……..41
Annex I, Table 1: Range of lifetimes, ODPs, and GWPs (20-yr and 100-yr) of some relevant ODS…………..53
                  and HFCs
Annex I, Table 2: Detailed back-of-the-envelope estimate of the energy efficiency and climate …………..54
                  mitigation related impacts of a program addressing 1 million energy efficient
                  room air conditioners; summarized in main text Table 3.
Annex IV, Table 1: ODS destruction projects registered with the voluntary market……………………………….69
Annex V, Table 1: Status of World Bank implemented chiller projects with multi-source financing……….70

Figures

Figure 1: ODS and related GHG control measures and policies………………………………………………………………..4
Figure 2: Product development cycle showing role of key stakeholders and available instruments…….…..7
          to support energy efficiency
Figure 3: Climate Flows 2012…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..9
Figure 4: Model structure for a potential HCFC-free energy efficient AC program…………………………………27
Figure 5: Project’s process flow…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…32
Figure 6: Illustration of flows as carbon assets are verified…………………………………………………………………...32
Figure 7: World Bank energy efficiency investments by region, 2007-2012……………………………………………35
Figure 8: Number of projects with full or strong overlap with the MP agenda, by region………………………42
Figure 9: $ commitment for projects with full or strong overlap with the MP agenda……………………………42
Figure 10: Eligible HCFC consumption remaining after HPMP phase I implementation in eligible……….…42
             Art 5 countries (ODP tons)
Figure 11: Number of projects with full or strong overlap with the MP agenda, by sector…………………….42
Annex III, Figure 1: Concept of emission reductions and carbon finance………………………………………………..61
Annex III, Figure 2: Carbon finance income is generally earned once a project is operational and…………62
                      emission reductions have been issued by a registry
Annex III, Figure 3: General steps forming part of the carbon finance project cycle……………………………….65
Annex VI, Figure 1: Mexico Efficient Lighting and Appliances project financing……………………………………..80
Annex VI, Figure 2: Structure of Mexico’s Domestic Refrigerator NAMA……………………………………………….80

Boxes

Box 1: The “chiller replacement” cohort of projects – Key lessons………………..……………………………………..22




                                               vii
                      Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                                  LIST OF ACRONYMS

A5:      [Parties] Operating Under Article 5 Paragraph 1 of the Montreal Protocol
AC:      Air Conditioning
AR4:     Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
BAU:     Business As Usual [scenario]
BFIs:    Bilateral Finance Institutions
CAR:     Climate Action Reserve
CCAC:    Climate and Clean Air Coalition
CCX:     Chicago Climate Exchange
CDM:     Clean Development Mechanism
CERs:    Certified Emission Reductions
CF:      Carbon Finance
CFCs:     Chlorofluorocarbons
CFLs:    Compact Fluorescent Lamps
CIF:     Climate Investment Funds
COP:     Conference of the Parties [to the Kyoto Protocol]
CPI:     Climate Policy Initiative
CTF:     Clean Technology Fund
DFIs:    Development Finance Institutions
DPL:     Development Policy Lending
DSM:     Demand Side Management
EE:      Energy Efficiency
ESCO:    Energy Services Companies
ESMAP:   World Bank Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
ERPA:    Emission Reductions Purchase Agreement
ETS:     Emission Trading Scheme
EU:      European Union
GCF:     Green Climate Fund
GEF:     Global Environment Facility
GHG:     Greenhouse Gas
GPP:     Green Public Purchasing
GWP:     Global Warming Potential
HCFCs:   Hydrochlorofluorocarbons
HFCs:    Hydrofluorocarbons
IBRD:    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA:     International Development Association
IEA:     International Energy Agency
IFC:     International Finance Corporation
IFIs:    International Financial Institutions
INDCs:   Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
IPCC:    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISO:     International Organization for Standardization



                                          viii
                       Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


JI:       Joint Implementation
KP:       Kyoto Protocol
LDCs:     Least Developed Countries
MDBs:     Multilateral Development Banks
MEPs:     Minimum Energy Performance Standards
MICs:     Middle Income Countries
MFIs:     Multilateral Finance Institutions
MLF:      Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol
MP:       Montreal Protocol
NAMA:     Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action
NFIs:     National Finance Institutions
NMM:      New Market Mechanism
ODS:      Ozone Depleting Substance(s)
ODP:      Ozone Depleting Potential
OECD:     The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PAD:      Project Appraisal Document
PID:      Project Information Document
PMR:      Partnership for Market Readiness
PPP:      Public-Private Partnership
RECs:     Renewable Emission Certificates
Ref:      Refrigeration
RTOC:     Refrigeration, Air Conditioning and Heat Pumps Technical Options Committee
SLCPs:    Short-Lived Climate Pollutants
SMEs:     Small and Medium-Size Enterprises
tCO2eq:   Tonnes of Carbon Dioxide Equivalent
TEAP:     Technology and Economic Assessment Panel
UNFCCC:   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
VCM:      Voluntary Carbon Market
VCS:      Verified Carbon Standard
VER:      Verified Emission Reduction
WMO:      World Meteorological Organization




                                           ix
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


1.       INTRODUCTION
1.      This study1 seeks to identify potential sources of co-financing to meet the additional
costs of energy efficiency (EE) and climate mitigation benefits associated with the HCFC phase-
out supported by the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol (MLF). As it stands, the policy
of the Multilateral Fund is to support only the eligible incremental costs related to the phase-
out of ozone depleting substances, and not to support the additional costs of additional energy
efficiency related improvements of the equipment. Currently therefore, while the Multilateral
Fund encourages exploring co-financing opportunities for improving energy efficiency, the Fund
does not directly support the uptake of the most energy efficient technology. This can lead to
missed opportunities to enhance support to ozone depleting substances phase-out projects and
therefore missed opportunities to maximize the associated climate mitigation outcomes from
these projects, as well as risking technology lock-in. Strategies to maximize synergies with
climate financing in general, and in combination with the World Bank’s energy efficiency and
climate mitigation portfolios, are explored with the aim to outline how finance may best be
leveraged in support of climate co-benefits generation in MLF-funded operations.

2.      The Parties to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (MP)
decided in 2007 to accelerate the phase-out of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) in
accordance with the schedule shown in the Table 1, below. The decision XIX/6 also required
that Parties take into account potential climate benefits associated with HCFC phase-out, which
are influenced, in the case of refrigeration and air conditioning (Ref/AC), by the selection of the
refrigerant alternative to HCFCs and the energy efficiency of the equipment that is being
upgraded (“converted”).

3.       HCFC phase-out management plans (HPMPs) approved by the MLF seek to facilitate the
conversion of Ref/AC manufacturing and foam manufacturing away from the use of HCFCs to
non-ODS alternatives. These processes entail structural redesign of equipment that allows for
enhanced energy efficiency with certification testing of equipment. Specifically in the Ref/AC
sector, this provides an opportunity to build upon MLF funding to upgrade equipment energy
efficiency performance as part of the HCFC phase out. However the process is not cost neutral
given that the components required for energy efficient Ref/AC equipment and refrigerants
with low global warming potential (GWP) tend, at present, to be more costly. Conversely, there
is a risk of lock-in with less than optimum technology if financing towards the cost of energy
efficiency upgrades cannot be made available in a timely manner.

4.    While blending of financial resources is applied in many World Bank operations, it is also
a source of added complexity, transaction costs and risk in project preparation and

1
 The “Study for Resource Mobilization Activities Related to the Phase-out of HCFCs” was approved by the Executive Committee
                                                                       st
of the MLF by Decision 63/24 and the Study report submitted to the 71 meeting of the Committee. The original concept
proposed by the World Bank envisaged addressing the resource mobilization question from two complementary perspectives:
harnessing market mechanisms to accelerate donor commitment and overall resources available to the MLF; and, using market
mechanisms at the project level. Ultimately, the Committee agreed to proceed by focusing solely on the second approach.



                                                         1
                              Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


implementation, to an extent which often discourages project teams and clients from seeking
out opportunities for blended finance. The World Bank has recognized this and repeatedly
attempted to harmonize project cycle and approval requirements, most recently through on-
going efforts to streamline GEF and Bank lending project preparation milestones. Yet it is still
difficult to overcome the rules and governance interests of the source funds and financing
mechanisms. This is problematic as it can lead to suboptimal project (re)design or even halting
project preparation entirely.


Table 1. Montreal Protocol HCFC consumption control measures

Non-Article 5 Parties: Consumption                   Article 5 Parties (developing countries): Consumption
Base level:    1989 HCFC consumption + 2.8 per       Base level:            Average 2009–10.
               cent of 1989 CFC consumption.
Freeze:        1996.                                 Freeze:              January 1, 2013.
35 per cent: January 1, 2004.                        10 per cent:         January 1, 2015.
reduction                                            reduction
75 per cent: January 1, 2010.                        35 per cent:         January 1, 2020.
reduction                                            reduction
90 per cent: January 1, 2015.                        67.5 per cent        January 1, 2025.
reduction                                            reduction
99.5 per       January 1, 2020, and thereafter,      97.5 per cent:       January 1, 2030, and thereafter,
cent:          consumption restricted to the         reduction            consumption restricted to the
reduction      servicing of refrigeration and air-   (averaged over ten   servicing of refrigeration and air-
               conditioning equipment existing at    years 2030–40)       conditioning equipment existing at
               that date.                                                 that date.
100 per        January 1, 2030.                      100 per cent:        January 1, 2040.
cent:                                                reduction
reduction
Source: Montreal Protocol Handbook, UNEP (2012)



5.      Whilst this aspect is not addressed here, it should be noted that the study is nested in
the broader public policy challenge of the compartmentalization in addressing (global)
environmental issues and consequently of funding sources. Given increasing interdependency
of environmental concerns and solutions and the resulting scope for synergies and savings, such
compartmentalization can be seen as a failure of public policy coordination. Addressing this
failure appears a particular challenge in the international context with its complex negotiated
governance arrangements. Yet, alternatives could be considered such as addressing sound
environmental conduct holistically, perhaps on a sector or industry basis, and aligning financial
support mechanisms accordingly.

6.      This study explores pathways that may encourage the uptake of ozone- and climate-
friendly technologies through synergies between the MP, policies to promote energy efficiency,
and climate finance instruments; thereby leading also to cost-effectiveness of public financing
and economic efficiency where synergies exist and can be exploited. The study underscores,
based on practical examples, that opportunities can be strategically engineered to encourage




                                                     2
                                  Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


harmonization between the phase-out of the HCFCs and HCFC-using technologies with efforts
to promote energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHG).

7.       The study recognizes that carbon markets and carbon finance, in general, are in a state
of flux and will likely remain so in the mid-term, and carbon prices are at present highly
depressed. Regardless of the specific design of any mechanism, a current problem is lack of
demand – associated with the economic downturn in many countries (especially in Europe),
leading to historical (too) low prices that make the mechanism ineffective , and insufficient
visibility on sources of future demand and the regulatory context. Consideration of carbon
finance as an option for financing of climate co-benefits will require a more robust market with
greater clarity and predictability of demand. The recent strong momentum towards domestic
carbon pricing initiatives is a welcome development in that direction - essentially, this study
assumes this will happen and thus seeks to extrapolate the lessons from the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) experience to be ready.

8.      Therefore, the avenues explored present options for consideration, irrespective of the
exact future configuration of the climate financing landscape, and of how the scope and roles of
the various climate financing instruments may evolve. The study is also relevant2 to the work of
the Climate and Clean Air Coalition to address Short Lived Climate Pollutants, as the paradigms
that are explored are broadly applicable to efforts to minimize HFCs.


2.        SECTOR BACKGROUND
9.      The objective of the MP is to eliminate the consumption and production of substances
that deplete the ozone layer. The MP has achieved recognized success in phasing out the
consumption and production of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other ODS through adoption of
lower ozone depleting potential (ODP)3 alternatives, including HCFCs (see Annex I, Table 1 for
the range of lifetimes, ODP and GWP of principal ODS and alternatives). The agreement to
accelerate phase-out of HCFCs has generated a further shift towards other alternatives,
including an upswing in the use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which have no ODP but do,
however, have high global warming potential (GWP). Although the MP does not regulate or
have a formal role in control of HFCs, its decision XIX/6 establishes a clear desire to minimize
climate impacts. Where feasible therefore, conversion to substances with no ODP and low GWP
such as ammonia, CO2, or hydrocarbons is promoted. New HFCs with low to very low GWP are


2
  The growth of HFCs which are increasingly replacing ODS phased out by the MP, and also increasing with rising demand for air
conditioning, is cause for concern. The threat from HFCs stems not from their current global contribution to climate forcing
which is relatively limited, but from the potential for exponential growth if left unabated, particularly in developing countries,
and the risk to cancel the climate benefits that accrued from CFC and now HCFC phase-out (see UNEP’s HFCs Synthesis Report).
Whilst this report is not primarily concerned with HFCs, some of the tools and lessons learned can apply to efforts to minimize
HFC growth, notably the section that seeks to map out opportunities for linkages with the Bank’s portfolio.
3
  ODP is the ratio of the impact on ozone of a chemical compared to the impact of a similar mass of CFC-11. The ODP of CFC-11
is defined to be 1.0. Other ODS have ODPs that range from 0.01 to 12.0.



                                                             3
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


under development4 but at present, viable low- and no-GWP alternatives are not commercially
available for all applications and/or circumstances (see Figure 1 for a depiction of ODS and
related GHG control measures over time).


              Figure 1. ODS and related GHG control measures and policies




              Source: HFCs Synthesis Report, UNEP (2011)

10.    While HCFCs are used in both the foam manufacturing and Refrigeration/Air
Conditioning sectors, the greatest potential energy efficiency gains through HCFC conversion
and technology upgrade can be achieved in the latter due to recent technological advances.
One sub-sector which offers interesting potential climate benefits is the residential AC sector
which currently uses HCFC-225. This section provides some broad estimates of the climate
benefits and energy savings that are associated with the sector. Table 2 provides a rough “back-
of-the-envelope” analysis of the relative benefits that could drive a technology upgrade
program linked to room air conditioning equipment.

11.    These analyses provide rough estimates of the potential climate benefits and energy
savings associated with the HCFC transition, and point to where these savings can be found.
The Montreal Protocol’s TEAP estimates6 that, in 2008, there were 553 million units of HCFC-22
air conditioners in service, containing 1 million tons of HCFC-22. Therefore, it can be estimated
that each year at least 50 million new units reach the market, containing roughly 100,000 tons
of HCFC-22.

4
  At least one producer has announced commercial production and market availability in early 2013, for HFO blends for air
conditioning and heat pumps application, while HFO-1234yf is being adopted for mobile air conditioning (in cars) in Europe and
North America.
5
  HFC-23, a by-product in the manufacture of HCFC-22, is a potent greenhouse gas regulated under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Therefore, the harmonization of efforts to phase out HCFC-22 and
eliminate HFC-23 is critical for both protecting the ozone layer and for climate change mitigation efforts.
6
  TEAP, RTOC (2010)



                                                           4
                             Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


12.     Based on a hypothetical conversion/replacement scheme targeting 1 million of these
units, one can see that the main drivers related to co-benefits would be, by far, energy savings
for the individual consumer and avoided economic cost of building new power generation
capacity. Based on the analysis in Table 2 below, a scheme could be developed for example to
provide a rebate on any working air conditioner that is scrapped and replaced for a new energy
efficient one. Such a rebate, if it were to include the first year of energy savings and avoided
cost of constructing a new power plant, could amount to at least $126 per unit. The analysis
also indicates that, should a viable carbon market be available, carbon finance revenues would
more than cover the cost of managing such a scheme through intermediation of retailers and
manufacturers or with energy services companies (ESCO) as driving agents.


Table 2. Back-of-the-envelope estimate of the energy efficiency and climate mitigation related
impacts of a program addressing 1 million energy efficient room air conditioners.

  Personal savings from one room AC
       Electricity savings = $117 per year
       Carbon “value” equivalent = $3.4 per air conditioner per year
  Impact on power generation
       Avoided cost of new power plant construction: $95- $216 million
       Equivalent to $9.5- $21.6 per air conditioner, excluding operating costs
  Program carbon finance income
       Net income from carbon finance: $3.2 - $3.3 per air conditioner per year
          (assuming $5 per ton CO2 - which is not supported by the market today)
  Possible (theoretical) impact from high GWP refrigerant replacement
       $0.6 per air conditioner per year
  → Main impact / driver is energy savings for the individual consumer and avoided investment
      in generation capacity. In contrast the savings from displacement of HCFCs, even if eligible
      for earning carbon credits (which it is not), is much smaller.

Source: this report – see Annex I, Table 2, for assumptions and details



13.     This pro-forma example demonstrates that climate benefits stemming from the
refrigerant control is often only a small fraction of the potential for GHG reduction (15% in our
example). On the other hand, climate benefits from energy efficiency improvement, generally
leading to reduced GHG emissions depending on the source of power, are more critical from a
climate change perspective. These rough estimates are for illustration purposes only, and
different equipment and situations would lead to different results, including with possibly less
energy efficiency gains.

14.   It should be noted that while reliance on the CDM in the energy efficiency sector has
been problematic in part because of complex and high transaction-cost monitoring and



                                                     5
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


verification requirements, by contrast the baseline assessments and monitoring and verification
tasks associated with MP compliance should be less onerous since, contrary to energy efficiency
aspects, there are fewer opportunities for the baseline or the target to deviate from a
theoretical value (that is, whether a particular ODS or non-ODS refrigerant is being used).

15.     Finally, with economic growth and rapid urbanization trends, increase in refrigeration
and air-conditioning energy use has become one of the largest and fastest growing contributors
of energy (electricity) demand in developing countries. Air-conditioning, in particular, also
coincides with electricity peak loads in most countries, and therefore energy efficiency in air-
conditioning also provides a significant opportunity to address electricity sector supply-demand
gaps which many countries face resulting in power system blackouts and brownouts. In this
context, the main public driver behind replacing the existing stock of Ref/AC or shifting the new
stock of Ref/AC to new technologies is energy security, with climate change mitigation as a co-
benefit and reduction of ODS even further down the line.


3.     FINANCING INSTRUMENTS FOR CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION, ENERGY
       SAVINGS, AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION
3.1    Overview of Climate Finance Instruments

16.    Climate finance refers to public or private sector finance that supports climate
adaptation and mitigation activities. This includes a number of policy and finance instruments
that may be used to incentivize mitigation actions and influence change in behavior amongst
stakeholders.

17.   Four broad categories of stakeholders are involved in the energy efficiency process and
product life cycle continuum (see Figure 2):
     Governments, economic unions and global treaties, such as the MP and Kyoto Protocol
      that use a variety of tools – of which regulation, fiscal and financing instruments, and
      capacity development are key - to drive behavioral change in the product development
      cycle, involving product design researchers, manufacturers, and consumers of energy
      efficient appliances and services;
     Businesses, including suppliers, retailers and energy services companies (ESCOs) who
      sell products/appliances and services to enhance energy efficiency and maximize profits
      and returns for investors;
     Consumers, who purchase energy efficient appliances and services depending on their
      needs, income level, level of awareness, and exposure to marketing; and
     Researchers and innovators, looking to develop new appliances and services in response
      to changes in the regulatory environment and business and consumer demand.

18.    Numerous financing instruments are available from a variety of potential partners to
address policy, fiscal, and financing needs related to energy efficient product and services



                                             6
                                    Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


 development and uptake. A non-exhaustive list of various financing partners who may support
 such efforts is presented in Table 3, with a more detailed overview of specific source of funding
 outlined in Annex II. Table 4 then maps the types of perceived public and private sector energy
 efficiency financing needs against available financing instruments and the agents from whom
 support may be solicited.


 Figure 2. Product development cycle showing role of key stakeholders and available instruments
 to support energy efficiency

                                                      Government
                                    Policies to support regulation, research, consumer awareness,


     Public sector      Standards, regulations, awareness raising, soft loans/grants, tax incentives, subsidies, carbon finance

     instruments:

 Researchers                                                                                                                 Consumers:
 Business,                                                                     Market pull                                 Consumers/buyers
 Government,                                                                                                               (Individuals, firms,
 Higher education,        Research and                                                                   Commercially      governments,
                                                  Demonstration        Deployment         Diffusion
 Non-profit               Development                                                                    mature            Other entities
 institutions
                              Technology product path




Private sector
instruments:          Create the market, access and use private investment (equity loan), guarantees, carbon finance
                                                        Businesses/suppliers
                                               Create demand and supply appliances

 Source: “Beyond the sum of the parts”, WB (2010 ).




 3.2.      Overview of Climate Finance Flows

 19.     The Climate Policy Initiative’s (CPI) Landscape of Climate Finance 2012 7 estimates that
 annual global climate finance flows reached approximately $364 billion in 2010/2011,
 approximately half of which went to investments in developing countries ($171 billion). Figure 3
 presents CPI’s graphical depiction of these overall flows. Additional complex interactions exist
 that are not depicted, for example households’ behavior (private) reacting to government
 incentives (public).

 20.     Mapping climate finance to date has proven challenging with no precise internationally
 agreed definition. Current efforts to track such financial flows struggle with issues regarding
 specificity (e.g., tagging of adaptation or mitigation investments), consistency (e.g.,

 7
  See http://climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/global-landscape-of-climate-finance-2012
 This is the most comprehensive treatment of the subject and is the source for all the figures in this section.



                                                                   7
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


comparability across existing reporting systems), and comprehensiveness (e.g., extensive data
gaps).8 It is worth noting that estimating financing for energy efficiency, which is most relevant
to both ODS and climate change benefits, in general is further complicated by underreporting,
given a tendency to classify investments by the sector targeted versus the energy efficiency or
climate benefits sought: investment for equipment upgrade is more likely to be recorded, if at
all, under the specific equipment category (e.g., AC, refrigerator, appliance, etc.) than under
energy efficient action. This may partially explain why energy efficiency accounts for only 4% of
global flows in the finance landscape.

21.     Given the current shortcomings in reporting of climate-related flows it remains difficult
to identify, beyond dedicated instruments like the MLF or carbon finance, which flows fall at
the intersection of ODS mitigation and low emissions development. The World Bank is actively
working on systems, as are others, to improve such reporting and increase the reliability of data
in this domain. Based on information available at this time, this section outlines evidence of
flows, as yet largely untapped for HCFC projects, that could be used to support opportunities
for synergistic ODS and climate co-benefits. Realizing this potential will require targeted
outreach, awareness-raising, and capacity building.

22.     Governments and public financial intermediaries have invested slightly more than $80
billion in mitigation activities, with energy efficiency representing 18% of this amount. A
significant percentage of mitigation finance comes from development finance institutions,
including bi-, multi-, and national development banks that together have provided $32.3 billion
in climate finance, or about 30% of North-South climate-related flows, highlighting the pivotal
role that these institutions play in leveraging and mobilizing finance for climate-smart
development.

23.     Development Finance Institutions (DFIs)9 support energy efficiency for energy security,
climate change priorities, or other purposes, and this financing is on the rise. DFI energy
efficiency portfolios include a wide range of activities including technical assistance and policy
incentives, financial intermediation, direct investment in projects and programs, as well as
piloting new financing models and combining and leveraging various streams of finance.
According to the Climate Policy Initiative, governments and public financial intermediaries
provided the following amounts in support of renewable energy and energy efficiency in
2010/11:
     National Finance Institutions (NFI): $28.9 billion (67.7% of NFI climate financing), with
        strong concentration in two countries, Brazil and China;
     Bilateral Finance Institutions (BFI): $3.6 billion (29.2% of BFI climate financing for
        renewable energy and 13% for energy efficiency);
     Multilateral Finance Institutions (MFI): $13 billion (61.45% of MFI climate financing).

8
  For a more detailed discussion see Buchner, Barbara, Jessica Brown and Jan Corfee-Morlot. (2011). Monitoring and Tracking
Long-Term Finance to Support Climate Action. May 2011. OECD/IEA Project for the Climate Change Expert Group on the
UNFCCC.
9
  DFIs are defined in the CPI report as comprising 4 Bilateral Finance Organizations, 9 Multilateral Finance Organizations
including the World Bank, and 19 National Finance Organizations.



                                                          8
                               Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Figure 3. Climate flows 2012




Source: Climate Policy Initiative (2012)



24.    Overall, as outlined in Table 4, a number of financing tools exist that can address the
various needs related to EE financing, from the policy/regulatory enabling environment, to
investments and risk guaranties.

25.      In 2012, multilateral development banks (MDBs) collectively committed more than $25
billion for climate action, of which approximately 80% was dedicated to mitigation activities. In
the order of $12 billion is considered to have been allocated to sustainable energy, which
includes energy efficiency, but the exact collective amount for energy efficiency has not yet
been calculated.




                                                   9
                               Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Table 3. Possible financing partners – a non-exhaustive list
SOURCE OF FINANCING             DESCRIPTION
Investor capital formation      Investor capital is generated by bank, private and corporate investors responding
                                to perceived investment opportunities offered by the market for an expanding
                                range of EE appliances driven by technology improvement, growing consumer
                                demand, increasing costs of energy, and increasing EE standards.
Multilateral Development        MDBs and donors manage various loan facilities that seek to help developing
Banks (MDBs)                    countries eradicate poverty and achieve global development targets, under which
                                EE is gaining importance as a financing/development priority.
Global Climate Change           Initiative of the European Union to build a new climate change alliance with
Alliance (GCCA)                 developing countries, working through established channels for cooperation.
Global Energy Efficiency and    A Public-Private Partnership designed to maximize private finance leveraged
Renewable Energy Fund           through European Commission public funds, managed by the European
(GEEREF)                        Investment Bank with a focus on financing SMEs.
Clean Technology Fund (CTF)     The CTF is one of the funding windows under the Climate Investment Funds (CIF),
                                partnership of the MDBs that provides incentives to middle income and
                                developing countries to scale up the demonstration, deployment, and transfer of
                                technologies with a high potential for long-term GHG emissions savings, including
                                EE.
Global Environment Facility     The financial mechanism for a number of Multilateral Environmental Agreements
(GEF)                           (MEAs), including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
                                (UNFCCC) and for CEITs under the MP. The GEF finances the incremental costs of
                                project activities, i.e. only those that are being undertaken to meet the objectives
                                of the MEA (global benefits). By 2011, GEF funding had supported over US $140
                                million for EE projects.
German International            The ICI finances climate projects focused on, inter alia, promotion of a climate-
Climate Initiative (ICI)      friendly economy.
Indonesia Climate Change      A national funding entity established by the Government of Indonesia, the ICCTF
Trust Fund (ICCTF)            acts as a catalyst to attract investment and implement a range of alternative
                              financing mechanisms for climate change mitigation and adaptation programs.
UK International Climate      Operational since 2011, the ICF is the primary channel for UK climate change
Fund (ICF)                    finance, through which developing countries may receive funding to embark on
                              low carbon growth.
Japanese Fast-Start Financing Fast-Start Financing (or Hatoyama Initiative) makes available up to USD$15 billion
                              in public and private financial assistance to help developing countries address
                              climate change.
Green Climate Fund (GCF)      Mandated by the parties to the UNFCCC, once operational the GCF is intended to
                              provide funds to developing countries to finance climate change adaptation and
                              mitigation activities, including for EE.
World Bank Carbon Finance The WB CFU enters into transactions as Trustee of various carbon funds. Whilst
Unit (WB CFU)                 originally the focus was on “project-based” transaction, using financing
                              contributed by public and private sector entities from OECD countries to purchase
                              project-based GHG emission reductions in developing countries and CEITs, the
                              scope of its activities now includes programs as well broader considerations.
Source: Research undertaken for this report



                                                      10
                                  Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Table 4. Energy efficiency financing needs, tools and examples; financing instruments available

Financing needs, tools, and examples                                       Available financing instruments
Creation of enabling environment, including capacity building
        EE regulations: energy efficiency appliance standards and         MDB resources are available to meet these costs.
         labeling, building codes, industry performance targets, fuel
         efficiency standards
        Regulatory reforms: removal of subsidies (power and
         heating pricing reform), decoupling sales from revenues
        Technical assistance: to ESCOs and other EE project               Grants from the GEF, Bank Trust Funds (ESMAP, ASTAE,
         developers to build an ESCO industry and prepare financing        PPIAF, PHRD, etc.), foundations, or other donors
         deals; to financial institutions to develop financial products;
         to government agencies on public procurement rules; to
         utilities on EE/DSM program; programs for cooling and
         heating design
        Government tax reform and incentives

Investment resources
Private financing: EE projects may be profitable and have short            International or national investment capital may be
payback periods, but they suffer from other barriers such as inertia,      used if investment meets risk-reward requirements
principal-agent problems, or managerial challenges

Long-term financing can be provided to governments on a sovereign          Government resources and development banks may
guarantee basis for the following:                                         also be used
        Lending for energy efficiency: Lending to municipalities or
         power utilities
        Lending to local financial institutions: Lending stimulates
         on-lending for EE investments
        Public procurement: Bulk procurement of energy-efficient
         retrofits for government buildings
        Green/Climate bonds: support low carbon                           Mobilized from private sector
         development/finance energy efficiency

Concessional element in financing:                                         CTF, IDA (in low-income countries)
        Financial incentives: Providing consumer rebates                  Concessional financing from other donors (AFD, KfW, or
        ESCOs: Providing initial capital to set up ESCO industry          JBIC) or GEF resources (for piloting or demonstration
        Dedicated revolving EE fund: Operating like a dedicated           only), Govt may also provide this
         investment fund
        Utility EE/DSM fund: Paying costs of utility-based efficiency     Carbon finance may assist with energy efficiency
         programs                                                          programs and provide additional revenue based on
                                                                           project generating emission reductions
Risk mitigation                                                            The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA),
Partial risk guarantees for investments or technology                      part of the World Bank Group, provides partial
(can also be supported with concessional finance)                          guarantees;
                                                                           The Global Environment Facility (GEF) has, in the past,
                                                                           provided limited risk guarantees on first-loss positions;
                                                                           Commercial bank & other risk guarantees are also
                                                                           available
Source: Research undertaken for this report



26.    Private flows, which are broadly defined as financial institutions and investors,
corporate actors, and households represent the lion’s share of climate investment. In 2010/11,
private flow investments amounted to approximately $217-243 billion globally, or 63% of the
total. Contributions from private intermediaries, commercial banks, and infrastructure funds



                                                              11
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


are considered to be in the order of $33.1-42.8 billion. Here, even more so than for public
sources, the information behind private flows for climate action is tenuous. Important data
gaps exist and assumptions are often required given the multiplicity of sources and endpoints,
confidentiality issues, and lack of data. It is difficult not only to quantify flows, but also to
estimate to what extent they may have been stimulated by specific policy and regulatory
actions.

27.     Overall, without differentiating between mitigation and adaptation inputs, private
actors contributed approximately $85 billion to financing in developing countries, with 80%
financed from their balance sheet. CPI (2012) further estimates that this contribution is largely
internal to developing countries; that is, domestic private actors contributed up to 83% of the
private investments in developing countries – making them a critical target for awareness
raising and capacity building. In China for example, 79% of energy efficiency financing is
estimated to stem from domestic private sources.


3.3.     Carbon Finance

28.     There are several types of carbon market instruments which developing countries could
use to help finance the introduction of low GHG, ozone friendly, equipment:
     The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM);
     International and domestic voluntary carbon markets;
     Emerging domestic cap and trade systems; and
     New Market Mechanisms currently under development (NAMAs10, sectoral crediting,
        new types of offset instruments, e.g. the Japanese “Joint Crediting Mechanism”).

Carbon finance concepts

29.    The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) governs
climate change negotiations. The UNFCCC’s Kyoto Protocol (KP) in turn contains the targets
and timeline to which so-called Annex I Parties11 agreed to reduce their GHG emissions as well
as the flexible mechanisms they may use in meeting their targets. Parties who ratified the
Protocol can either meet their emission cap through domestic action, or they may purchase

10
   Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) refers to a set of policies and actions a country commits to undertake to
address its climate change challenges and low carbon development goal. These may include scaling up of renewable energy
development, energy efficiency measures, forest management, solid waste management, public transportation etc. As of
September 2012, about 50 countries had submitted information regarding their NAMA to the UNFCCC and one of the
mechanisms to support the framing and implementation of NAMAs is through the Partnership for Market Readiness. Resources
from both public and private sectors at domestic and international levels need to be mobilized for countries to take actions.
11
   Countries with legally binding emissions objectives under the KP include those that were members of the OECD in 1997
(when the Protocol was negotiated and adopted) and the countries with economies in transition. While most Annex I Parties
observed the Protocol’s first Commitment Period (2008-12), the USA never ratified the Protocol and Canada withdrew after
having ratified it. The Protocol’s agreed second Commitment Period is supported by even fewer countries (essentially only the
European Union). A new climate treaty with broader participation is currently being negotiated and planned to come into force
in 2020.



                                                          12
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


emission quotas (“Assigned Amount Units”) from other Annex I Parties or project -based carbon
offsets (“Certified Emission Reductions”) from developing countries through the Protocol’s
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). Outside the Kyoto Protocol and the demand generated
by Parties needing to meet legally-binding emissions targets, a (smaller) voluntary carbon
market has also emerged consisting of voluntary demand for emissions offsets not required for
regulatory compliance.

30.      CDM projects are activities that can demonstrate that they will reduce GHG emissions
(measured in tons of CO2 equivalent - tCO2-eq) compared to a baseline, usually the business-as-
usual (BAU) scenario. For example, a project which proposes to install energy efficient air
conditioners compared to the baseline equipment and which can demonstrate that this activity
results in reduced consumption of energy and hence lowered CO2 emissions (from power
generation, based on the GHG intensity of the power grid) may qualify as a CDM project12. CDM
projects must also contribute to meeting the sustainable development objectives of the host
country. The same principle is typically applied by standards and emission registries that
facilitate carbon offset projects and the generation of carbon credits for the voluntary market.
Carbon finance concepts are described in detail in Annex III.

31.      Carbon finance projects and the emission reductions they generate are normally
registered, either with the UNFCCC (for CDM projects) or with a registry in the voluntary
market, after they have been verified to meet the required standards. Registration will usually
enable the project developer to sell the expected or the verified and registered actual emission
reductions (certified emission reductions - CERs - under the CDM) to another party wishing to
offset its own CO2 emissions. The sale of emission reductions from a carbon offset project will
usually generate an income stream that will support the project over time, but which may also
be used to raise project finance. That is, at least initially, the CDM – and carbon finance in
general – were also thought of as a financing mechanism for investments in energy efficiency
and cleaner technologies in developing countries. However, carbon finance was not in fact
designed to address investment barriers in underlying projects as most carbon purchasing
contracts (e.g., emission reductions purchase agreements - ERPAs) consider payments for
credits upon delivery. Therefore, project developers have found this form of project finance
difficult to access, since commercial banks were reluctant to accept ERPAs as collateral for their
loans. It should be noted, however, that this touches on a more general issue of financing of
demand-side energy efficiency with future energy savings, and that this difficulty is not inherent
to the CDM only.

32.    Project-based carbon finance instruments are structured as performance-based
payment schemes with internationally defined overarching principles and methodologies for
assessing project eligibility and quantifying, monitoring, reporting, and verifying GHG impacts of
project activities. Project-based carbon finance has been instrumental in reducing emissions of


12
  A similar Kyoto Protocol mechanism, known as “Joint Implementation,” exists for emission reduction projects in Annex I
countries.



                                                          13
                               Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs), such as methane, from waste management operations,
and HFCs, from chemical plants, which are covered by the mandate of the Kyoto Protocol.

Targeting HFC-23 incineration with the Kyoto project-based mechanisms

33.      Some CDM projects were developed to support the incineration of HFC-23, which is
generated as a by-product in the production of HCFC-22, a Montreal Protocol-regulated
chemical, either for refrigerant or as input (‘feedstock’) for the further production of synthetic
polymers. This is described in more detail in Annex IV. Given the high GWP of HFC-23, plant
operators were, until recently, able to earn significant revenue through the carbon offset
market, far exceeding the cost of purchasing, installing and operating HFC-23 incinerators and
the transaction costs linked to the carbon market. However, concerns over the abundance of
HFC-23 credits and with the risk/perception for perverse incentives, and questions regarding
their additionality and contribution of these activities to host country sustainable development,
all led to a decision in 2012 by the EU to no longer allow the use of carbon credits from such
projects for compliance within the EU Trading Scheme (ETS), thereby effectively halting most
carbon finance flows to HFC-23 destruction projects.

34.    Therefore, while carbon finance proved extremely effective in early years at catalyzing
investments for mitigation of HFC-23 releases, eligibility restrictions on CERs associated with
GHG reductions from the destruction of HFC-23 in the EU-ETS is having a big impact and raises
doubts that this mechanism could be expanded to help finance future ODS mitigation efforts.

Destroying ODS Banks with the voluntary carbon markets

35.     At a much smaller scale, voluntary carbon markets are creating incentives for the
recovery and destruction of ODS, as described in more detail in Annex IV. While the MP
regulates the production and consumption of ODS, a significant amount of ODS still remains
contained in equipment, products, and stockpiles, and risks being released into the atmosphere
in the absence of appropriate regulatory or financial incentives. Activity has, thus far, been
limited, except in California where transactions have increased in number and volume from
2010 to 2012. The level of interest expressed remains low however in comparison to the
volume of ODS potentially eligible for destruction, as provided by some estimates.13 Moreover,
the voluntary markets today are suffering from the same uncertainties and depressed prices as
the CDM, though they appear less affected.

Assessment of carbon market experience and risks based on 12 years of operation

36.    The main suppliers of CERs have been China, India, Brazil and Mexico, accounting for
over 95% of all CERs issued to date. Over 62% of CERs issued derive from industrial gases
projects including HFC-23, N2O, and perfluorocarbon (PFC) projects which have been attractive

13
  See “Study on Financing the Destruction of Unwanted Ozone-Depleting Substances through the Voluntary Carbon Market,”
ICF International (2010).



                                                        14
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


targets for CDM projects in the early stages of the carbon market, taking into account their high
GWP, high concentration, and the relatively robust financial and technical nature of their
industrial emission sources. Conversely end use energy efficiency projects, including those in
the Ref/AC and chiller replacement sectors, have made negligible progress, with fewer than 10
projects issuing CERs, each in small amounts.

37.       Overall, while carbon finance instruments have established very detailed procedures for
accounting of, and banking on, GHG emission reductions, they are not without risk, for the
following reasons:
    (i)      carbon finance instruments pose risk for both project developers and buyers of
             carbon credits. For the former, carbon finance procedures are burdensome, projects
             are time consuming to develop, and they present risk with regard to the possibility
             of non-registration, or, if registered, with regard to the possibility that expected
             volumes of emission reductions may not be issued – the CDM board is looking at
             measures to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the CDM. From the
             perspective of the buyer, if the expected income from a carbon finance project is
             critical to the success of a project (related to the additionality criteria), such risks
             may be perceived to be too high to proceed with carbon financing;
    (ii)     program design and successful delivery: there are transaction costs associated not
             only with dealing with multiple dispersed sources of financing, but also associated
             with programs involving smaller interventions; how to bundle these and coordinate
             activities to generate an attractive package has been a key challenge. In this regard,
             significant progress has been made under the CDM’s programmatic approach;14
    (iii)    carbon finance rules do change from time to time and while some simplifications
             have been introduced, revisions of rules and modalities often lead to greater
             stringency;
    (iv)     the recent severe downturn in prices of emission reductions resulting from a lower
             demand associated with economic downturn does not encourage the use of carbon
             finance at this time. Nonetheless, a number of actors, including the European Union
             and the World Bank, are exploring measures and means to revitalize the market; a
             new round of carbon finance is expected to emerge, linked to a new climate treaty
             entering into force – none of this in the short term.

38.     Despite its complexity, the CDM was quite successful in terms of number of projects and
capacity built in developing countries, upon which the new generation of carbon finance
instruments builds. Carbon finance programs however can take anywhere from 3 – 6 years to
deliver an actual revenue stream associated with the value of the carbon credits, and given the
current market situation, they do so at very low rates of return. As a result, this serves as a
disincentive for any project that would be dependent on carbon finance income.




14
  Small-scale methodologies, programs of activities and micro-projects have been promoted, leading to several CDM projects
addressing efficient lighting, micro-hydro etc.



                                                          15
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


3.4.     Current Status of Carbon Markets

39.      Glut of carbon assets from CDM at time of severely contracted demand. In the order of
2.4 billion tons of CO2eq carbon credits were contracted during the 2002-2011 period from
both developing countries and countries with economies in transition. These contracts reached
a cumulative total worth of US$28 billion in carbon credits and supported underlying
investments of more than US$150 billion in developing countries, principally from the private
sector.15 Since 2011, the market has contracted in reaction to the end of the first Kyoto
Commitment Period and EU restrictions on the use of CDM credits from new projects (except in
LDCs) in the third phase of the EU ETS. Whereas in 2007 636 million primary16 CERs were traded
for $8.2 billion, by 2011 this had declined to just 263 million primary CERs at a value of $2.9
billion.17 And though November 2012 saw the registration of the 5000th18 project by the CDM
Executive Board, at the same time the price of primary CERs dropped to under $1 compared to
the $20+ value they commanded in 2008. The voluntary market has been somewhat less
impacted, but has also seen a drop in prices.

40.     Carbon market outlook for 2013 to 2020: It is projected that approximately 2.5 to 3
billion CERs19 will be issued from projects registered before the end of 2012 against a demand
of no more than 1.5 billion CERs, largely due to restrictions following the economic downturn in
the world’s largest market, the EU ETS, which has historically driven demand for CERs. The
voluntary carbon market, which is smaller, may face similar difficulties. Therefore, CER prices
are expected to remain depressed, which provides little incentive to the market to develop new
CDM projects.

41.     Decisions emanating from UNFCCC Conference of the Parties, Doha post 2012: The
flexible mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol (CDM, Joint Implementation and emissions trading
through Assigned Amount Units) continue to exist as compliance instruments for the Parties20
to the second commitment period from 2013-2020. However, no additional compliance
demand for carbon assets will result, given that a review of commitments will not take place
until 2014, and no significant actions were taken to address the current position of the carbon
market as outlined above.21


15
   Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 2012. Reference to investments in 2010 and 2011.
16
   “Primary” CERs are purchased from the original party that makes the reduction.
17
   This represents a 2011 monetary value of forward (primary) project-based transactions for generation of pre-2012 and post-
2012 CERs, ERUs and voluntary market (see State and trends of the carbon market, 2012, WB).
18
   As of May 13, 2013, 6,830 projects have been registered. http://cdm.unfccc.int/
19
   Undiscounted and risk adjusted values are over double this figure.
20
   Excluding Japan, New Zealand and Russia, but including Belarus and Kazakhstan with emission caps.
21
   The following actions which are expected to provide results in the medium term were agreed to : The Green Climate Fund,
intended to be operational in 2014 – though progress has been slow in setting this up; Germany, the UK, France, Denmark,
Sweden and the European Commission announced concrete finance pledges in Doha for the period up to 2015, totaling
approximately 6 billion USD; a work program to further elaborate the new market-based mechanism under the UNFCCC, and
set out possible elements for its operation; and a work program to develop a framework for recognizing mechanisms
established outside the UNFCCC, such as nationally-administered or bilateral offset programs, and to consider their role in
helping countries to meet their mitigation targets.



                                                           16
                                  Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


42.     The European Union (EU) policy changes: Carbon credits which are generated from
projects in non-LDCs registered before end of 2012 will remain eligible under the European
Emissions Trading Scheme, while those registered after 2012, or from industrial gasses projects,
including from HCFC-22/HFC-23 projects, have become ineligible under the EU ETS post-2012.

43.    Implications of current CDM and joint implementation22 (JI) market for phasing out
HCFCs: Given the lack of demand for emission reductions, which is projected to last through the
mid-term, coupled with the continued projected low price of emission reductions and the EU
position, carbon finance as currently configured does not present a reliable financing option to
support the phase out of HCFCs, especially for MICs.

44.     In the post-Kyoto area, the CDM will likely lose its dominant role and be supplemented
by new generations of international and domestic carbon market instruments (e.g. NAMAs,
Bilateral Crediting Mechanism (Japan), policy and sector-based crediting). This is relevant since
the concept of synergies may most effectively be introduced at the formative stage of these
new mechanisms. Examples exist in the international and increasingly domestic voluntary
carbon markets, where for instance the “Gold Standard”23 enhances its carbon credit offerings
by certifying and monetizing additional sustainable development benefits. It should, for
instance, be possible to define a carbon asset class that certifies energy efficiency and GHG
reductions, or ozone and climate benefits.

45.     The focus in climate finance circles is now turning towards developing a new and wider
array of climate finance instruments which could, amongst other things, better support energy
efficiency and related ODS phase-out efforts.


3.5.      Emerging Domestic and International Schemes

46.     Despite the challenges facing the global CDM-based market, many countries have
learned from the experience and now are exploring innovative and cost-effective ways to scale
up emissions reductions and foster financial flows, including through carbon market
instruments. Much of the current focus of the international community is towards the next
generation of carbon mechanisms that aim to target “broad segments of the economy” and
towards the linking of emerging domestic carbon markets. Under the Partnership for Market
Readiness (PMR), a grant-based, global partnership, the World Bank is working with a number
of developed and developing partners, representing some of the world’s largest economies, to
build readiness for market-based instruments for GHG emissions reduction. To date, nearly $30
million in grant funding has been allocated to 16 nations to support the design and

22
   The “joint implementation” mechanism defined in the Kyoto Protocol allows a so-called Annex B Party (industrialized
countries, roughly equivalent to non-A5 countries under the MP) to earn emission reduction units from a project in another
Annex B Party. This is therefore relevant for the Countries in Economies in Transition, and not directly relevant to MLF
supported activities.
23
   The Gold Standard is a certification standard for carbon mitigation projects, recognized internationally for its quality and rigor
in both the compliance and voluntary carbon markets - http://www.cdmgoldstandard.org/.



                                                              17
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


development of market approaches to greenhouse gas emission reductions. This includes
development of monitoring, reporting, and verification systems and consideration of scaled-up
crediting mechanisms and domestic cap and trade schemes to cost effectively meet given
emissions caps and national mitigation objectives, and to promote energy efficiency in response
to rising power costs and demand, growing supply bottlenecks, and energy security issues.
Some examples, including support for developing Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions
(NAMAs),24 are outlined in Table 5 below. Moreover, PMR participants have recently agreed to
explore opportunities to pilot emission reductions transactions in connection with a payment
facility to purchase emissions credits generated as part of the Partnership’s activities.25

Pay-for-Performance mechanisms

47.    Pay-for-performance mechanisms (also known as results-based finance) are also being
developed that build on the experiences of the international community with carbon finance,
and with output-based aid. Such schemes disburse cash on the delivery of pre-determined and
independently verified results. Compared to traditional funding mechanisms, pay-for-
performance provides increased transparency and accountability along with greater scope for
innovation that can also be a powerful catalyst for private investment and maximize public
value for money. Pay-for-performance mechanisms present opportunities for short-term
climate mitigation interventions and can serve as stop-gap measures to breathe new life into
carbon markets.

48.     At the request of the G8, the World Bank convened a group of experts, the Methane
Finance Study Group, which released its report in April 2013 evaluating new approaches to
financing methane reduction activities. An innovative recommendation from the Group is to
establish a climate finance facility that would use payment for performance against
independently verified emission reductions to provide incentives for methane abatement
projects, and rely on an auction mechanism to ensure the lowest possible cost to the funder.
There is a great deal of interest in this initiative, and the partners in the Climate and Clean Air
Coalition subsequently agreed in September 2013 to establish a similar Study Group to review
potential strategies for supporting financial flows towards projects that can significantly reduce
black carbon emissions.




24
   Nationally appropriate mitigation actions (NAMAs) are domestically developed voluntary initiatives adopted by developing
countries to mitigate their GHG emissions. Countries develop NAMAs for those sectors which most interest them, for example
renewable energy (e.g., geothermal) or energy efficiency (e.g., energy efficient buildings or equipment). The financing of
NAMAs will use domestic resources or resources provided by donor countries (“supported NAMAs”) including through carbon
markets (“credited NAMAs”). The UNFCCC has established a website for the submission of information on NAMAS and for
donors to review and decide if they wish to support a particular NAMA.
25
   Strategic orientation for the future of the Partnership for Market Readiness, PMR Secretariat, October 2013
http://www.thepmr.org/system/files/documents/PMR_Draft_Strategic%20Note_October2013.pdf



                                                          18
                               Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Table 5. Examples of relevant country undertakings under the Partnership for Market Readiness
COUNTRY     PMR ACTIVITIES
Brazil         Brazil has a voluntary commitment to reduce emissions by 36.1%-38.9% below business-as-usual by
               2020. The country is currently considering mitigation plans that cover the forestry, agriculture, energy,
               iron, steel, transportation, mining and building sectors. As part of its proposed PMR activities, Brazil is
               analyzing different carbon pricing instruments suitable for given sectors.
China *        China aims to reduce emissions intensity by 40-45% compared with 2005 levels by 2020. In order to
               achieve this objective—and as included in its 12th Five-Year Plan—China looks to create statistical and
               verification systems for GHG emissions and to pursue pilot emissions trading schemes (ETS) in five cities
               and two provinces. The country aims to set up a national scheme by 2015. China’s market readiness
               plan, supported by financing from the PMR focuses on the design of China’s national emissions trading
               scheme, including (i) core technical, institutional and regulatory market readiness components; (ii)
               design elements of main ETS components; and (iii) specific consideration and research on issues facing
               State-owned enterprises and the power sector in a carbon emissions trading scheme.
India *        India aims to reduce its GHG carbon intensity by 20-25% compared with 2005 levels by 2020 as a
               voluntary commitment. Energy efficiency measures are being promoted and scaled up to permit these
               significant reductions in energy intensity. India’s Perform Achieve and Trade Scheme (PAT) is an existing
               market-based mechanism that covers 8 industrial sectors; it was developed to enhance the cost
               effectiveness of improving energy efficiency through certification of energy savings that may be traded
               using energy savings certificates (ESCerts). The PAT aims to accelerate a shift to energy efficient
               appliances in designated sectors through the use of innovative measures to make products more
               affordable, and creating mechanisms that would help finance demand side management programs in all
               sectors by capturing future energy savings. To further intensify these efforts, India is working through
               the PMR to develop reporting guidelines for EE and expand sectoral coverage of the PAT. This scheme is
               particularly interesting due to its innovative nature and potential for replication in other countries.
Indonesia*     Indonesia plans to reduce its national GHG emissions by 26 percent from its BAU scenario by 2020 and
               by an additional 15 percent with international support. With assistance from the PMR, Indonesia plans
               to build MRV systems for the power sector and its cement industry as well as conduct research and
               consensus building activities on the future use of market-based instruments.
Jordan *       The PMR is helping Jordan explore the potential for scale-up of crediting for NAMAs in renewable
               energy, water (energy efficiency in pumping, waste water treatment) and/or solid waste management
               sectors.
Mexico         Mexico pledges to reduce up to 30% of its emissions by 2020 compared to its baseline scenario,
               dependent on international support and participation in external markets. As part of its PMR Activities,
               Mexico is focusing on the development of three crediting NAMAs in the following target areas: (i) urban
               services; (ii) appliance/refrigerators; and (iii) urban transport, as well as on the elaboration of a national
               registry/tracking tool for emissions data collection, and a management and reporting system.
Thailand *     Thailand seeks to lay the groundwork for a low carbon society, as outlined in its 11th National
               Economic, Social, and Development Plan, and to reduce energy intensity by 25% by 2030 as compared
               to 2005 levels and to increase the share of alternative energy to 25% of final energy consumption by
               2021. PMR support in Thailand will help create an Energy Performance Certificate scheme (EPC) and a
               pilot Low Carbon City Program (LCC).
Vietnam *      PMR support in Vietnam will, inter alia, help design and pilot market instruments in the steel, solid
               waste, and power (energy efficiency) sectors. Vietnam's emissions reduction strategy focuses on energy
               efficiency and large-scale renewable energy production. The country aims to reduce energy
               consumption per unit of GDP by 2.5-3% per year by 2020 and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
               relative to its BAU scenario by 2-3% per year from 2020 to 2030. Vietnam is also developing a Green
               Growth Strategy that envisions emission reductions from the energy sector by 10% relative to BAU (and
               20% with international support) by 2020.
* Indicates countries with whom the World Bank is working on HCFC consumption and production projects.
``````````Source: this report, based on http://www.thepmr.org/




                                                        19
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


4.     OPPORTUNITIES FOR SYNERGY: BUILDING ON EXPERIENCE
4.1.   Experience with Multi-Source Financing: the “Chiller Replacement” Cohort
       of Projects

49.     A cluster of projects targeting the conversion of building chillers with the explicit intent
to address servicing uses of CFCs, potential climate co-benefits, and identification of additional
financing from other sources offers useful insight and lessons learned regarding securing and
implementing multi-source financing .

50.     The analysis reviews the achievements and on-going challenges associated with five
projects: India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Turkey. This analysis does not
constitute a formal evaluation, nor is it comprehensive. Rather, it provides a qualitative
overview of some of the difficulties encountered at the various stages of implementation, and
reflects upon the lessons that may be extracted and serve as possible guidance for such future
work. The details for each project are presented under Annex V.

51.     Overall experience with this cohort of projects has been mixed, and this even though
chiller replacement allowed unusually large energy efficiency gains (30% and more), thereby
providing a rapid return on investment. While they represent a clear effort to acknowledge
synergies inherent amongst the different global environmental conventions and their financing
mechanisms, they also speak to the complexities that can arise as additional financing partners
become involved, as well as when a “blended” approach applies in name only. Such challenges
have ranged from an inability to synchronize the timing of financing approvals, the collapse of
the carbon market, the impact of the 2008 financial crisis, competing institutional, governance,
and implementation arrangements (e.g. dual reporting), namely under the MLF and GEF, and
issues regarding the acceptability, suitability, and commercial availability of alternatives.

52.     In general and as noted earlier in the report, the difficulty of truly leveraging underlying
investment with carbon finance revenues has been a challenge for the carbon finance
experience thus far. Here, carbon finance in and of itself has not driven the financing of chiller
projects largely due to doubts associated with the status of the CDM in light of the political
uncertainty regarding the post-Kyoto timeframe, as well as the current depleted state of the
carbon market. Where the integration of carbon finance has been tested, it has tended to
overburden projects with heavy monitoring procedures and, in general, higher transaction
costs. Moreover, within the context of chiller replacement, one barrier lies in the opportunity
cost of access to up-front financing for the investment, a challenge that can also be
compounded by low energy tariffs. The India experience, in particular, shows that as a result of
this barrier (and a lack of trust in carbon markets), participants will choose up-front
compensation over greater compensation in future – the CER price level being a factor of
course.




                                              20
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


53.     Lessons drawn from an extensive study on chiller replacement in India formed the basis
of the World Bank’s design to secure MLF financing for the global chiller demonstration
program. Based on the recognition that carbon finance would not address the opportunity cost
barriers, the strategy adopted was for MLF and GEF funding to cover the upfront costs for the
first round of chiller replacement and, once carbon finance returns started to flow, these could
in turn be utilized for upfront financing to bring additional chiller owners onboard.
Unfortunately, this premise could never be effectively tested given the global economic
downturn and subsequent collapse of the carbon market.

54.     Experience with these projects has also demonstrated that multi-source financing tends
to lead to heavy implementation structures and procedures. There is a need to simplify
procedures and processes not only to streamline obtaining financing from multiple sources, but
also with respect to reporting requirements imposed during implementation. At present, for
example, it is a requirement to maintain strictly separate progress reporting and accounting of
relatively small amounts of MLF and GEF financing for ‘blended’ projects, despite the
similarities between the instruments and their quasi identical shareholder base. The design of
similar future projects should strive to substantially simplify procedures and minimize
additional administrative requirements, and should consider exploring the potential for joint
project design, approval and oversight functions in order to enhance efficiency and reduce
transaction costs.

55.     Turkey’s experience demonstrates how positive results derived through application of a
simple and targeted project design can rapidly deliver the desired market transformation. Here,
non-grant instruments were used to overcome the opportunity cost, low energy tariffs and lack
of fiscal incentive barriers that were faced. The Turkish counterparts who managed the project
on the ground offered an attractive financing package (zero interest loans with three year
payback periods) and also actively promoted chiller replacement, which ultimately led to the
project achieving a high success rate.

56.     One broad lesson that can be drawn from this suite of projects is that concessional
financing is important for this type of project, and is particularly relevant as it also benefits and
can leverage funds for climate mitigation. It is especially important where, as in this instance,
there are multiple barriers to be addressed: operational complexity, with multiple project
cycles of different institutions and funding mechanisms (including GEF and MLF);
regulatory/policy uncertainty (state of the CDM); and technical difficulties (choice of
refrigerant).

57.     As noted above, the market for primary CDM interventions has dropped to its lowest
level since 2004, linked to declining demand for offsets resulting from economic turbulence, a
growing long-term oversupply of carbon offsets in the EU ETS, and plummeting carbon prices.
This has impacted the vision behind the strategy governing the more recent group of projects,
requiring that they be restructured to adapt to the new context in order to deliver the best
possible outcomes in terms of chiller replacement.



                                               21
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



Box 1. The “chiller replacement” cohort of projects – Key lessons

        Five “chiller” projects were implemented or prepared by the World Bank; four envisaged
         multi-source financing with GEF co-financing, of which three also envisaged a carbon finance
         (CDM) revenue stream.
        The most successful of the five projects, based on the number of chillers replaced, is the
         oldest one (for Turkey) which, whilst it promoted an innovative revolving fund for chiller
         replacement, relied on a single source (MLF) of international financing.
        The projects that had envisaged relying on a CDM revenue stream had to drop that
         component. It is difficult however to tease out intrinsic project design /CDM delivery issues
         from the overall collapse of the CDM – in other words, these projects might have been fully
         successful had the CDM not collapsed (and more countries ratified the Kyoto Protocol).
        There is some evidence however that carbon finance led to overburdening the projects with
         monitoring and verification procedures which were unattractive to chiller owners.
        Technical issues (i.e. choice of refrigerant) were the source of irreconcilable differences,
         ultimately leading to the cancellation of one of the projects (Indonesia).
        Blending MLF and GEF resources has been a source of delay related to different project
         cycles and approval procedures, despite similarities in instruments and quasi identical
         shareholder base.
        Blending MLF and GEF resources has also lead to heavy implementation structures and
         procedures, with requirements for separate progress reporting and accounting of relatively
         small amounts of grant financing – these procedures should be streamlined and simplified.

These lessons derive from a qualitative and non-exhaustive analysis of experiences with the cohort
of “chiller” projects implemented by the World Bank, rather than from a formal evaluation. These
lessons in general are relatively nuanced; the more detailed overview provided in Annex 5 of this
report provides a more thorough description of the challenges and opportunities.

58.     Taking this experience into account and looking more broadly, some options might be
explored to avoid compartmentalization and facilitate multi-benefit or synergetic approaches.
Financial resources could be pooled upfront from different sources and funds (e.g. GEF and
MLF) and under a specific mandate to address synergies more systematically to effectively
create a seamless single-window for project proponents and implementers. In the longer term,
a single funding mechanism that would address environmental benefits on a broad basis (e.g.
including national and local benefits) could also be envisaged. With a more robust carbon
market, benefits generated could be converted into assets to be monetized in emerging
environmental markets (such as the carbon market) and/or sold to (or reimbursed by)
specialized funds or interested parties. Although such an approach is not without governance
and administrative complexities and risks (political and market related), the Green
Infrastructure Investment Fund26 (GIIF) that is being developed in the East Asia Pacific Region,
for example, is exploring comparable avenues.
26
  The recent World Bank study on a Green Infrastructure Investment Finance framework to stimulate greater flow of funds for
green investments in EAP countries is primarily oriented toward promoting private investments, but can also serve to
accelerate public-private partnerships as well as purely public engagements. The framework consists of an analytical
methodology to assist policy makers in deriving the financial “viability gap” of green investments, and a country assessment



                                                          22
                               Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



4.2.     Some Relevant Models for Phasing out HCFC-22 in the Residential Sector

59.     Two main approaches have been adopted by developing countries in promoting new
Ref/AC technologies from the energy standpoint. First is the set of policy-based approaches
using appliance energy efficiency standards (along with appliance energy efficiency labeling
systems), and often in conjunction with building energy efficiency codes. This approach is
primarily focused on new stock and works well in countries where energy (electricity) pricing is
rational and where the compliance regime is robust, with infrastructure available (testing
laboratories, etc.). However, as a short-term measure, often the second approach of financial
incentives is adopted, especially where there are limited incentives for consumers to adopt new
energy efficient appliances or replace existing appliances with new ones as these are both more
expensive and manufacturers are unwilling to promote these into the market in the absence of
binding regulations and consumer demand. The choice among mandatory regulation (efficiency
standards), incentives (subsidies in various forms), and purely voluntary programs (e.g., labeling
and disclosure of efficiency ratings) is of relevance to appliances and therefore refrigerants.
Most of the World Bank’s interventions in the areas of appliances, including refrigeration and
air-conditioning, are in the second category – that is based on financial incentives - as
governments often find it difficult to rely solely on standards and labeling enforcement.

60.     The following section explores examples that have been developed recently or that are
under development, and that offer promising models for addressing climate co-benefits,
particularly in the residential sector.

The Mexico Efficient Lighting and Appliances Project (ELAP)

61.     The Mexico ELAP paradigm highlights a number of key characteristics that can serve to
inform the design of a cross-cutting ozone-climate co-benefits model. The project was
approved in November 2010, with a development objective to promote Mexico’s efficient use
of energy and mitigate climate change through the increased use of energy efficient
technologies at the residential level. The vehicle by which to achieve these objectives is to
promote the development of a sustainable market for energy efficient equipment among the
large and fast growing energy end-use sectors for lighting and Ref/AC.

62.    The project has three components, including the replacement of 45 million
incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) in the low to medium-income
residential sector, targeted technical assistance, and institutional strengthening. Of particular
relevance are the incentives designed to encourage the replacement of old and inefficient
appliances, namely refrigerators and air-conditioners in the residential sector.




framework to allow a better understanding of a country’s investment climate in general a nd green investments climate
specifically. (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/04/16253049/green-infrastructure-finance-framework-report)



                                                        23
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


63.    The value of the project is estimated to be $714 million and its financing structure
includes a blending of World Bank financing, composed of loans from the IBRD and the CTF, as
well as a GEF grant. This is complemented by financing from the Government of Mexico, the
National Development Bank (NAFIN), and Mexican consumers (see Figure 1 in Annex VI).

64.     The project is of particular interest to this study, given a focus on phasing out CFC-12
based appliances in the residential sector, and its support for the Appliances Replacement
Program under the Government’s national program on energy efficiency, which targets the
replacement, including collection and scrapping, of approximately 1.7 million old (more than 10
years) and inefficient REF/AC appliances over a four-year period.

65.     Two types of incentives are being proposed: 1) the provision of vouchers as instant
discounts to low-income consumers, and 2) the provision by NAFIN of credits, at favorable
interest rates, to middle-income and other qualifying consumers. Resources from the IBRD loan
to the Government co-finance the vouchers, those from the CTF loan to NAFIN support the
credits, and resources from the GEF grant capitalize the guarantee facility that protects NAFIN
from credit defaults by consumers.

66.    Carbon finance is also considered in connection with the appliance replacement
program and Ref/AC disposal activities under Component 2, where MLF resources have
supported an assessment of opportunities for financing the destruction of ODS through the
voluntary carbon markets.27

67.     Qualification of Efficient Appliances by Consumption Level. In order to qualify as an
eligible appliance under the program, refrigerators and air conditioners must meet specific EE
requirements above the Minimum Efficiency Performance Standards approved by the
Government. In addition, appliances must also meet certain size requirements, which vary by
consumption level, reflecting limitations on size for consumers who benefit from the larger
subsidies provided by the vouchers as compared to the credits.

68.     Integration with Mexico’s Domestic Refrigerator Nationally Appropriate Mitigation
Action. This proposal is being developed as a potential crediting NAMA and will be elaborated
during the implementation of Mexico’s Market Readiness Proposal with funding from the
Partnership for Market Readiness. A description 28 is included on the PMR website. The
Domestic Refrigerator NAMA is an initiative driven by the National Association of Home
Appliance Manufacturers (ANFAD), whose intention it is to introduce, on a nationwide scale,
more EE technologies that use refrigerants with significantly lower or zero GWP. The domestic
refrigeration technology currently sold in Mexico is based on HFCs, predominantly R-134a
which has a high GWP of 1300. The move away from the use of HFCs, combined with enhanced
energy savings, will contribute doubly to the country’s climate change mitigation efforts.


27
     “Disposal of ODS in Mexico”, World Bank (2012)
28
     http://www.thepmr.org/system/files/documents/Mexico_MRP_Final_Refg_19-02-2013.pdf



                                                       24
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


69.    The NAMA proposal scales up the World Bank efficient appliances project described
above. Although older, inefficient refrigerators and air-conditioners are still in use, the market
has been steadily moving towards adoption of HFC-134a appliances. Based on imports and
domestic production capacity data, the Mexican market share for refrigerant fluid currently
shows 98 % HFC-134a and 2 % hydrocarbon.29

70.      The NAMA aims to phase in HFC-free energy efficient technology to cover 100% of the
domestic market in Mexico (2.4 million units per year in 2012) within a 5-year timeframe. The
estimated mitigation potential from the electricity to be saved is in the order of 4.6 million
tCO2-eq accumulated over a 15 year period. Piloting the NAMA with the introduction of
100,000 new refrigerators is estimated to cost around $770,000 for operational costs and
$3,250,000 for the coverage of the incremental cost of the new technology ($30/unit), plus
$21,160,000 for loans to the end users, which will be paid back through household electricity
bills. A visual representation of the NAMA’s implementation arrangement is presented in Annex
VI, Figure 2.

71.     The design of this initiative still needs to be elaborated and operationalized, along with
identifying funding sources. While a number of key elements will need to be in place to ensure
success, financing will be key. If successful, the design of both initiatives - vouchers and low-
interest loans for consumers, and financial incentives for manufacturers - could be adapted and
replicated to HCFC appliance phase-out in other developing countries. This would demonstrate
that energy saved in the Ref/AC sector can be associated to quantifiable emission reductions,
and that carbon finance holds the potential to play an important role in harnessing additional
resources to incentivize consumers and/or appliances manufacturers.

Directly Improving Equipment Efficiency

72.     In addition to the more traditional demand-side management approach typically
followed by energy efficiency programs, World Bank Energy teams have been working with
clients to design interventions that directly target manufacturers and seek to improve the
efficiency of equipment. Innovative mechanisms are being developed to provide financial
incentives to manufacturers to create price parity for the more efficient product without
creating market distortions. Strong monitoring and verification elements are introduced to test
quality and conformity of the product with the agreed specifications. In principle, such
innovative design could be envisaged and would be potentially applicable to support climate
co-benefits in parallel with MP funding towards an ODS-free transition. This model is
particularly relevant and attractive because such relatively rare example of supply-side
intervention in the climate change/ energy efficiency domain can readily match the types of
conversions that are typical of MP interventions, and apply to Ref/AC equipment, including with
MLF funding targeting the refrigerant.



29
     World Bank Project Appraisal Document



                                                     25
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Model Scenario for the Residential Sector

73.     Many residential energy efficiency equipment programs have been developed and
implemented in developed and developing countries; ODS phase-out activities can be included
in the design of these activities. Based on this experience, some complementary features of an
energy efficiency equipment transformation programs could be as follows: (i) strong regulation
and enforcement including inspection at import points, manufacturers, retailers or the
installation points for larger equipment to ensure compliance with standards; (ii) standards and
labeling to demonstrate to inspectors and consumers compliance with regulations; and (iii)
financial incentives to overcome initial financial barriers/higher costs until the new standards
become common practice. Incentives can take the form of loans, grants, tax incentives, or initial
subsidies to the power sector, suppliers/retailers, or consumers depending on where the
financial barrier is found and can be most efficiently overcome. The Mexico example which may
serve as a model addresses these key points by providing the consumer with information about
the efficiency of the new technology against the minimum energy performance standards,
supported by a labeling program and financial incentives for manufacturers and/or consumers.

74.    In the case of regulatory approaches/policy tools to promote energy efficiency of Ref/AC
equipment such as appliance Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPs) and appliance
energy efficiency labeling, elements related to MP requirements (that is, if the refrigerant used
is ODS free or not) could be integrated into the standard MEPs and also provided as
information through the EE label design. For example the California Appliance Efficiency
Regulations30 refer to ODS. In the case of financial incentive-based approaches to promote
energy efficient appliances through traditional utility demand-side management or innovative
market mechanisms like ESCOs, it would be important to establish the relative additional
(incremental) purchase cost of complying with MP requirements over the BAU cost of
appliances with regular efficiency levels, and over the cost of appliances with higher efficiency –
with additional incentives to target the most environmentally friendly refrigerant.

75.      A typical household level equipment energy efficiency program may target air-
conditioning units (windows or split systems) used in the residential sector or small buildings
(split systems or rooftop units) that are currently using HCFC-22 as the coolant. Depending on
the country concerned, the key stakeholders to involve in an energy efficiency program are
therefore: (i) the power sector, whose interests are to reduce the gap between power demand
and supply (including reducing peak load), promote energy security and independence and, in
some instances, to mitigate climate change; (ii) consumers (commercial, public, households)
for whom energy efficient equipment provides energy savings and thus monetary savings; (iii)
manufacturers and retailers, who must comply with regulations and respond to demand from
consumers.

76.    Compelling this set of stakeholders to test and label equipment correctly, both with
regard to EE standards and the ODS potential of equipment, allows consumers to make more

30
     http://www.energy.ca.gov/2012publications/CEC-400-2012-019/CEC-400-2012-019-CMF.pdf



                                                        26
                                      Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


informed decisions. However, the higher upfront costs of upgrades are often strong barriers to
the deployment of EE technologies. Therefore, market transformation may only be achieved
when adequate financial incentives are offered to the parties facing the financial barriers,
usually the consumers or suppliers. Based on the Mexico ELA project example, a potential
HCFC-free energy efficient air-conditioning program could be structured as per Figure 4 below.


4.3.     Driving ODS Phase-out Through Energy Efficiency in the Non-residential
         Sector

77.      The non-residential sector includes buildings (public and commercial: air-conditioning,
chillers, rooftop units) and industrial facilities where refrigeration plays a key role in the process
(textile, foods and beverages, chemicals, etc.).



Figure 4. Model structure for a potential HCFC-free energy efficient AC program


               Funding Sources                                                               Funding Sources
                   Government                          Government                               Carbon/Climate
                   Donors                                                                        Finance
                                                 Energy Efficiency Facility
                   MDB                                                                          Power utility




                                                              Carbon
                                                              Rights              Participating
                      Manufacturers                                                 Financing
                                                                                   Institutions




                                        New equipment
                                        (+ rebates)
                         Retailers                                                                        Power
                                                                       Consumer
                                                                                   Payment of loan        Utility
                                                                                   through
                                        Payment & return of
                                                                                   electricity bills
                                        old equipment




                        Equipment
                      scrapping and
                           ODS
                       destruction




Source: this report



78.    Many of the points discussed above under residential models also apply to the non-
residential sector including approaches to regulation and enforcement, standards and labeling
and financing mechanisms to support phase-in. A key difference in the non-residential sector as
compared to the residential sector is the size and cost of the equipment, and the volume of


                                                                            27
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


ODS involved. It therefore needs to align with corporate and public sector financing models,
some of which are as follows:
    Leasing and loan facilities need to be available through equipment suppliers/
      commercial banks (i.e. where corporate loan financing schemes are required);
    Innovative financing approaches, such as those involving third party ESCOs where, for
      example, a utility or supplier finances and installs the new equipment and recovers the
      cost from the corporate consumers electricity based on the value of actual or averaged
      projected energy savings as managed by the ESCO;
    Public sector financing of energy efficiency projects in public buildings, which has
      become increasingly favored as a means to reduce operating costs; and
    The use of official development assistance (ODA) can also play an important part in
      demonstrating pilot programs in either corporate or public settings.

The GEF – Supporting Energy Efficiency Finance

79.    GEF concessional funding has been a strong catalyst for introducing innovative ideas and
supporting institutional development to build successful energy efficiency programs. A number
of World Bank Group GEF-supported energy efficiency projects in different regions have
successfully institutionalized ways to achieve energy efficiency gains that promise strong
returns on investment. The most sustainable uses of GEF resources have been achieved when
the GEF contribution formed part of broader, longer-term energy efficiency initiatives - such as
blended packages of concessional and non-concessional energy efficiency finance (including
helping local financing institutions develop their own EE lending products and business lines).
Other good examples include projects focused on market transformation, heating reform and
building EE, industry/utility level EE, or ESCO development — supported by strong government
commitment and program financing from other sources.

80.     For example, the Bank’s International Finance Corporation (IFC)-implemented China
Utility-Based Energy Efficiency Finance Program (CHUEE) used the GEF contribution to provide
credit enhancement tools and technical assistance to local banks to develop their energy
efficiency and renewable energy financing business. Financial institutions, utility companies,
and suppliers of energy efficient equipment were brought together to establish new financing
models for energy efficiency, with a focus on expanding lending to small and medium
enterprises. The concessional element focus on provision of public training, green credit,
international standards such as the Equator Principles, and completion of five industrial and
regional energy efficiency opportunity studies all helped the China Banking Regulatory
Commission, the Chinese banking sector, other potential investors, and ESCOs and equipment
suppliers better understand the Chinese national EE market. A $16.5 million GEF investment in
CHUEE helped three partner banks disburse $540 million in energy efficiency loans to 107
projects, mobilizing nearly $1 billion of additional financing and resulting in a global reduction
of millions of tons of CO2 equivalent.




                                             28
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Building Energy Efficiency Codes

81.     Building energy efficiency codes and standards offer a powerful tool to promote energy
efficiency measures, including consideration of the substances used as refrigerant. A recent
World Bank ESMAP publication “Mainstreaming Building Energy Efficiency Codes in Developing
Countries” (2010) asserts that mandatory and enforced building EE codes are an essential and
effective tool to promote energy savings related to heating and cooling that may otherwise be
overlooked.31 The report also notes that no country, industrialized or developing, has reaped
the benefits of energy conservation measures in buildings without enforcing compliance with
such mandatory codes.

82.    The report also finds that promotion and enforcement of building energy efficiency
codes in a country can both complement and promote the technical and engineering capacity
of the national supply chain, such that local materials and equipment become available and
compatible. In other words, building codes promote and facilitate the availability and uptake of
ODS-free low-GWP/GHG solutions.

83.     With respect to financing, in medium-income countries building energy efficiency codes
can be mainstreamed such that compliance becomes the norm and additional costs are
effectively internalized in regular building costs. For lower income countries, however, external
financing to meet the up-front additional costs of energy conservation measures must be
addressed, which could include participation in carbon markets to encourage market-driven
energy efficiency innovations.


4.4.     Using Carbon Assets to Enhance Investments in Montreal Protocol
         Projects

84.     The possibility of using future carbon assets generated through MP projects to increase
their level and/or lower their cost of financing remains worthy of consideration, given that the
general economic principles behind the global carbon market are broadly applicable to market-
based mechanisms in the medium term.

85.    If MP projects that aim to reduce ODS in refrigeration applications through the
replacement of older HCFC-using cooling units with more modern and efficient technology are
able to generate significant energy saving benefits, and such projects are also registered under
one of the various Carbon Finance mechanisms, then any energy savings achieved could be
converted into carbon assets (taking into account the power grid emission factor).



31
  Pierre Langlois and Shirley J. Hansen, PhD., authors of ‘The World ESCO Outlook, 2012’, further cite energy performance
contracting (EPC) and shared savings contracting (SSC) models, adapted to local needs, as key tools for self-funding energy
efficiency, based on their practical experiences gained working with developed and developing countries around the world.



                                                           29
                                     Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


86.     In principle, monetization of future carbon assets can offer two main benefits in
addition to the immediate energy savings to consumers, provided carbon markets are solid.
From an environmental perspective, monetization could accelerate the implementation of
HCFC -reducing projects. From a financial perspective, providing more capital and/or lowering
its cost at the onset of a project, rather than relying on an additional future revenue stream
from carbon finance, could improve a project’s overall financial viability and encourage more
rapid scale-up up of ODS-reducing projects.

Carbon Assets as a Credit Enhancement Tool for Lending

87.    Carbon assets generated by MP projects could further potentially be used as collateral
against lending.32 For most sponsors, the collateral would be used to reduce the risk profile of
the borrower, which would enable the lender to decrease the cost of funding for collateralized
operations. Alternatively, for borrowers facing credit exposure headroom limitations, the credit
enhancing effect of such collateral could be used to increase exposure limits, resulting in the
release of additional funding sources. This proposal could utilize a range of carbon assets, such
as CERs and verified, voluntary emission reductions (VERs).

88.     Depending on the type of asset to be utilized, MP projects generating energy efficiency
gains would need to register under the CDM or JI schemes. Post registration, carbon assets
would be transferred by means of an Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) or other
arrangement into the custody of a third party, which could use these assets as collateral to
extend a loan to the country/project originating the assets at the project design phase. The
collateral could be held on the balance sheets of the lender or in a separate facility that could
be set up as a debt service facility with binding instructions to pay off pre-determined debts.
Note however that this would require a mature and sophisticated market.

89.     The introduction of carbon assets to the MLF financial structure would necessarily
induce the management of additional risk. Determining which parties bear what risks and how
these risks can be mitigated are crucial elements of this proposal (see Figure 5):

           Project Company: holds the delivery risk, or the risk of generating fewer carbon assets
            than expected;
           Carbon Credit Trustee: holds (and manages) carbon asset price risk once an ERPA is
            signed. Otherwise, it would remain with the Project Company.
           Lender: holds the Borrower’s credit risk in case of default by the project companies,
            though this risk would be reduced by the collateral. The Lender would also assume
            carbon asset delivery risk indirectly, as the quality of the collateral is linked to the ability
            of the project company to deliver as planned. Of all the risks, delivery risk remains the
            most difficult to mitigate or transfer.



32
     The lending could be done by multilateral agencies, banks, or other financial institutions.



                                                                30
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


90.    Once carbon assets are verified, they may be sold at spot market prices or settled
through the ERPA at a pre-agreed price. Depending on the arrangement, proceeds may be paid
to the lender as debt service or to the project entity. The host government may stand as a
guarantor and/or consolidator (see Figure 6).

91.     To enhance the collateralized lending concept, guarantee mechanisms could be used to
mitigate certain risks. For instance, it may be possible to strip out the credit and delivery risk
components of the carbon assets by using new or existing mechanisms (i.e., IFC’s Carbon
Delivery Guarantee Mechanism 33 ), thereby enhancing the monetization potential of the
assets.34

92.     Effectively, such an approach allows a buyer of carbon credits to provide an advance, or
lend money, against the projected value of the emission reductions to be purchased. This
necessitates that a guarantee be established to allow the lender to recover its advance should
the emission reductions not be delivered. In the past the World Bank carbon funds have offered
such advances to some projects in their portfolio; other lenders could do so if they felt their
risks were reduced by the existence of an ERPA with an institution such as the World Bank.


Figure 5. Project’s process flow                                         Figure 6. Illustration of flows as carbon assets
                                                                         are verified




Source: this report                                                     Source: this report




33
   The IFC has two conditions for offering this financial product: the carbon market must be mature and it must present a clear
and long-term price signal.
34
   See IFC Carbon Finance information page: http://ifcnet.ifc.org/intranet/carbonfinance.nsf/.



                                                           31
                                  Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


5.        ADDITIONALITY AND OPTIONS FOR PROFIT SHARING
93.    When approving the terms of this study, the Executive Committee highlighted a number
of elements important for consideration, including the “additionality of the projects proposed”
and “assurance that these projects would avoid perverse incentives for countries”. Within the
context of the MLF, “additionality” can be understood as assurance that the set of activities to
be promoted would generate environmental benefits beyond the baseline of MLF-supported
interventions, which would not happen without the additional effort.

94.    This can also be understood, together with the reference to perverse incentives, as a
desire to see that any grant or concessional element that is introduced with private sector
beneficiaries does not distort existing markets. This is particularly important today when,
contrary to the early days of CFC phase-out, the market is much more fragmented, with large
volumes of chemicals of interest produced in developing (Article 5) countries in either wholly
domestic, foreign owned, or joint venture-types of enterprises. The World Bank, including the
IFC, possesses rich experience in project economic analysis to ensure that any grant element or
concessional loan is set to an appropriate level for barrier removal but does not interfere with
the market.

95.      The Executive Committee, in approving this study, also requested that it “explore
possibilities of profit-sharing, including return of funds to the MLF.” This is in part an issue of
how proceeds may be distributed and can be challenging to analyze in the absence of concrete
parameters. Conceptually, “profit sharing” with the Executive Committee can take three forms:
(i) a lower MLF contribution (grant) to projects with synergies (and other funding sources), (ii) a
greater scope or faster HCFC phase-out, or (iii) monetary reflows to the MLF. Participation of
the MLF in any monetary returns (e.g. from carbon credits) seems difficult to justify, unless a
specific service was provided that may enhance the carbon market instruments. To create
value, such services would best address weaknesses in carbon markets and related instruments,
for instance upfront investment funding, financial risk management (through insurance or
guarantees), or funding/grant flexibility to fill unexpected funding gaps.

96.    The concept of carbon or related revenues flowing back to the MLF could be explored
through a model in which, for example, MLF support is provided to manufacturers of HCFC-
using Ref/AC equipment to convert to alternatives, as well as to introduce energy efficient and
low GHG equipment which would generate energy and/or GHG savings. In return for the MLF
providing funds35 to manufacturers, the MLF could share in the income earned from the sale of
the energy or GHG savings. From a theoretical perspective, the concept is feasible. Some
generic design features of such a program could include:


35
  As noted, this assumes that the MLF is also providing support directly for EE related improvements or other valuable services
to the carbon market, such as price risk management, some form of guarantee or insurance , as otherwise it would be difficult
to justify reflows to the Fund, since the “profits” that would involve private sector actors would then derive from energy savings
and reduced GHG emissions, rather than being directly linked to the ODS reduction or financing arrangement that is supported
by the MLF.



                                                            32
                            Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


         MLF funds would be provided as a grant to Ref/AC manufacturers to change production
          lines to produce low ODS, low GHG and more energy efficient appliances;
         All manufacturers benefitting from the MLF funds would be required to also take part in
          a program which would recognize or register the projected reduction in energy or GHG
          emissions – through more energy efficient appliances and appliances making use of low
          GHG coolants;
         A legal agreement spelling out what percentage the MLF would receive would be
          required between the Implementing Agency of the MLF, equipment manufacturers, and
          the overall entity managing the energy savings and GHG reduction program to
          apportion the income derived from the program;
         Once the program was registered or recognized, each year an annual audit would need
          to be undertaken to determine the amount of equipment sold and the resulting energy
          or GHG savings, and verify the resulting emission reductions; and
         Once the energy or GHG savings were sold, the income derived from the sales would
          then be apportioned between manufacturers and the Implementing Agency/MLF as per
          the legal agreement.

97.       Some key factors related to the applicability of such a concept would include:

         When this concept was first considered, a robust carbon market existed with the price
          of emission reductions trading at over $10 per tonne. The current price is much lower.
          Until the price of carbon recovers, such schemes will not be viable.
         The main target for such a program would be the larger manufacturers of AC and
          refrigeration equipment. However, they are typically located in middle-income countries
          which are excluded from selling emission reductions to the European Union market
          from 2013.
         Although domestic carbon and energy efficiency markets are developing in many of the
          large equipment manufacturing countries, Mexico is the first one (and only one so far)
          to have demonstrated interest in AC and refrigeration fitting into the thinking and
          elaboration of its new generation of carbon finance architecture. In the years to come,
          other countries could be inspired by the Mexico example.
         Would large manufacturers find participation sufficiently attractive in a scheme as
          described above if they are required to share the income with the MLF? A recognized
          barrier to multiple-source financing generally is that this comes often with an increase in
          transaction costs, decreasing the attractiveness of participation to investors. As noted
          above, even with the robust carbon price of the past, there was only limited use of the
          potential of a carbon finance program to generate energy savings.

98.     The idea that the MLF could benefit from the reflows of a market mechanism/climate
finance scheme tied to conversion to low ODS, low GHG and higher EE equipment
manufacturing production lines is theoretically possible, and experience with the operation of
similar funds is that reflows can be managed transparently when this is planned from the start.
Although, as discussed, no such profitable opportunities exist in the short-term, the Bank is



                                                33
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


working with clients to monitor this space. The design and piloting of domestic climate finance
markets that include energy efficiency improvements in the Ref/AC sector may provide an
option in future.


6.       INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
6.1      Energy Efficiency Financing at the World Bank

99.     World Bank investments for clean energy are growing at a rapid pace. World Bank
Group commitments36 for EE have been around $1.5 billion per year for the past five years. This
offers opportunity to explore the possible linkages between Bank clean energy operations and
the MP agenda, and to understand the potential scope and scale of energy sector activities that
could be tapped into if incentives were aligned and transaction costs kept to a minimum.

100. Energy efficiency37 has emerged as a growing investment focus of the WBG given the
recognition that it is one of the most effective means to enhance energy security and achieve
better supply/demand balance in the face of mounting power shortages, as well as to mitigate
climate change. Energy efficiency can offer an interesting point of entry as it taps the least-cost
domestic source of energy while reducing the need for investment in energy generation
infrastructure required to power economic growth. In so doing, it can enhance private and
macro competitiveness and creates fiscal space for other development priorities, while avoiding
negative environmental impacts associated with energy generation including, but not limited
to, global climate change.

101. Nevertheless, energy efficiency improvements, particularly on the demand side, are
complex to implement as the opportunities are diverse, dispersed, and spread across a range of
different end-use sectors that face various technical, institutional, financial, market and
regulatory barriers (see Table 6). In addition, converting potential opportunities into
investments in order to scale up energy efficiency implementation requires working across
sector boundaries – for instance, energy savings in the water, agriculture, or transport sectors.
Furthermore, transfer of knowledge in the areas of energy efficiency policy and finance – key to
effective replication and scale-up – is more complex than the transfer of technology, and the
transferability of the relatively successful energy efficiency policy and finance approaches from
OECD countries is not direct, requiring significant adaptation prior to replication in developing
countries, given the different barriers and institutional contexts. World Bank GEF co-financed
energy efficiency financing projects, such as CHUEE for example, referenced earlier, have
worked precisely to address these obstacles.



36
  Energy Anchor Database, data as of September 7, 2012; personal communication, Ashok Sarkar, 5 Oct 2012.
37
  This section “Energy Efficiency Community of Practice Progress Report for Fiscal Year 2012,” SEGEN, World Bank, June 2012,
and “Delivery Mechanisms for Energy Efficiency in Bank Operations” presentation by Jas Singh, Energy & Extractive Industries
Learning Days, March 8, 2013.



                                                          34
                             Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


        Figure 7. World Bank energy efficiency investments by region, 2007 – 2012




        Source: Jas Singh, ECA Energy Unit, WB (2013)




Table 6. Main barriers to investments in energy efficiency

Policy / Regulatory        Equipment/ Service              End Users                  Financiers
                                Providers

- Energy pricing and       - High project           - Lack of awareness,        - New technologies
  collection                 development costs        high discount rates         and contractual
- Procurement policies - Limited demand for         - High upfront and            mechanisms
  favor lower cost           EE goods/services        project development       - Small sizes/widely
- Import duties on EE      - Diffuse/diverse          costs                       dispersed high
  equipment                  markets                - Ability/willingness to      transaction costs
- Unclear or               - New contractual          pay incremental costs     - High perceived risks –
  underdeveloped EE          mechanisms (ESCOs)     - Low EE benefits             not traditional asset-
  institutional            - Limited technical,       relative to other costs     based financing
  framework                  business, risk mgmt.   - Perceived risks of new    - Other higher return,
- Lack of appliance          skills                   technologies/ systems       lower risk projects
  standards and            - Limited financing/     - Concept of EE is          - Over-collateralization
  building EE codes,         equity                   “virtual” – cannot see    - Behavioral biases
  lack of testing, poor                             - Mixed incentives
  enforcement                                       - Behavioral biases
- Limited and poor data                             - Lack of credible data
Source: Jas Singh, ECA Energy Unit, WB (2013)



102. Energy efficiency projects can generate interesting and multiple benefits but it must be
acknowledged that they are work intensive at the design and implementation stages, given the



                                                    35
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


barriers noted above. Their lending volumes are, in general, much lower than renewable energy
projects, and they offer less visibility than projects in the renewable energy sector. The Bank
therefore works with client countries to build the capacity necessary to ensure that energy
efficiency projects are not systematically down-graded when compared to large infrastructure
projects (i.e., in the case of the energy, transport, and water sectors), and/or to sector-specific
strategies and guidelines failing to account for efficiency as a viable path to achieve
development objectives (i.e., in the case of the agriculture, sanitation, and urban sectors).

103. In addressing energy efficiency, the Bank uses a number of delivery models that target
the industrial, commercial, public, or residential sectors, including development policy lending
(DPLs), utility demand side management (DSM) programs, ESCOs, commercial energy efficiency
financing, public EE financing, actions to stimulate market transformation, incentives subsidies
and grants, and capacity building, awareness-raising, and education (see Table 7). The
experience38 with these various mechanisms is described below, including pointers to existing
or potential linkages and synergies with Montreal Protocol issues.


Table 7. Delivery models for energy efficiency financing that have been used in World Bank
projects

      Model / Sector                 Industrial            Commercial                  Public             Residential
DPLs                                                                                                         
Utility DSM                                                                                                  
ESCOs                                                                                  
Commercial EE financing                                                                                      
Public EE financing                                                                      
Market transformation                                                                                           
Incentives, subsidies, grants
                                                                                                               
Capacity building,
awareness raising,                                                                                           
education
Source: Jas Singh, ECA Energy Unit, WB (2013)



104. Climate/energy DPLs with energy efficiency policy conditions. The demand from
governments for DPL support has grown in recent years and several of these have targeted
energy efficiency directly through: support to development of EE laws/acts, secondary
legislation/decrees, national climate change/EE strategies, and EE Action Plans; changes in tariff
structures to incentivize EE; upgrading or adoption of regulations to support white


38
  From “Delivery Mechanisms for Energy Efficiency in Bank Operations,” presentation by Jas Singh, Energy & Extractive
Industries Learning Days, World Bank, March 8, 2013.



                                                           36
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


certificates,39 smart metering, codes and standards, and auditor/energy manager certifications;
initiation/funding of appropriate EE programs; and enactment of favorable tolls, taxes, and
incentives. Key success factors identified for this delivery model include proper regulatory and
financial incentives; adequate and dedicated funding sources; utility management
commitment; strong program planning, implementation, and evaluation functions; and strong
customer outreach.

105. Utility demand side management (DSM). On the demand side, the Bank has worked
directly with electric utilities on their DSM approaches, addressing lighting or EE appliances, as
in the case of the Mexico ELAP. There are many advantages for utilities to pursue DSM, but also
mixed incentives which require careful alignment. Recent examples include a number of utility-
run CFL programs, as well as “post DSM” models such as DSM bidding, standard offer, EE power
plant, and white certificates.

106. Energy service companies (ESCOs). ESCOs represent an approach that was developed in
the industrialized world and adapted, with some success, to developing country circumstances.
ESCO configurations vary widely, including bundling projects, mobilizing financing, offering
turn-key services, and assuming performance risks. ESCOs are complex mechanisms that
require strong legal, financial, accounting, and business infrastructure; experience has shown
that often the ESCO structure must be vastly simplified to be launched in Bank client countries.
In these situations, “public” ESCOs are utilized to develop the market, which itself necessitates
the development of a sustainable exit strategy for transition to a fully market-based structure.

107. Key success factors that have been identified include supportive policies and enabling
environment; the introduction of simpler business models; appropriate financing schemes;
early market development through public sector projects; and development of PPP models (e.g.
public ESCO, super ESCO, ESCO agents, ESCO financing windows) to build capacity and develop
the business model to kick-start the market.

108. Energy efficiency financing through financial intermediaries. A number of these delivery
models have involved investments through “financial intermediaries” that then on-lend to
others. Financial intermediaries can be commercial banks, ESCOs, or dedicated investment
funds, and a variety of tools can be involved including, credit lines, revolving funds, special
purpose funds, credit guarantees, special purpose vehicles, or equity funds. This type of
intervention is commonly used to support energy efficiency with building owners, small
industries, etc. It is therefore highly likely that such projects offer synergies related to the
phase-out of HCFCs or HFCs, yet at the initial stage their design does not offer sufficient
portfolio composition breakdown, or detailed activity lists. To maximize ozone-climate co-
benefits using this modality, specific, up-front criteria would need to be integrated into
investment support documents.


39
  An instrument awarded by an authorizing body to guarantee that a specific amount of energy savings has been achieved;
usually tradable.



                                                         37
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


109. One of the on-going challenges of this work is to bring commercial banks into the
market. Key success factors have included: conducting a holistic upfront market assessment;
careful design of financing schemes and products; careful selection of financing partners with
relevant prior experience and interest; intensive marketing to ensure a strong project pipeline;
and flexible schemes that can evolve with markets. Special incentives potentially supported
with concessional finance may be necessary to steer end-user refrigerant choice, where the
lowest ODP/GWP option might incur additional costs not balanced by additional energy
efficiency savings.

110. Direct public energy efficiency financing. This modality is typically used by public/
municipal clients whose investments have a strong social dimension (e.g., schools, hospitals),
and where commercial financing is not a viable option due to factors such as reliance on a
central budget for maintenance and operations. In some cases, some repayment and/or co-
financing obligations have resulted. In the interest of sustainability and scalability, this modality
can only be applied where funds are available on an ongoing basis. There are a number of
examples of successful operations using this modality in Central and Eastern Europe.

111. Key success factors have included strong political commitment, transparent building
selection criteria, realistic project performance indicators, use of bundled procurements to
reduce administrative costs, strong technical baseline data, and competent
contractors/suppliers. Introducing concomitant pricing reforms has also helped ensure
sustainability of savings and proper operations and maintenance.

112. “Market transformation,” referring to targeting the products rather than the end users.
Many tools have been used, including utility DSM, standards & labeling, market aggregation,
public procurement, marketing, technology transfer, financing, rebates, and manufacturer
negotiations. Challenges include overcoming higher costs and changing purchasing behaviors,
while in some projects, still under preparation, the Bank and its clients are also developing
approaches to provide incentives directly to manufacturers.

113. Key success factors that have been identified include strong upfront market research,
effective public campaigns, incentive schemes that have preceded introduction of mandatory
requirements, careful selection of financing partners, judicious use of subsidies, effective and
efficient enforcement, and use of economies of scale to help incentivize suppliers and bring
down costs.

114. Incentives, subsidies and grants. The use of public funds has been justified to
demonstrate new technologies or models, overcome initial high costs, lower perceived risks,
and jumpstart nascent markets. These can be used where credit barriers are too high or banks
are unwilling to lend, and to help address low priority of energy efficiency among consumers.
Care has to be taken to design initiatives such that subsidies can be used alongside market-
based approaches without undermining them. Key success factors include effective
administration, targeted use, sunset provisions, and intensive dissemination.



                                               38
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



115. Most recently, “green” procurement has been used to support energy efficiency at the
municipal level, in schools and hospitals. In this case, an incentive is provided to encourage
purchase decisions based not only on least cost considerations, but also on life cycle benefit
considerations. Where alternatives are readily available, this can be a powerful instrument (see
below).


6.2.   Identification of Opportunities for Linkages with the Montreal Protocol
       Agenda and Points of Entry in the World Bank Program

Background

116. The World Bank’s portfolio of projects in various sectors, including but not limited to
energy efficiency, has the potential to strongly overlap with the MP agenda through the
procurement of appliances, equipment, and/or insulation materials, as well as through
elaboration of policy and regulatory frameworks affecting the choice of chemicals used.
Overlap between these kinds of projects and the MP agenda can be made more explicit in order
to maximize synergies and the MP related impact of Bank activities overall. Such opportunities
for linkages are not however readily apparent from basic project documentation used in Bank
operations. Table 8 lists the World Bank sectors/activities with potential MP linkages.

117. A portfolio review has highlighted areas of opportunities for linkages and identified
points of entry in the portfolio where communication of recommended practices regarding the
choice of more desirable low-GWP and zero-ODP technologies could be targeted. This
preliminary review, which has not been fine-tuned, nevertheless comprises all World Bank
projects approved in fiscal years 2011 and 2012, including IBRD/IDA, GEF, and CIF projects, and
serves as a first step to uncover the common patterns and trends in the Bank’s regular
programming where HCFC/HFC-related issues may be pinpointed.

Methodology

118. Within these two fiscal years, 447 projects were World Bank Board approved in FY11
and 327 projects in FY12, with an overall commitment of more than $80 billion from IBRD/IDA
funding and trust funds. The review involved screening of project concept notes and project
appraisal documents (PADs), based on the development of a typology to identify sectors and
key activities that could impact the consumption/emission of HCFCs or HFCs. The broad
approach followed cannot attribute funding specifically to directly relevant MP issues, but
rather attributes funding for the full component if there is an overlap between that component
and MP issues.

119. The 774 projects were rated based on the strength of their relational links to the HCFC
agenda. A list of keywords was used to search project documents for overlap, excluding the



                                             39
                            Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Montreal Protocol projects, and each project was then classified according to one of four
categories: full, strong, potential, or nil. Of the 774 projects, 16 projects qualified as ‘full’ based
on the following selection of relational keywords: cold chain/ equipment/ room/ storage/ box,
cooling, freezer, refrigerator/ refrigeration, HVAC, AC, MAC (mobile air conditioning system), air
con(ditioner).

120. The limited number of projects with ‘full’ explicit overlap does not signify that there are
no additional relevant projects. Many activities have strong potential relevance to the MP
agenda, particularly given that Ref/AC systems are used virtually everywhere, and span many
sectors. A further 62 projects were identified as having ‘strong’ overlap when the project
documentation described activities strongly suggesting links with the HCFC agenda, in the
following sectors: i) agriculture: food storage, milk and meat preservation, packaging,
distribution; ii) aquaculture; iii) development policy lending: energy efficiency, renewable
energy, green growth, infrastructure, housing, low carbon, urban transport; iv) energy
efficiency; v) health: medical supplies, distribution, vaccines, health care facilities; vi) transport:
green freight/truck, train; and vii) urban: green building (space heating and cooling). Together,
projects with ‘full’ and ‘strong’ relational overlap, where targeted interventions could support
MP objectives, represent 8.7% of the total FY11/FY12 portfolio of projects and have a
cumulative committed value of $7 billion for these 2 years.

121. Furthermore, additional projects can be characterized as having ‘potential’ overlap,
where the overlap could not be readily inferred from project documentation but where the
type of activities/sectors might in principle involve relevant aspects related to Ref/AC.
Identifying which among these projects really overlap with the HCFC agenda would require a
much more detailed analysis, including interview with the project teams. An additional 53
‘potential’ projects, worth another $7 billion in World Bank commit ments have been identified
associated in sectors and activities covering: i) agriculture: productivity/technologies, food
safety; ii) aquaculture: alliance for responsible fisheries, capacity building; iii) development
policy lending: health and education sectors, health reform; education: school construction,
basic education services, early child education; iv) emergency recovery: housing construction,
health, education, transport; v) health: maternal and child health services, capacity building,
nutrition/ school meals, health care system; vi) rural: basic infrastructure, transitional housing,
vulnerability reduction, food security/ nutrition; vii) transport: transport efficiency, smart/
intelligent transport management system, construction of railways, public transport; and, viii)
urban: municipal development, historical building/cultural heritage, informal settlement,
infrastructure investment, low income housing development.

Potential Points of Entry

122. Analysis of the 181 projects classified as having full, strong or potential overlap with the
MP agenda shows that consideration of the ‘potential’ category did not appear to drastically
alter the data trends that emerge, and therefore only those projects with ‘full’ and ‘strong’
overlap were identified as the first tier of projects/sectors that would be analyzed in greater
detail.


                                                40
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Table 8. Examples of sectors and World Bank interventions potentially relevant to the Montreal
Protocol agenda

SECTORS        MP- RELEVANT WORLD BANK INTERVENTIONS                MAIN MP SECTORS
Agriculture food banks/ storage and preservation                    Residential/commercial and
            packaging and distribution                              industrial air conditioning
            livestock, meat, milk
            productivity and technology                             Commercial refrigeration
            climate smart agriculture
Aquaculture handling practices, hygiene                             Industrial refrigeration
            capacity building, alliance for responsible fisheries
Development energy efficiency and renewable energy                  Car/truck/train (mobile) AC
policy      green/ low carbon growth
lending     infrastructure and housing                              Foam manufacturing (blowing
            urban transport                                         agent)
Education   construction of schools, classrooms and
            kindergarten                                            Solvent use
Energy      lighting and appliances
Efficiency  financing, investment, scaling up                       Firefighting (fire extinguishers)
            regulation
Emergency   construction of housing and roads
recovery    health and education services
Health      medical supplies and vaccines incl. distribution
            construction of health centers, health care
            facilities, hospitals, ambulatories and laboratories
Rural       basic infrastructure
            transitional housing
Transport   green freight, truck and train
            public transport
            smart/ intelligent transport management system
            transport efficiency
Urban       green building
            municipal development
            informal settlement, low income housing
            development
            infrastructure investment




123.    Regional trends and opportunities. The distribution of the number of projects (Figure 8)
reflects the high volume of activities in the Africa region, of which the majority are in the health
sector. In East Asia and the Latin American regions, EE and transport projects compose a larger
share. Overall, the regional distribution pattern is consistent from one year to the next. From a
dollar commitment by region perspective (Figure 9), the trend is skewed by a few large DPL
operations in the Europe and Central Asia and the Latin America and Caribbean regions.



                                               41
                                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Figure 8. Number of projects with full or strong overlap Figure 9. $ commitment for projects with full
with the MP agenda, by region                            or strong overlap with the MP agenda, US $
                                                         million, by region
                                 project number by region                                                                  IBRD/ IDA commitment by region
                                      FY 11 and FY 12                                                                              FY 11 and FY 12
                                        full + strong                                                                                full + strong
18                                                                                          1,800

16                                                                                          1,600
                                                                        Urban                                                                                          Urban
14                                                                                          1,400
                                                                        Transport                                                                                      Transport
12                                                                      Health              1,200                                                                      Health
10                                                                      Energy efficiency   1,000                                                                      Energy efficiency

 8                                                                      Education/ health    800                                                                       Education/ health
                                                                        Education                                                                                      Education
 6                                                                                           600
                                                                        DPL                                                                                            DPL
 4                                                                      Aquaculture          400                                                                       Aquaculture
 2                                                                      Agriculture          200                                                                       Agriculture

 0                                                                                             0
     AFR       EAP     ECA      LCR       MNA      SAR      World                                   AFR       EAP    ECA      LCR      MNA       SAR        World



Source: this report                                                                         Source: this report

124. “Needs.” Figure 10 highlights remaining eligible consumption of HCFCs, by region,
following approval and implementation of the stage I HCFC Phase-out Management Plans in all
eligible developing countries. A few things stand out, China’s consumption notwithstanding.
When compared to the types and volumes of World Bank investments by sector and region,
with overlap to the MP agenda highlighted in Figures 10 and 11, in general it may be surmised
that the LAC region appears to be the one where the greatest opportunities exist that are
matched with the greatest “need” in terms of HCFC phase-out.

Figure 10. Eligible HCFC consumption                                Figure 11. Number of projects with full or strong overlap
remaining after HPMP phase I                                        with the MP agenda, by sector
implementation in eligible Article 5
countries (ODP tonnes)

               eligible remaining consumption                                               project number by sector
                         (ODP tonnes)
                      after stage I HPMP
                                                                                                 FY 11 and FY 12
                                                                                                   full + strong
                     SA 1,591         AFR 988
           MNA                                          EAP
           2,007                                     (without
                                                      China),                    Urban                                                                         AFR
                                                       1,773                 Transport
      LAC                                                                                                                                                      EAP
     2,864                                                                      Health
                                                                      Energy efficiency                                                                        ECA
                                                                     Education/ health                                                                         LCR
                                China,                                      Education
ECA 166                         15,420                                              DPL                                                                        MNA
                                                                          Aquaculture                                                                          SAR
                                                                           Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                               World
                                                                                              0           5         10     15       20        25

Source: this report                                                 Source: this report



                                                                       42
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


125. Sectoral trends and opportunities. Health sector projects make up the majority of the
“full” and “strong” overlap pool, which is not surprising given the use of cold storage
equipment in the medical supply and vaccine distribution chains (see Figure 11). Energy
efficiency and agriculture come second. Air conditioning and refrigeration equipment are major
consumers of energy, and therefore must be targeted for energy efficiency improvement. For
the agriculture and aquaculture sector, food preservation and distribution, where cold storage
and freezers are needed, are key concerns. Emergency recovery, transport, and education take
a greater importance when looking also at the “potential” projects.

Due Diligence - Green Public Purchasing (GPP)

126. One key tool that may be used in World Bank projects to promote energy efficient
equipment and/or technology that uses low GWP/low ODP is by “greening” procurement. A
recent internal guidance note40 from the World Bank’s Operations Procurement Unit outlines
how Bank operational procurement policies and practices can have significant environmental
and social impact through the goods and services that countries procure under Bank-financed
projects and through those the Bank itself procures. Procurement is considered
"environmentally responsible" when environmental aspects are incorporated into purchasing
choices, along with economic factors such as price, quality, and performance. The note clarifies
that Bank Clients have the option to incorporate environmental requirements in the technical
specifications of the goods and equipment procured under Bank Guidelines, and as part of bid
evaluation.

127. In particular, the guidelines state that, “for goods and equipment, other factors may be
taken into consideration including, among others, payment schedule, delivery time, operating
costs, efficiency and compatibility of the equipment, availability of service and spare parts, and
related training, safety and environmental benefits.” This makes it possible to refer to
“internationally accepted standards such as those issued by the International Standards
Organization with which the equipment or materials or workmanship shall comply. When such
international standards are unavailable or are inappropriate, national standards may be
specified.”

128. In addition, the Standard Bidding Document for Procurement of Goods (May 2004,
revised May 2010) provides the possibility for introducing environmental aspects into the
process of evaluation and comparison of bids through “projected operating and maintenance
cost” and “performance and productivity of the equipment.” The evaluation criteria in the
bidding documents would specify a component of the good’s operating and maintenance costs,
which represent the corresponding environmental concern, such as energy consumption,
emissions, or waste management and disposal cost at end of useful life. The bidding documents
would also specify a satisfactory method for calculating these costs over the operational life of
the good in question. This “life cycle cost” becomes part of the bid-evaluated costs, and is

40
  “Green public purchasing (GPP): An introduction and methods to include environmental aspects in technical specific ations
and bid evaluation criteria”, OPCPR, WB, June 2007, updated November 2011.



                                                           43
                           Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


defined as such in the Bid Data Sheet. For example, bidding documents could require bidders to
demonstrate the annual electricity consumption cost for a computer or office photocopier over
its useful life, using a standard formula that specifies units for calculation, the number of
operating hours per day and/or other relevant operational characteristics.

129. The note also provides that a price advantage could be given to bidders demonstrating
that environmental benefits are taken into consideration, as this could be clearly stated in the
technical specifications in a manner similar to the Bank’s current domestic preference
allowance.

130. While “green procurement” is presented as an option open to Bank clients, it is a tool
that is available for immediate use within the context of existing guidelines and procedures,
and it allows Bank clients to express preferences for goods or companies with desirable
environmental qualities. If GPP were to be more effectively used to address MP considerations,
clients and Bank task teams would require up-to-date technical guidance in order to effectively
conduct bid specification and evaluation processes.

131. The portfolio review for FY11 and FY12, although preliminary in nature, raises a number
of interesting trends and yields interesting opportunities for further analysis, as follows:

         Each year projects that could amount to up to $3.5 billion, equivalent to 8.7% of the
          Bank’s portfolio, appears to have overlap with the MP agenda.
         Taking into account regional distribution of potential and needs, good complementarity
          exists to explore MP-investment synergies across most regions, with the LAC region
          standing out as a region with particularly high potential.
         Taking into account sectoral distribution potential, priority sectors that could be
          targeted include EE, health, and agriculture.
         If consumption of ODS (HCFCs) can be seen as a proxy of needs, the EAP region, in
          particular, is one where efforts related to EE could be increased.



6.3       Potential Linkages with the International Finance Corporation (IFC)

132. IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution
focused exclusively on the private sector in developing countries. Through investment services,
IFC provides a broad suite of financial products and services —including loans, equity, trade
finance, structured finance, and syndications—designed to promote development in emerging
economies and help reduce poverty. Through advisory services, IFC offers advice, problem
solving, and training to companies, industries, and governments, all aimed at helping private
sector enterprises overcome obstacles to growth. Advisory services do not rely upon IFC capital
for funding but are supported by donor trust funds.




                                               44
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


133. IFC has helped develop and deploy tools for estimating project GHG emissions. The
Carbon Emissions Estimator Tool (CEET) builds upon a tool developed by the Agence Française
de Développement (AFD) and expanded to cover IFC investment sectors. The CEET provides
investment departments with a simple way to estimate actual project emissions based on
information commonly collected during project appraisal, as well as enabling the calculation of
changes in GHG emissions by comparing project emissions to a no-project or reference
scenario.

134. In FY13, IFC invested over $2.5 billion in climate related investments, or 14% of total
FY13 net commitments. A corporate goal is to commit $3 billion to climate-related investments
by FY15. Climate related investment volumes have been tracked since 2005 and, going forward,
IFC intends to also report on the impact of its climate-related investments in terms of GHG
emissions reduction. All new investment projects (excluding through financial intermediaries)
are required to report GHG emissions prior to project approval as an additional form of
business risk analysis.

135. Aligned with goals to scale up climate-related activities, IFC’s guiding principles and
typology for climate-related investment and advisory projects include various project types that
are directly related to Montreal Protocol sectors: 1) energy efficiency, including green buildings,
2) cleaner production, 3) retrofits or replacement of existing heating and cooling systems with
reduced global warming potential refrigerants, and 4) recrease in fugitive GHG emissions in
existing operations. There are however currently no projects explicitly addressing HCFCs. More
information on IFC climate-related investments are described in IFC Definitions and Metrics for
Climate-Related Activities.

136. IFC Advisory Services works with companies to adopt beneficial environmental, social,
and governance practices and technologies, as well as to seek broad adoption of these practices
to transform markets and scale up climate change solutions. This work represented 16% of total
client-advisory spending in FY2012, with the goal to increase this to 23% in FY15.

137. Financial intermediaries represent nearly half of IFC’s climate-related investments: IFC
has supported 125 financial partners through 135 sustainability and climate projects in 35
countries since 1997. Engaging financial intermediary partners to overcome investment barriers
and share IFC experience and standards also presents opportunities to engage a broader range
of stakeholders around Montreal Protocol related issues.

138. The building sector is one area which holds great potential for enhancing linkages of
relevance to the Montreal Protocol. Continued growth in the green building sector is expected
to scale up improvements in energy efficiency in residential and commercial cooling and
refrigeration. IFC's investments in new green buildings grew from $2 million in FY09 to over
$400 million in FY13, representing 16% of IFC's climate commitments. For example, IFC is
providing $10 million in financing to complete construction of an energy-efficient 50-bed
hospital in Mexico’s Monterrey City that will improve access to health services for low and
middle-income communities. IFC is also supporting the buildings sector in emerging markets


                                              45
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


through its EDGE Green Building Market Transformation Program. Buildings certified by EDGE
will have lower emissions than their peers and also require less energy, water, and building
materials. IFC is engaging with builders, developers and financial institutions to make these
buildings more accessible to households and commercial enterprises.41



7.         OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
139. This study highlights that, in principle, many sources of financing available to address
energy efficiency considerations in developing countries could potentially be used to finance
the additional climate benefits associated with HCFC phase out . The status of the global
carbon market in the short-term, however, limits the availability of funding sources that could
provide predictable resource mobilization options against which developing country Parties to
the MP could plan for compliance purposes. The report recognizes therefore that there are at
present no silver bullets in light of the current uncertainty surrounding climate negotiations and
climate finance: new ideas are being explored and promoted but have not yet been widely
tested and adopted. The report notes however that there are numerous efforts currently
underway to shape the future of climate finance, including efforts under the Partnership for
Market Readiness supported by the World Bank. There is, internationally, a strong recognition
that it is vital for climate change mitigation efforts to utilize market-based approaches including
carbon markets, and that this requires that there be a “right” price set for Carbon in order to
generate investments.

140. A number of opportunities for linkages exist between MP activities and the World
Bank’s portfolio. Every year, multi-billion dollar investments are sourced by the World Bank
towards energy efficiency. Although not all these investments overlap with Montreal Protocol
sectors, it is a safe assumption that a significant portion of these investments are in fact
relevant. The initial analysis conducted has shown that a variety of sectors, across several
regions, offer strong potential for synergy. It is recommended that in order to increase
mainstreaming of ozone layer depletion activities in World Bank programming, outreach efforts
should be targeted to Bank teams and clients in relevant sectors through the development and
dissemination of guidance notes and examples of good practices, including related to
sustainable “green” procurement. In this context, efforts could be focused in regions where
energy efficiency financing efforts are being pursued and where MP phase-out obligations
(from an ODP perspective) remain high. In particular the LAC region stands out as one with
strong potential for synergies, with significant remaining HCFC phase out needs and strong
Bank activities in related sectors. On the other hand, the EAP region appears one where there
would be potential for increased energy efficiency-related Bank activities to match the
significant size of the related sectors, as evidenced by the size of the remaining HCFC phase-out
needs. IFC, the private sector arm of the World Bank, is also supporting a range of climate-


41
     For more information, please visit http://www.ifc.org/greenbuildings.



                                                        46
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


smart investments and activities that support the MP agenda and there are many potential
opportunities for more direct linkages in this area.

141. Alignment of MLF funding with Bank lending may prove challenging however, even
when directly related to energy efficiency financing, given the different business models at
play. The MLF applies a systematic approach in its provision of support, in order to ensure that
all developing country Parties have access to the financing necessary to allow them to meet
their compliance obligations. A World Bank lending project, in contrast, develops organically,
from the ground up, with a focus on its emergence as a priority issue of national concern within
a fixed lending envelope. This raises issues of timing with respect to matching opportunities to
leverage relevant energy efficiency operations with the MLF funding and development timeline,
which is guided by global compliance targets. Furthermore, additional constraints may arise
from the fact that, often, different national line ministries or departments would be involved,
requiring good management of dialogue amongst government stakeholders. In view of the
significant opportunities for climate co-benefits financing, it is recommended that the Parties to
the Montreal Protocol promote strong inter-sectoral discussions within Government, and that
the Executive Committee take into consideration Agencies’ comparative advantage and
relevant energy efficiency financing country programs in the context of pipeline and funding
decision-making.

142. Innovative financing schemes nevertheless are being developed that could be adapted
to support energy efficiency benefits linked to HCFC transition. In some Bank supported
interventions, for example, teams are designing projects to work with industry to improve
equipment energy efficiency performance. Such an approach could be followed under
circumstances directly relevant to the Montreal Protocol; for example, for manufacturers of
fridges and room AC, the MLF could finance some of the conversion and Bank financing would
support the manufacturers in developing more efficient equipment. It is recommended that the
Bank’s Montreal Protocol team keep abreast of developments under these projects with a view
to sharing relevant lessons learned with the Parties to the Montreal Protocol and the Executive
Committee as appropriate.

143. The global carbon markets do not, at present, offer viable financing options. In the
near term, CDM related schemes will not be available to support energy efficiency or other
financing needs at the nexus of the ozone/climate agenda, due to, amongst other things, the
severe downturn in the CDM. Moreover, to date, the CDM has had limited success in
contributing to overcome investment barriers and channeling financing for GHG mitigation
interventions for less mature technologies or targeting large scale, long-term investments, and
in addressing sectors or countries with weak investment climates.42 This is due in part to the
CDM’s cumbersome procedures that resulted in a long and unpredictable project cycle (it takes
an average of four years for a project to reach the issuance of certified carbon credits). In
addition, regulatory risks limit the CDM’s capacity to facilitate access to advance payments
42
  It is important to understand that carbon finance was not designed to address investment barriers in underlying projects as
most carbon purchasing contracts (e.g., emission reductions purchase agreements – ERPAs) consider payments for credits upon
delivery.



                                                          47
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


critical for projects, in particular in least developing countries (LDCs). Reducing such risks is
indispensable in order to direct climate finance and result-based developmental finance into
CDM projects, as well as attract private sector investment. The issues of efficiency and outreach
under the CDM are at the center of the on-going CDM reform and figure in recommendations
formulated by the High-level Panel on the CDM Policy Dialogue that took place in 2012. The
World Bank is actively contributing to the dialogue on ways to make the CDM more efficient,
flexible, and better adapted to the needs of different countries to contribute to net global
emission reductions and sustainable development, and is also engaged in discussions and
support to the development of new generation carbon market instruments - both nationally
and internationally.

144. One of the premises for this report is that in any event carbon revenues are usually
only paid once a project is fully commissioned, while project developers invariably need
finance to reach financial closure. To overcome these problems, approaches to develop
financial products to frontload future carbon credits continue to be explored. Instruments such
as green bonds, designed to deliver financing to developing countries through the sale of bonds
that return both interest and carbon credits, have been under discussion to leverage and scale
up investment, provided that the price of carbon is sufficiently high. Insurance and guarantee
products can underwrite risks and enable the development of existing and new low-carbon
technologies that may, on their own, not be commercially attractive. It is recommended that
these approaches be kept under review so that they can be applied to Montreal Protocol-
related activities when the second generation of carbon markets is up and going.

145. The severe downturn in the CDM market and the widespread ban on carbon credits
from HFC-23 projects present another challenge since, for the foreseeable future, HCFC
production for feedstock results in HFC-23 being released to the atmosphere if it is not
captured and destroyed. It may require that governments address the issue through
regulation, with technical assistance provided as appropriate. It is recommended that, if
incorporated in a domestic trading scheme, the allocation of such credits would have to be
carefully prescribed and limited to avoid domestic markets being flooded with cheap credits, as
happened with the CDM.


146. However, the outlook with respect to development of domestic carbon markets in a
number of developing countries remains promising. A number of pilots underway or planned
by countries participating in the Partnership for Market Readiness are being launched with the
support of the Bank. A case in point is the development of several regional cap-and-trade
schemes in China. The Partnership for Market Readiness is working to build readiness for
market-based instruments and may support piloting schemes in selected countries in the
future. It is possible that these will evolve into new markets which may eventually be able to
support financing of activities to which HCFC phase-out projects could link. Within a 3-5 year
timeframe, it is envisaged that these markets may be able to support financing. At that stage,
financial engineering tools and approaches that were conceptualized and developed to
facilitate the upfront financing of investments under the CDM should be applicable. It is



                                             48
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


recommended that the Executive Committee and the Parties to the Montreal Protocol be kept
abreast of these developments, and that countries engaged with the PMR explore Montreal
Protocol-related activities as part of their readiness efforts.

147. Following the request of the Executive Committee, the report considers reflows back to
the MLF and concludes that these are theoretically possible, provided robust domestic carbon
markets exist with high enough carbon prices to justify the additional effort. It is recommended
that should such approach be followed, very careful consideration should be taken to not
unduly increase transaction costs and create new barriers to investments which would
inevitably reduce attractiveness to private sector investments.

148. The on-going phase-out of HCFCs will create stocks of used HCFCs (so-called “banks”). It
is recommended that Parties to the Montreal Protocol and members of the Executive
Committee work with the Implementing Agencies and the international community to ensure
that these banks do not accumulate and add to the existing CFC banks. Proactive approaches
could include support to manufacturers and others to develop buy-back schemes that address
the final disposal of the ODS.

149. In conclusion, the strong commitment by World Bank senior management to put climate
change at the core of the Bank’s fight for poverty eradication and shared prosperity offers a
framework for enhanced engagement throughout the World Bank upon which to build linkages
among Montreal Protocol activities, energy efficiency, and climate mitigation.




                                             49
                              Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                                                 REFERENCES
Barbara Buchner, Jessica Brown and Jan Corfee-Morlot (2011), Monitoring and Tracking Long-Term Finance to
Support Climate Action, OECD/ IEA Project for the Climate Change Expert Group on the UNFCCC
(http://www.oecd.org/env/cc/48073739.pdf)

Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2012), reference to investments in 2010 and 2011 (http://about.bnef.com/)

California Energy Commission (2012), Appliance Efficiency Regulations
(http://www.energy.ca.gov/2012publications/CEC-400-2012-019/CEC-400-2012-019-CMF.pdf)

China Clean Development Mechanism Fund, (www.cdmfund.org)

Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) methodologies, (http://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/index.html)

Climate Action Reserve (2012), CAR Article 5 ODS Project Protocol Version 2.0
(http://www.climateactionreserve.org/how/protocols/ozone-depleting-substances/)
Climate Policy Initiative (2012), Global Landscape of Climate Finance
(http://climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/global-landscape-of-climate-finance-2012/)

DNV KEMA (2013), Market Readiness Proposal for Mexico: Domestic Refrigerators NAMA, Prepared for the
Government of Mexico and the World Bank
(http://www.thepmr.org/system/files/documents/Mexico_MRP_Final_Refg_19-02-2013.pdf)

Feng Liu, Anke S. Meyer, and John F. Hogan (2010), Mainstreaming Building Energy Efficiency Codes in Developing
Countries: Global Experiences and Lessons from Early Adopters, World Bank Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program (ESMAP), (http://www.esmap.org/node/755)

ICF International (2010), Study on Financing the Destruction of Unwanted Ozone-Depleting Substances through the
Voluntary Carbon Market, Prepared for the World Bank
(http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/ENVIRONMENT/EXTTMP/0,,contentMDK:22587937~menu
PK:1247163~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:408230~isCURL:Y,00.html)

International Finance Corporation and Carbon Finance
(http://www1.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/CB_Home/Mobilizing+
Climate+Finance/CarbonFinance/)

IPCC AR4, Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis, Chapter 2: Changes in Atmospheric
Constituents and Radiative Forcing, Table 2.14 (http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch2s2-10-
2.html)

Langlois, Pierre and Shirley J. Hansen, PhD. (2012), World ESCO Outlook, 2012, Fairmont Press, 512 pp.

Methane Finance Study Group (2013), Using Pay-for-Performance Mechanisms to Finance Methane Abatement
http://www.climatefinanceoptions.org/cfo/node/3438

Molly Peters-Stanley and Katherine Hamilton (2012), Developing Dimension: State of the Voluntary Carbon
Markets 2012, Ecosystem Marketplace and Bloomberg New Energy Finance,
(http://www.forest-trends.org/publication_details.php?publicationID=3164)

Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR), (http://www.thepmr.org/)




                                                     50
                              Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Partnership for Market Readiness Secretariat (2013), Strategic orientation for the future of the Partnership for
Market Readiness
(http://www.thepmr.org/system/files/documents/PMR_Draft_Strategic%20Note_October2013.pdf)

Pew Charitable Trusts (2010), Who’s Wining the Clean Energy Race? G-20 Investment Powering Forward
(http://www.pewenvironment.org/uploadedFiles/PEG/Publications/Report/G-20Report-LOWRes-FINAL.pdf)

Secretariat of The Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer & The Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (2012), Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete
                    th
the Ozone Layer – 9 Edition, United Nations Environment Programme

(http://ozone.unep.org/Publications/MP_Handbook/MP-Handbook-2012.pdf)

Stephen A. Montzka, Lambert Kuijpers, Mark O. Battle, Murat Aydin, Kristal Verhulst, Eric S. Saltzman, and David W.
Fahey (2010), Recent increases in global HFC-23 emissions, Geophysical Research Letters

TEAP (2010), Refrigeration, Air Conditioning and Heat Pumps Technical Options Committee (RTOC) Reports, Ozone
Secretariat, UNEP, (http://ozone.unep.org/teap/Reports/RTOC/RTOC-Assessment-report-2010.pdf)

UNEP (2011), HFCs: A Critical Link in Protecting Climate and the Ozone Layer
(http://www.unep.org/publications/contents/pub_details_search.asp?ID=6224a)

UNEP Risoe Center (2013), CDM/JI Pipeline Analysis and Database, (http://cdmpipeline.org/)

Verified Carbon Standard, VM0016 Recovery and Destruction of Ozone-Depleting Substances (ODS) from Products,
v1.0, (http://v-c-s.org/methodologies/find)

WMO/ UNEP (2010), Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion
(http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/csd/assessments/ozone/2010/)

World Bank (2004, revised 2010), Standard Bidding Document Procurement of Goods
(http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/PROJECTS/PROCUREMENT/0,,contentMDK:21351162~menuPK:842
84~pagePK:84269~piPK:60001558~theSitePK:84266~isCURL:Y,00.html)

World Bank (2010), Beyond the Sum of Its Parts: Combining Financial Instruments to Support Low-Carbon
Development, Development and Climate Change
(http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2010/01/12536632/beyond-sum-parts-combining-financial-
instruments-support-low-carbon-development)

World Bank, IMF, OECD, and the Regional Development Banks (2011), Mobilizing Climate Finance – A Paper
prepared at the request of G20 Finance Ministers, (http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/110411c.pdf)

World Bank (2011), Blending Climate Finance for Energy Efficiency in Mexico, Mexico Efficient Lighting and
Appliances Project Fact Sheet

World Bank (2011), Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services Under IBRD Loans and
IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers,
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROCUREMENT/Resources/278019-
1308067833011/Procurement_GLs_English_Final_Jan2011.pdf)

World Bank (2012), Disposal of ODS Collected from Refrigerators and Air Conditioners under the Mexican Efficient
Lighting and Appliance Program, (http://www.multilateralfund.org/66/English/1/66%20Inf.2.pdf)




                                                      51
                           Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



World Bank (2012), Green Infrastructure Finance: Framework Report
(http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/04/16253049/green-infrastructure-finance-framework-report)

World Bank (2012), State and Trends of the Carbon Market,
(http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/ENVIRONMENT/EXTCARBONFINANCE/0,,contentMDK:232
06428~menuPK:5575595~pagePK:64168445~piPK:64168309~theSitePK:4125853~isCURL:Y,00.html)




                                                 52
                            Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits




                                  ANNEX I – Sector Background


1.      This Annex provides background material for the analyses presented in Section 2 on
Sector Background. The ODP and GWP of the main chemical substances relevant to this study
are provided in Table 1. Table 2 gives the assumptions behind the model and the details of the
calculations presented in Table 2 of the main text of the report.



Table 1. Range of lifetimes, ODPs, and GWPs (20-yr and 100-yr) of some relevant ODS and HFCs


           Substance             Lifetime       ODP                  GWP             GWP
                                 (years)                             (20-yr)         (100-yr)
           Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
            CFC-11               45             1                  6,730             4,750
            CFC-12               100            1                  11,000            10,900
           Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)
            HCFC-22              12             0.055              5,160             1,810
            HCFC-141b            9.3            0.11               2,250             725
            HCFC-142b            17.9           0.065              5,490             2,310
           Hydrofluorocarbons (saturated HFCs)
            HFC-23               270            -                  12,000            14,800
            HFC-32               4.9            -                  2,330             675
            HFC-125              29             -                  6,350             3,500
            HFC-134a             14             -                  3,830             1,430
            HFC-161              0.3            -                  43                12
            HFC-245fa            7.6            -                  3,380             1,030
           Hydrofluorocarbons (unsaturated HFCs)
            HFC-1234yf           10.5 days      -                                    4
            trans-HFC-1234ze     16.4 days      -                                    7

          Source: Handbook for the Montreal Protocol, UNEP (2012); IPCC AR4 (2007); WMO/ UNEP (2010)




                                                    53
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Table 2. Detailed back-of-the-envelope estimate of the energy efficiency and climate mitigation
related impacts of a program addressing 1 million43 energy efficient room air conditioners;
summarized in main text Table 3.

Personal savings from one room AC
    Assume average size room air conditioner: 1,500 W / 18,000 BTU
    Air conditioner cost: $700
    Assume new unit is 20% more energy efficient (300W)
    Use varies per region: assume 12 hours for 270 days for (sub)-tropical climate
    Energy savings: 300 W x 12 hours X 270 days = 972 kWh per annum
    Energy savings @$0.12 per kWh = 972 x 0,12 = $117 per annum. Over 10 years = $1,170
    Potential “Carbon value” per annum @ $5 per ton of carbon and grid emission factor of
       0,7 tCO2eq per MWh = 0.972 X 0.7 x $5 = $3,40 per air conditioner per annum
Impact on power generation
    Program saves 972,000 MWh of electricity per year
    Avoided cost of new power plant: 111 MW of installed power. Capital cost in order of
       $95- $216 million depending on source of power
    Saving per air conditioner is in order of $9.5- $21.6 (excluding operating costs)
Program carbon finance income
    Annual income from sale of emission reductions for 1 million air conditioners = $3.4
       million
    Carbon finance income over 10 years is $34 million
    Carbon finance program costs:
           o One-off costs: Carbon finance program preparation: $200,000 - $400,000
           o Program validation: $15,000 - $50,000
           o Program registration: $50,000
           o Annual monitoring: $20,000 - $60,000
           o Annual verification: $15,000 - $30,000
           o Annual issuance fees: $50,000
       Program cost over 10 years: $265,000 - $500,000 + 10 X ($85,000 - $140,000) = $1.15
       million - 1.9 million
    Net income from carbon finance: $32.1 - $32.75 million
Possible (theoretical) impact from refrigerant
    Average size window air conditioner might contain 0.7 kg of refrigerant
    HCFC-22 GWP of 1,810; substituted with a gas with 0 GWP
    would result in reduction of 126,700 tCO2eq if assuming 10% leakage rate, or
    @ $5 per ton, a revenue of $633,500 per annum; representing only $0.6 per unit
    In contrast the savings from displacement of HCFCs even if it were eligible for earning
       carbon credits (it is not), is much smaller.
Source: this report


43
  553 million units of HCFC-22 air conditioners were estimated to be operating worldwide in 2008; in the order of 50 million
new units might therefore reach the market yearly (TEAP, RTOC, 2010).



                                                           54
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                        ANNEX II – Climate Finance Instruments

2.      This Annex expands on Section 3.1, Overview of Climate Finance Instruments. A number
of policy and fiscal instruments are available that could be used to target various sets of
stakeholders at different stages of the product development cycle, which may be summarized
as follows:
     Financing the enabling, regulatory and fiscal/tax environment. Financing of energy
        efficiency (EE) and ODS standards and labels are usually undertaken by governments in
        MICs and in the case of LDCs, through concessional sources of finance and technical
        support from MDBs and bilateral and donor agencies. Financing needs are relatively low
        but the correct design of the enabling environment is critical for program success. A
        range of existing instruments to more innovative instruments can be used. Criteria for
        selecting the correct instruments include: effectiveness in changing behavior, cost
        effectiveness of administration, economic efficiency, financial sustainability and
        predictability of results. For instance, taxes are often a highly effective and predictable
        instrument for changing behavior. In contrast, carbon finance as a means of financing
        new products and services in order to change behavior carries a high administrative
        burden, provides low financial rewards and is highly unpredictable in terms of delivering
        financial rewards.
     The most obvious and relatively easier fiscal instruments that may be used to incentivize
        a change in retailer and consumer behavior include:
            o Reducing or eliminating import duties and or sales taxes on energy efficiency and
                low ODS appliances;
            o Providing tax rebates to suppliers who reconfigure manufacturing lines to
                support EE and low ODS appliances. Given that new business investments are
                usually tax deductible, this is not a new instrument as such unless further tax
                deductible benefits are created;
            o Providing rebates to consumers who submit receipts demonstrating that they
                have replaced old energy inefficient and high ODS appliances with new EE and
                low ODS appliances. Though such programs exist in many developed countries
                they need to be expanded to cover low ODS equipment in developing countries
                together with the development of ODS bank facilities;
            o Investment level support to manufacturers of equipment and ESCOs may take
                the form of grants, or soft loans to manufacturers to ramp up production and
                sales of more EE appliances until such time as they become the new market
                norm/baseline technology. Regulation may simultaneously be tightened to
                support higher standards in order to support the phase-in;
            o ESCOs play an important role in many countries in providing new EE appliances
                to consumers who in turn, recover the costs of the investment in the appliances
                through savings on energy bills. Utilities, equipment suppliers, municipalities or
                private agents may provide such a service to consumers. ESCOs often require
                upfront soft finance from government or a utility in order to make the upfront
                purchase of appliances on behalf of the consumer. That is, the ESCO effectively



                                              55
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


             leases the appliance or extends credit to the consumer until it is paid off from
             energy savings on the electricity bill. Various donor and MDB programs have also
             supported such initiatives;
           o National revolving energy efficiency funds may be established to support the
             above activities. Such funds may be established through government budget,
             MDB loans or through green bonds;
           o Green bonds may be structured in the same way as regular government or bank
             bonds but provide the principal amount to the financing of energy efficiency
             activities. Prior to the decline in carbon markets, green bonds were being
             developed which would allow the bond holder to opt for receipt of a fixed
             coupon (interest) or to be paid in certified emission reductions (CERs) or income
             derived from the sale of CERs. While green bonds are likely to continue to be
             used, it will be difficult to pay the coupon in emission reductions or from the
             income derived from the sale of emission reductions until carbon prices stabilize.

3.    Specific instruments are varied and include the following list, by no means
comprehensive:

4.     Capital formation through investors. The most important source of finance remains
banks and private/corporate investors responding to the perceived investment opportunities
offered by the market in the expanding range of energy efficient appliances driven by
technology improvements, consumer demand, the increasing costs of energy and increasing
energy efficiency standards imposed by governments.

5.      MDB and donor related programs to support developing countries. A large number of
loan facilities are managed by MDBs and donors to support developing countries to eradicate
poverty and to achieve their development targets. Though energy access is more commonly
stated as a development goal in donor/development partner country program documents than
EE, the latter is gaining increasing importance as a financing/development priority. This is due
to the fact that countries recognize that EE programs can deliver results more quickly and at
lower cost than building new power plants. The main financing instruments include market
related interest rate loans associated with technical assistance, low interest rate loans, and
grants. Various guarantee instruments are also provided.

6.      The Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA) is an initiative of the European Union (EU).
Its overall objective is to build a new alliance on climate change between the EU and developing
countries that a) are most affected and, b) have the least capacity to deal with climate change.
The GCCA does not intend to set up a new fund or governance structure, but will work through
the European Commission’s established channels for political dialogue and cooperation at both
the national and international levels.

7.      The Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund (GEEREF) is a Public-Private
Partnership designed to maximize the private finance leveraged through public funding made
available by the European Commission and managed by the European Investment Bank.


                                             56
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


GEEREF is structured as a fund of funds and invests in private equity sub-funds that specialize in
financing small and medium-sized project developers and enterprises (SMEs) to implement EE
and renewable energy projects in developing countries and economies in transition.

8.      The Climate Investment Funds (CIF) are a $7.6 billion partnership to scale up both
financing and knowledge for climate solutions in 49 countries. The CIFs are demonstrating
scaled-up support to transformative adaptation and mitigation planning, leveraging investment
finance and deployment of technologies. Current demand for CIF assistance outweighs
available resources indicating a need for additional financing to cover the gap before the Green
Climate Fund (GCF) is fully operational. CIF contributors agreed that "the CIF should play its
part in ensuring the continuity of climate finance provided to recipient countries while the
GCF's structures are put in place." Of the four CIF windows, two are focusing on sustainable
energy, the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) and the Program for Scaling-up Renewable Energy in
low-income countries (SREP).

9.      With $5.2 billion in pledges, the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) provides middle-income
countries with resources to trigger investments for scaling up demonstration, deployment and
transfer of low-carbon technologies. Investment Plans for 15 pilot countries and one region
have been endorsed, as well as $2.3 billion in funding for 41 projects under 14 investment
plans. The amount is expected to leverage $18.8 billion in co-financing from governments,
MDBs, and other sources, with nearly one third funded by the private sector. Virtually all of the
CTF’s Investment Plans have a component to finance EE improvement (mostly through financial
intermediaries, coupling credit lines/risk facilities and capacity building). While not all may
target sectors linked to ODS, these investment plans offer opportunities. The World Bank is the
Trustee of the CTF, as well as an implementing agency together with the regional development
banks (Asian Development Bank, African Development bank, Inter-American Development Bank
and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development).

10.     The Global Environment Facility (GEF). The GEF is the financial mechanism for a number
of Multilateral Environmental Agreements, including the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and also supports the Montreal Protocol in countries with
economies in transition. As of 2011, the GEF EE window had allocated $80 million to ESCOs and
$61 million to appliances projects44. It finances the incremental costs of project activities, i.e.
those activities which are only being undertaken to broadly meet the objectives of the
Convention/ to create global benefits. The GEF, in principle, should be well suited to support
the funding of climate co-benefits associated with the Montreal Protocol, but in practice this
has not always been the case, in part due to the constraints that arise from the GEF’s resource
allocation system.

11.     The Indonesia Climate Change Trust Fund (ICCTF) is a national funding entity which aims
to develop innovative ways to link international finance sources with national investment
strategies. Created by the Government of Indonesia, it acts as a catalyst to attract investment

44
     http://www.thegef.org/gef/whatisgef



                                                     57
                                Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


and to implement a range of alternative financing mechanisms for climate change mitigation
and adaptation programs. The ICCTF receives non-refundable contributions from bilateral and
multilateral donors. The main funding mechanism of the ICCTF is the “Innovation Fund” which
provides grants to line ministries to support climate change related projects.

12.    The UK International Climate Fund (ICF) is the primary channel of UK climate change
finance. It became operational in 2011 emanating from the Spending Review 2010 and
replacing the Environmental Transformation Fund. The ICF is designed to help developing
countries adapt to climate change, embark on low carbon growth and tackle deforestation.

13.    The German International Climate Initiative (ICI) finances climate projects in developing
and newly industrialized countries, as well as in countries with economies in transition. The ICI
focuses on promoting a climate-friendly economy, measures for climate change adaptation and
for the preservation or sustainable use of carbon reservoirs/reducing emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation (REDD).

14.      The Japan Fast-Start Financing. In December 2009, Japan announced the Hatoyama
Initiative (now commonly referred to as the Fast-Start Financing), which pledged $15 billion in
public and private financial assistance to help developing countries address climate change.
Consisting of $11 billion in public finance and $4 billion in private finance, this Fast-Start
Financing replaced the government's previous financing mechanism known as the “Co ol Earth
Partnership” (2008 - 2010).

15.      The Green Climate Fund (GCF). The decision to establish the Green Climate Fund was
taken by the Conference of the Parties to UNFCCC in December 2010. The GCF is intended to
provide funds to developing countries to finance climate change adaptation and mitigation
activities, including for energy efficiency45. The Green Climate Fund was designated as an
operating entity of the financial mechanism of the UNFCCC. As per the UNFCCC, the Fund is to
operate in a transparent and accountable manner guided by efficiency and effectiveness. The
Fund is to play a key role in channeling new, additional, adequate and predictable financial
resources to developing countries and is to catalyze climate finance, both public and private,
and at the international and national levels. The Fund will pursue a country-driven approach
and promote and strengthen engagement at the country level through effective involvement of
relevant institutions and stakeholders. The Fund which is to be scalable and flexible is to seek a
balance between adaptation and mitigation, while promoting environmental, social, economic
and development co-benefits and taking a gender-sensitive approach. The target of GCF is to
raise Climate Finance to US$100 billion for low carbon investment by 2020.



45
  http://gcfund.net/about-the-fund/mandate-and-governance.html. At this point it is unclear what level of funding will
materialize given the current global economic climate. No commitment of funds to the GCF has been fixed. The Copenhagen
Accord contains a pledge from developed countries of 100 billion by 2020, which can come from "a wide variety of sources,
public and private, bilateral and multilateral, including alternative sources of finance."




                                                          58
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


16.     De-risking instruments. De-risking instruments may be useful where loan guarantees or
Letters of Credit are required by banks to lend to firms seeking to expand production of new
appliances; that is, for firms that are less credit worthy and do not have strong balance sheets
or assets and are therefore, less able to access bank credit, or only at significantly higher
interest rates. Facilities which partially cover the default by the borrower help to reduce the
risks which lenders face in lending to firms.

17.    Carbon Finance. The carbon offset market exists through regulation or voluntary action.
Signatory countries to the Kyoto Protocol have agreed to reduce their GHG emissions. They
pass this obligation onto firms in the form of legally binding GHG emission caps or targets that
are measured in tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2-eq). Firms in turn, are required to
reduce their emissions accordingly to meet their targets or caps. The voluntary carbon market,
in contrast, caters to the needs of entities that voluntarily decide to reduce their carbon
footprint as part of a corporate social responsibility framework. In addition, some voluntary
carbon market schemes cater to consumers who are attracted to buy carbon neutral products
or services. The anticipation of legislation on GHG emissions also motivates some pre-
compliance activity. Carbon offset markets did catalyze investment in ODS-mitigation projects
with pre-compliance and/or voluntary markets with projects focusing on destruction of ODS
banks under the Climate Action Reserve (CAR).




                                             59
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                                  ANNEX III – Carbon Finance Concepts

1.      This Annex expands on the overview provided in Section 3.3 of the Report. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) governs climate change
negotiations. The UNFCCC’s Kyoto Protocol (KP) in turn contains the targets and timeline to
which so-called Annex I Parties agreed46 to reduce their GHG emissions as well as the flexible
mechanisms they may use in meeting their targets. Parties who ratified the Protocol can either
meet their emission cap through domestic action, or they may purchase emission quotas
(“Assigned Amount Units”) from other Annex I Parties or project -based carbon offsets
(“Certified Emission Reductions”) from developing countries through the Protocol’s Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM). Outside the Kyoto Protocol and the demand generated by
Parties needing to meet legally-binding emissions targets, a (smaller) voluntary carbon market
has also emerged consisting of voluntary demand for emissions offsets not required for
regulatory compliance.

2.      Carbon finance projects are defined as activities that can demonstrate that they have
reduced GHG emissions measured in tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2-eq) compared to a baseline
(often a business-as-usual (BAU) activity or scenario. For example, a project which proposes to
install more costly energy efficient air conditioners compared to the existing baseline
equipment, and which demonstrates reduced consumption of energy and hence lowered CO 2
emissions from the power grid, may qualify as a carbon finance project.

3.      A project and the resulting emission reductions will usually be registered with a carbon
trading clearinghouse (the UNFCCC for the CDM or one of several voluntary registries). This will
assist the project developer to sell the expected or actual emission reductions to another party
wishing to offset its CO2 emissions. While carbon finance projects target, in the first instance,
GHG emission reductions or CO2 reductions which can be purchased by another party, the sale
of the emission reductions can also be intended to be a key mechanism through which the
project developer may raise project finance. That is, carbon finance projects are also intended
as a mechanism for financing the introduction of energy efficient and cleaner technologies to
developing countries.

4.      Project-based carbon finance instruments are structured as performance-based
payment schemes with internationally defined overarching principles and methodologies for
assessing project eligibility and quantifying, monitoring, reporting and verifying GHG impacts of
project activities. Project-based carbon finance has been instrumental in reducing emissions of
short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs), such as methane and HFCs that are covered by the
mandate of the Kyoto Protocol.


46
  Countries with legally binding emissions objectives under the KP those that were member of the OECD in 1997 (when the
Protocol was negotiated and adopted) and the countries with economies in transition. While most Annex I Parties observed the
Protocol’s first Commitment Period (2008-12), the USA never ratified the Protocol and Canada withdrew after having ratified it.
The Protocol’s agreed second Commitment Period is supported by even fewer countries (essentially only the European Union).
A new climate treaty with broader participation is currently being negotiated and planned to come into force in 2020.



                                                           60
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


5.      Carbon finance is a market mechanism regarded by most as being a more efficient
mechanism than either imposing taxes on emissions of CO2 or fixing strict targets that each
firm would have to meet. In principle it allows firms to more efficiently plan new investments
and how best to allocate capital in order to meet targets. Carbon finance projects are also
referred to as emission reduction projects and they have given rise to the carbon market in
which emission reductions are traded. Hence we also refer to emission reductions as “carbon
credits” and to the carbon trade which is the trade in carbon credits and which has given rise to
the carbon finance business.


              Figure 1. Concept of emission reductions and carbon finance




              Source: this report




                                              61
                             Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                 Figure 2. Carbon finance income is generally earned once a project is operational and
                 emission reductions have been issued by a registry




                 Source: this report


Key Carbon Finance Activities

6.       The key carbon finance activities which need to be understood include: (i)
demonstrating that project emission reductions will be generated and the estimated volume;
(ii) the carbon finance project cycle and institutional and implementation arrangements; and
(iii) negotiating an agreement to sell emission reductions – emission reductions purchase
agreement.

Demonstrate that emission reductions will be generated and the estimated volume

        Decide which mechanism the project will be registered under: Several different
         mechanisms or registries exist for registering emission reduction projects each with
         their own unique rules. The general concepts as described below are broadly similar.

        Identify and use an approved methodology 47 : Methodologies provide the general
         guidance for determining whether a project is eligible to claim carbon credits and the
         method which it needs to comply with to calculate the emission reductions and

47

http://cdm.unfccc.int/filestorage/C/D/M/CDMWF_AM_NUYR4LTAJWFFEKSTJRJDZ8YDRKJB3T/AMS_II.C.Efficiency_Demand_sid
e_ver09.pdf?t=dXJ8bWxpajE1fDCC7AaNc8w7GdGoGPbwCKLP



                                                   62
                      Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


    demonstrate that the project is additional (see below). For instance under the Clean
    Development Mechanism (CDM), a number of methodologies can be used to claim
    emission reductions from energy efficiency projects. As HCFCs are not included in the
    Kyoto Protocol “basket” of gases, no methodologies exist for cla iming emission
    reductions from projects which destroy or do not use HCFCs. While it is conceivable that
    methodologies could be developed under the voluntary carbon market now that there
    are stricter control measures for HCFCs, the key issue is that this would probably not be
    worth the effort financially: An average size window air conditioner not using HCFCs
    would only displace 0.09 t equivalent of CO2 which at $5 per t of CO2-eq would be worth
    $0.45 per annum. This compares to income of approx. $3.40 which would be earned
    from energy efficiency measures.

   Project must be additional/not business as usual: In order to demonstrate that the
    project will generate emission reductions the project developer has to demonstrate that
    the project would not take place under business as usual. The project developer usually
    needs to demonstrate that: (i) they considered that the project would be eligible to earn
    carbon revenues at the time of investment decision such as a company board meeting;
    (ii) that the project will face significant barriers in being implemented such as financial
    barriers (cannot raise funds); technological barriers (technology is first of its kind/
    new/risky/ lacks suppliers and maintenance providers); implementation barriers (roll
    out requirements are new and untested), etc. or (iii) the project faces investment
    barriers, i.e. the project is more costly than business as usual and does not generate the
    required company rates of return, or consumers would not buy the more expensive
    appliance.

   Establish the baseline and project emissions: In the case of an energy efficient air
    conditioner project for example, the project developer needs to establish the energy
    consumption of the type of air conditioner which the project will replace. He also needs
    to establish the energy consumption of the proposed project equipment. The projected
    difference in energy consumption will constitute the projected energy savings per piece
    of equipment and for all of the air conditioners for the program as a whole. The energy
    savings are then converted into GHG emission reductions by applying the power grid
    GHG emission factor.

   Clear monitoring parameters: All methodologies specify the parameters which need to
    be determined during project design and the parameters which will be monitored
    annually. These general parameters are typically as follows:

       o the power consumption of the baseline or pre-project equipment (measured in
         kW);
       o the power of the project equipment to achieve the same level of performance
         (kW);
       o estimated operating hours of the equipment (hours);
       o Number of pieces of equipment;


                                          63
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


           o Scrapping of old equipment: it may be needed to demonstrate that old
             equipment is scrapped and does not continue to be used – otherwise emissions
             have not gone down – but baselines that allow for growth are possible as well;
           o Projected emission reductions: The baseline energy consumption – the project
             energy consumption x the grid emissions factor for the power grid provides the
             overall projected CO2 savings/ emission reductions;
           o Clearly defined monitoring requirements and arrangements: The institutional
             responsibilities for monitoring arrangements including data capture and storage
             must be described and the frequency of monitoring and type of monitoring must
             be specified. The actual number of pieces of equipment which will form part of
             the project together with the date of installation, the power of the equipment,
             the place of installation etc. must be recorded in the project database. Where a
             very large numbers of pieces of equipment are installed, annual sample surveys
             are usually allowed to demonstrate that the equipment remains installed and in
             working condition. Depending on the methodology, it may be necessary to
             demonstrate through actual continuous monitoring of a sample of equipment
             for how many hours it operates per annum. In other instances it may be
             possible to adopt conservative default values.

Carbon finance project cycle and institutional/ implementation arrangements

7.      The carbon finance project cycle involves several routine key steps which are indicated
in Figure 3 below. There are four key players:
 The project developer who develops the underlying project also referred to as the seller of
    the emission reductions.
 The buyer of the emission reductions who will often support the seller technically or
    financially through advances to get the project registered. They will usually also be assisted
    by their own consultants given the highly specialised content of the project documents
    which must be prepared.
 Third party independent auditors who validate the project document (validators) and
    verifiers who verify the annual monitoring report prepared by the seller each year to
    demonstrate the volume of emission reductions which have been generated.
 Carbon Registries are the technical extension of the regulator – the key stakeholder in
    establishing a market. There are various registries serving different types of carbon assets
    and different markets. The best known is the CDM serving the Kyoto Protocol. Until recently
    it was the main registry serving MICs and LDCs. The transaction costs associated with
    administrative requirements vary significantly between registries. The procedures for the
    CDM are considered by many to place excessive burden on project stakeholders, creating
    barriers for investors. The voluntary Verified Carbon Standard while ensuring a similar high
    level of integrity is considered less burdensome on project developers, but is unable to issue
    emission reductions for CDM purposes which rest solely with the CDM Executive Board.




                                             64
                             Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



                Figure 3. General steps forming part of the carbon finance project cycle


                     7. Seller transfers
                     emission reductions to         1. Project developer develops a project
                     the buyer who pays the            idea note to find potential buyers of the
                     seller for the emission           proposed emission reductions (1-6
                     reductions (1- 3                  months)
                     months)
                                                                         2. The project developer
        6. Verifier forwards the                                         (seller) and a buyer of
        verification report to the                                       emission reductions may
        registry for issuance of the                                     sign a legal agreement and
        emission reductions (1 - 6                                       work together to develop the
        months)                                                          carbon finance aspects of
                                                                         the project including project
        5. Seller prepares an                                            document (3 – 6 months)
        annual monitoring
        report and seller or
        buyer contracts a
        carbon finance auditor                                             3. Validator / independent
        (verifier) to verify the                                           carbon finance auditor is
        monitoring report and                                              hired by buyer or seller to
        the emission reductions                                            validate (audit) the project
        (6 - 18 months                                                     document/project (1 - 2
                                4. Validator/auditor requests and receives years)
                                project registration with carbon registry
                                (3 - 12 months if reviews)

                                                                              carbon finance auditor/
                 Carbon Registry                 Seller and buyer             Validator
       Source: this report

Negotiating emission reduction purchase agreements (ERPAs)

8.       Negotiating an emission reductions purchase agreement between seller and buyer
involves several key issues with the identification of risk mitigation measures being a most
critical one. The most obvious aspects to be negotiated include: overall emission reduction
volume/size of the contract, volume of emission reductions to be delivered each year, the type
of emission reduction (whether for instance based on a monitoring report or an actual issued
emission reduction).

9.     With Europe having decided to restrict emission reductions into its trading scheme from
projects registered post December 31, 2012 to LDCs, MICs are effectively shut out of the
European market, and hence the origin of the emission reductions is key.

10.     On pricing, approaches have shifted from fixed price contracts to variable pricing
contracts as well as a mixture of both. Currently, with the decline in carbon markets, the few
sovereign (government buyers) recognize the need to offer prices which are partially delinked
from the market and which offer a price required to make it attractive to project developers to
undertake a carbon finance project. However, the volume of funds available for such activities
are insignificant compared to the needs.



                                                   65
                                   Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



11.     Risk mitigation measures aim to create certainty for both buyers and seller especially to
insulate against under-delivery of emission reductions and damaging price fluctuations. The
most common risk mitigation measures include using milestone dates by when projects should
be registered, commissioned and generating emission reductions and what emission reduction
volumes would constitute under-delivery and allow the buyer to renegotiate the emission
reduction purchase agreement or to cancel it.

Assessment of carbon market risks based on the 12 years of carbon markets

12.    Overall, while carbon finance instruments have established very detailed procedures for
accounting of, and banking on, GHG emission reductions, they are not without risk for the
reasons that follow:

       (i)       carbon finance instruments pose risk for both project developers and buyers of
                 carbon credits. For the former, carbon finance procedures are burdensome, projects
                 are time consuming to develop, and they present risk with regard to the possibility
                 of non-registration, or if registered to the possibility that expected volumes of
                 emission reductions may not be issued. From the perspective of the buyer, if the
                 expected income from a carbon finance project is critical to the success of a project,
                 such risks may be perceived to be too high to proceed with carbon financing;
       (ii)      carbon finance rules, especially under the CDM and in the European market, change
                 frequently and while some minor simplifications are introduced, often the revisions
                 lead to greater stringency;
       (iii)     recent severe downturn in prices of emission reductions which does not encourage
                 the use of carbon finance at this time. Nonetheless, a number of actors, including
                 the European Union and the World Bank48 are exploring measures and means to
                 revitalize the market.

13.     In conclusion, carbon finance programs can take anywhere from 3 – 6 years to deliver
actual financing, and they currently, given the market situation, do so at very low returns. As a
result, this presents a disincentive for any project that would be dependent on carbon finance
income. Results based schemes funded by sovereign donors could offer a stop gap solution
however.




48
     For example work of the World Bank’s Carbon Finance Unit under the Partnership for Market Readiness.



                                                            66
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


                   ANNEX IV – Experiences with Carbon Finance Related to
                                  the Montreal Protocol

1.     This Annex expands on section 3.3 of the Report by providing additional information
regarding experiences with using carbon finance to finance the mitigation of releases of
relevant substances in two key areas: the destruction of HFC-23 by-products (not an ODS) and
the destruction of ODS “banks”.

Targeting HFC-23 incineration with the Kyoto project-based mechanisms

2.      One sector that has seen the development of a number of projects for support through
the Kyoto project49-based mechanisms is the incineration of HFC-23. The bulk of HFC-23
generation comes as a by-product in the production of HCFC-22, either for refrigerant or as
input (“feedstock”) for the further production of synthetic polymers. HFCs are part of the Kyoto
basket of gases but, having no ODP, are not regulated by the Montreal Protocol, while HCFCs
that have both ODP and GWP are regulated by the Montreal Protocol only. . Given the high
GWP of HFC-23, plant operators were, until recently, able to earn significant revenue through
the carbon offset market, far exceeding the cost of purchasing, installing and operating HFC-23
incinerators and the transaction costs linked to the carbon market. However, concerns over
the abundance of HFC-23 credits and with the risk/perception for perverse incentives, and
questions regarding their additionality and contribution of these activities to host country
sustainable development, all led to a decision in 2012 by the EU to no longer allow the use of
carbon credits from such projects for compliance within the EU Trading Scheme (ETS), thereby
effectively halting most carbon finance flows to HFC-23 destruction projects.

3.      There are currently 23 such CDM projects50 in existence, all but one registered, and 19
are active and have issued CERs. Virtually all are in East Asia and the Pacific, with 11 projects in
China, nine in India (including one not registered) and one in South Korea. Though they
represent only a tiny fraction of CDM projects registered (0.3%) or with issuance (0.9%)
globally, ‘HFC’ projects nevertheless account for the top category in terms of issuance, with
40% of certified emission reductions (CERs) issued to date, or approximately 483 MMtCO2-eq.51

4.     ‘HFC’ projects also represent the top category in terms of CDM transactions by project
type, or about 20% of CERs transacted in the primary pre-2013 CDM market, reflecting the
preference of buyers and intermediaries for asset types with large potential and predictable
issuance. Together, these forward transactions account for $4.9 billion in potential flows to
“HFC” projects (or 17% of global estimated value of CDM transactions in the primary pre-2013


49
   When covered by carbon market regulation, HFC sources have been so far addressed through the project market and not
included under the cap. New Zealand is the only exception, where HFCs (and PFCs and SF6) are regulated by the New Zealand
ETS since January 2013, and California (where compliance started in 2013).
50
   There are, in addition, four 4 CDM projects in India that substitute HFC-134a as a blowing agent for polyurethane foam. All
but one are registered, but with no issuance so far.
51
   Source: UNEP Risoe CDM/JI Pipeline Analysis and Database, March 1st 2013.



                                                            67
                                 Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


CDM market, with already $4 billion in realized52 financial flows (or 34% of estimated payments
for issued CERs globally).53

5.      This by far outweighs the estimated $59 million in underlying investment behind these
projects.54 To capture part of this rent and mobilize public revenues for domestic climate
action, China (the largest host of such HFC-23 projects) has set up a revenue sharing
arrangement for the sale of carbon credits from these projects. Regulation requires that
project owners share 65% of revenue generated from HFC-23 CDM projects with the China
CDM Fund55. There are also different percentages for other types of projects. The CDM
Executive board repeatedly reviewed these projects and made adjustments to the applicable
rules. In 2012, the EU decided to no longer accept carbon credits from such projects under the
EU Trading Scheme (ETS).

6.      As a result of this ban, carbon market flows to HFC-23 destruction projects have almost
halted. In the absence of government regulations or creation of domestic carbon markets, the
venting of HFC-23 might resume. Moreover, and in any event, a large fraction of the
developing countries HCFC-22 production is not covered by CDM projects, in part because the
HFC-23 incineration methodology prevented any new HFC-23 incineration projects from being
added because there was a requirement that the maximum production of HCFC-22 needed to
be established with three consecutive years between 2000-2004. Total annual production of
HCFC-22 in developing countries continues to increase however mainly due to the increasing
demand for feedstock production (e.g., use for production of Teflon). Production for feedstock
is not covered under the Montreal Protocol and thus not covered under the scheduled phase-
out for HCFCs56.

7.      While carbon finance proved extremely effective at catalyzing investments for
mitigation of HFCs, eligibility restrictions on HFC assets in the compliance market raises doubts
that this mechanism could be expanded to finance related future ODS mitigation efforts.
Overall, the HFC-23 issue presents a paradox. HFC CDM projects were desirable because they
required low capital investment, and generated a very large and predictable volume of carbon
credits. However, if a domestic or international pricing scheme were to be developed such that
no moral hazard was associated with the generation of the credits, it is conceivable that the low
capital cost, size and predictability of these projects could again prove attractive to investors
and project developers in the future. But, unless carefully designed, such schemes could again
52
   Actual financial flows to developing countries through the CDM are likely of a smaller magnitude as a vast majority of
transactions are forward purchase agreements with payment on delivery. Depending on project financing, registration, and
performance as well as delays in the regulatory process, the amount and schedule of payments may prove different.
53
   As transactions and their contractual terms are confidential, it is extremely difficult to estimate actual payments. One
assumes here that a project registered in year Y has been contracted in the previous year (Y-1) and that all payments occur on
delivery. Actual financial flows through the CDM primary market are thus estimated as the sum, for all projects with issuance,
of volume of CERs issued times contract price. Source: for CER issuance, UNEP Risoe CDM/JI Pipeline Analysis and Database,
March 1st 2013; for market price, World Bank (2012). State and Trends of the Carbon Market.
54
   Source: UNEP Risoe CDM/JI Pipeline Analysis and Database, March 1st 2013 (applies only to registered projects).
55
   See www.cdmfund.org
56
   Source: Stephen A. Montzka, Lambert Kuijpers, Mark O. Battle, Murat Aydin, Kristal Verhulst, Eric S. Saltzman, and David W.
Fahey (2010). “Recent increases in global HFC-23 emissions”, Geophysical Research Letters.



                                                           68
                               Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


flood the market with cheap carbon credits, thereby undermining the overall intent of such
schemes which is to provide a sufficiently high carbon price to incentivize investment in low
carbon technologies.

Destroying ODS Banks with the voluntary carbon markets

8.     At a much smaller scale, the voluntary carbon market is creating incentives for the
recovery and destruction of ODS even though much of the potential remains to be tapped and
the voluntary markets today are suffering from the same uncertainties and depressed prices as
the CDM. While the MP regulates the production and consumption of ODS, a significant
amount of ODS still remains contained in equipment, products, and stockpiles, and risks being
released into the atmosphere in the absence of appropriate regulatory or financial incentives.

9.      To date, there are three programs or standards that have approved methodologies to
regulate such ODS destruction projects (see Table 7). Activity has, thus far, been limited, except
in California where transactions have increased in number and volume since 2010, at least to
2012, given that Climate Action Reserve (CAR) early action ODS credits could be used for
compliance under the U.S. Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006. Though volumes (6 million
tCO2-eq) over the period 2010-11 remain moderate, prices currently fetch US $8/ton. While
this demonstrates that interest from buyers exists, the level of interest expressed remains low
in comparison to the volume of ODS potentially eligible for destruction, as provided by some
estimates57. The recent severe downturn in the CDM is also affecting the voluntary markets,
though these appear comparatively less affected.

Table 1. ODS destruction projects registered with the voluntary market
Standard/Program       Geographical eligibility         Number of          Volume issued        Activity
                                                        registered         (MMtCO2-eq)
                                                        projects
Chicago Climate         Destruction must occur          13                 NA                   No transaction publicly
         58
Exchange                within U.S. territory with                                              disclosed on the ICE
(closed 2010)           import possible
Climate Action          ODS must be destroyed           31 (incl. 3        9.9 (39% from        2.4 MMtCO2-eq
              59
Reserve (CAR)           within U.S. territory but can   from India and     Art. 5 countries)    transacted at
                        be sourced in Art. 5            Mexico)                                 $8.2/tCO2-eq in 2011
                                  60                                                                                61
                        countries                                                               (CAR-eligible only)
                                                            62
Verified Carbon         Destruction can occur in        0                  0                    NA
Standard (VCS)          any MP country (allowing
                        for import).
Source: this report; from various sources

57
   See “Study on Financing the Destruction of Unwanted Ozone-Depleting Substances through the Voluntary Carbon Market”,
ICF International, Feb 2010.
58
    Source: the Intercontinental Exchange (the ICE) https://www.theice.com/ccx.jhtml
59
    Source: http://www.climateactionreserve.org/
60
    Only offset from the destruction of ODS sourced and destroyed in the US are eligible under the California ETS.
61
    Molly Peters-Stanley and Katherine Hamilton (2012). Developing Dimension: State of the Voluntary Carbon
    Markets 2012. Ecosystem Marketplace & Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
62
    There are 3 registered F-gas projects: 2 HFCs from the CDM and 1 for refrigerant leak detection (US-based).



                                                         69
                                  Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



             ANNEX V - Review of Experiences with Multi-Source Financing:
                   the “Chiller Replacement” Cohort of Projects

1.     A cluster of projects that targeted the conversion of building chillers, with the explicit
intent to address servicing uses of CFCs, potential climate co-benefits and identification of
additional financing from other sources offers useful insight and lessons learned regarding
securing and implementing multi-source financing .

2.      The analysis reviews the achievements and on-going challenges associated with five
projects: India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Turkey. This analysis does not
constitute a formal evaluation, nor is it comprehensive. Rather, it provides a qualitative
overview of some of the difficulties encountered at the various stages of implementation, and
reflects upon the lessons that may be extracted and serve as possible guidance for future such
work.

Table 1. Status of World Bank implemented chiller projects with multi-source financing

Project name63            Start date              Funding                                Status
                          (effectiveness)
Turkey                    1995                    MLF $4.1m                              Completed
                                                                                         and closed Dec 2007
Thailand -                Oct 2001                MLF $2.5m                              Completed
Building Chiller                                  ($1.3m cancelled)                      and closed 30 Sep 2005
Replacement                                       GEF $2.5m
Project                                           ($1.3m cancelled)
India - Chiller           Nov 2009                MLF $1m                                Under implementation
Energy Efficiency                                 GEF $6.3m                              CF component being dropped
Project                                           + CF component estimated
                                                  $15.5m
Philippines -             Jan 2011                MLF $1m                                Under implementation
Chiller Energy                                    GEF $2.5m                              CF component being dropped
Efficiency Project                                + CF component estimated
                                                  at $7.3m (KfW)
                                                  Private (chiller owner) $37m
Indonesia- Chiller        NA – appraisal          MLF $1m                                Cancelled
Energy Efficiency         completed               GEF $3.7m                              CEO endorsement was not
Project                   Dec 2012                Private (chiller owner) $21m           achieved due to GEF Council
                                                                                         members concerns with private
                                                                                         sector’s choice of refrigerant
                                                                                         alternatives.
Source: this report; based on project documentation as of November 2013

63
  The World Bank is also implementing chiller replacement projects with MLF support in Argentina, Jordan, and Mexico, but
these did not involve co-financing/blending from different multilateral sources of financing and therefore are not treated in this
section. Turkey is included because of its reliance on an innovative revolving fund.



                                                             70
                                  Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



3.       Overall experience with this cohort of projects has been mixed. While they represent a
clear effort to acknowledge synergies inherent amongst the different global environmental
conventions and their financing mechanisms, they also speak to the complexities that can arise
as additional financing partners become involved, as well as when a “blended” approach
applies in name only. Such challenges have ranged from an inability to synchronize the timing
of financing approvals, the collapse of the carbon market, the impact of the 2008 financial
crisis, competing institutional and implementation arrangements (e.g. dual reporting), namely
under the MLF and GEF, and issues regarding the suitability and commercial availability of
alternatives.

4.       The market for primary CDM has dropped to its lowest level since 2004, linked to
declining demand for offsets resulting from economic turbulence, a growing long-term
oversupply of carbon offsets in the EU ETS and plummeting carbon prices. This has impacted
the vision behind the strategy governing the more recent group of projects, requiring that they
be restructured to adapt to the new context, and deliver the best possible outcomes in terms of
chiller replacement in that context.

Turkey Chiller

5.      The project was developed not as a stand-alone “chiller” project, but as part of the
refrigeration sector phase out, the Turkey ODS II project, which was approved in 1995 and
closed in December 2007 having disbursed $18.7 million in total (with $12 million under the
Refrigeration Sector Plan overall, and $4.1 million for the chiller component64). Through this
project, Turkey was the first to establish a Revolving Fund to ensure sustainable actions on
phase out of ODS. Private sector enterprises were the principal beneficiaries of the project.

6.      The Turkish Technology Development Foundation (TTGV), the financial intermediary and
implementing agency, provided technical support and funds to large companies and SMEs on a
loan and grant basis. Specifically for the chiller component, support was a combination of grant
(25%) and soft loan (75%) provided by TTGV. Payback for the loan was over three years, with
zero interest. The combination of grant and soft loan under a revolving fund scheme proved to
be an effective tool motivating hotel owners to replace their old chillers with more energy
efficient systems. In effect in this instance, the MLF grant allowed for the capitalization of the
Revolving Fund that would serve to finance the energy efficiency / climate mitigation benefits.
The high gains in energy efficiency that accrued on replacement coupled by the active
marketing conducted by TTGV enabled nearly 40 chillers to be replaced across the country,
compared with only four as originally contemplated.

7.     Internally, staff continuity65 contributed to the success of the project. Rather unusually,
from project approval in 1995 until completion in 2007, the World Bank Task Manager and the

64
     MLF Project Completion Report
65
     World Bank, Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR)



                                                           71
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


TTGV Project Manager remained on the project. This resulted in substantial continuity of
project knowledge, helped consensus building with officials of pertinent government agencies,
and an enhanced ability to streamline project procedures and allowed TTGV to overcome a
number of implementation related issues, including the noted lack of flexibility in funding.

Thai chiller

8.      The overarching objectives of the proposed project were to assist Thailand to (i)
improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the building chiller sector,
and (ii) reduce consumption of ozone depleting substances (ODS) as required under the
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (MP). Specifically, the project
was designed to work through EGAT (state-owned electric utility) to demonstrate the potential
energy and environmental benefits that could be achieved through early replacement of low-
energy efficient chillers using chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) with newer, more energy-efficient
non-CFC chillers. The project design was originally meant to demonstrate the benefits of the
approach by replacing 24 old CFC chillers. This demonstration activity was meant to lay the
foundation for a follow-on project that would replace about 444 chillers, estimated to be
approximately 30% of the entire Thai chiller market in 1999 (estimated at about 1500 units). It
was anticipated that this initial push to the sector would result in a “market transformation”
that would lead to the accelerated replacement of all CFC-based chillers in the country.

9.       The project was prepared in 1996 and 1997 and was approved by the MLF Executive
Committee and the GEF Council during the fourth quarter of 1998. The project was originally to
be implemented by EGAT, but in the fall-out after the 1997 financial crisis, the Government
decided to privatize EGAT, making it no longer interested in demand-side management
activities, including chiller replacement. The project was finally approved and became effective
in October 2001, but in the re-design, the executing agency was changed to the Industrial
Finance Corporation of Thailand (IFCT) who operated as a financial intermediary utilizing the
project’s funding (drawing $2.5 million from GEF and $2.5 million from MLF) as the basis for
softening chiller replacement loans.

10.      Because of the market corrections following the crisis, the commercially available
interest rate dropped so low that the preferential rate provided through GEF and MLF grants
was not competitive. Moreover, at the same period, the Ministry of Energy offered successfully
several financial subsidy schemes to promote energy efficiency that were more attractive for
the private sector as the interest rates were lower, with longer repayment periods and because
there was no requirement to dismantle the old CFC chiller and install a data logger for the new
chiller. The project therefore closed one year earlier than anticipated due to the limited uptake
of loans by chiller owners. By that time, 17 out of the targeted 24 chillers had been replaced,
but there was significant funding remaining with $1.3 million being returned to the GEF and
$1.27 million to the MLF. Nevertheless, the Implementation Completion Report for the project
notes that the project was considered to have achieved Satisfactory results as the 17 chillers
replaced had resulted in the project exceeding its stated targets (CFCs phased out; kWh energy




                                             72
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


saved; and CO2 abated) and, as a demonstrations, had stimulated the market transformation
resulting in a much larger replacement of chillers via local financing.

11.     A number of lessons have been drawn from the Thailand experience. The project was
deemed successful in achieving its stated goals even though it did not directly replace as many
chillers through the demonstration program as expected. However, some participants noted
the complex and at times seemingly unnecessary complications arising from the conditions
placed upon participants through the financing agreement. The monitoring and evaluation
procedures and cost of participation in general did place an extra cost burden on project
participants (estimated at 15% of chiller cost as documented by one supplier). Additional
complications were created by the somewhat duplicative and unsynchronized approval
procedures required for GEF and MLF programming.

12.     The Thai chiller project demonstrated that synergistic initiatives blending funds from
different sources could be used to achieve complementary global environmental benefits. In
this instance, benefits from CFC phase-out and reduced GHG emissions were stimulated by
focusing on a unitary approach to chiller replacement. This idea provided the basis for the next
generation of chiller-replacement projects in India, Philippines, and Indonesia.

India Chiller

13.     Conceived as part of a programmatic effort to catalyze further synergies between ODS
Phase-out and GHG emission reduction through energy efficiency, the India Chiller Energy
Efficiency project was allocated $1 million by the MLF Executive Committee in 2007. The GEF
Council approved an allocation of $6.3 million for the project in May 2008. But in order to
upscale the project and mobilize the maximum amount of funding possible for chiller phase-out
in India, it was decided to also tap resources available under the CDM. The original potential
for CDM funding was estimated at $15.5 million, a sum which would be made available to
proponents not at the beginning of the project, but only after the replacement of their chillers
had been completed, they had generated and verified CO2 savings, and certified emission
reductions had been issued. The GEF and MLF clearances to begin project implementation
were granted to allow the project to become effective in November 2009.

14.      Because of the need to combine resources from three funding sources, each with
different mechanisms with slightly different priorities and requirements, the project assumed a
complex structure with strict requirements for eligibility. A “slot” window was developed to
eliminate chillers from the eligibility of support if they were either too old as it is not possible to
claim carbon credits for equipment which needs to be replaced in any event, or for those which
are new and would have little to offer in way of reduced ODS or improved energy efficiency.
Chiller owners had two choices. They could choose to obtain a one-time, up-front subsidy,
signing over any potential carbon-linked payments to the project’s revolving fund. Or they
could choose to receive all of their subsidy payments in the form of carbon-payments over the
initial years of the chillers lifespan so long as that period was covered by the first commitment
period of the Kyoto protocol.


                                                73
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



15.    The project faced various challenges in the early stages of implementation linked to its
inherent complexity, the preference for shorter-term paybacks on the part of chiller owners,
and the lag in getting the project registered. The initial financial intermediary which was meant
to support the project withdrew from the project, and the new financial intermediary which
took over decided to sign an ERPA with another buyer. Once the new buyer became fully
acquainted with the project risks to registration and issuance of CERs as well as the slow
implementation progress, they chose to terminate the ERPA.

16.     Because of the initial over-ambitious project design, various project delays, and
uncertainty with the carbon market, at the time of World Bank Board Approval (June 2009), the
amount of funding expected from carbon financing streams was reduced to $5.85 million from
the initial estimate of $15.5 million. The project was expected to support the replacement of
370 of the estimated 12,500 chillers in the Indian market. These demonstrations were intended
to show how profitable the investments would be both to the financial intermediary serving as
executing agency and to the chiller owners. This business model demonstrating mutually
beneficial activities was expected to be sustainable and to lead to the eventual transformation
of the market. The economic rate of return for the project was estimated at between 68 and
71%, depending upon the assumptions employed regarding the value of carbon purchased by
2013. These economic benefits included both the value of the energy savings and the overall
reduction in demand resulting in capacity savings to the electric utility. From a typical chiller
owner’s perspective, the investment would demonstrate a financial rate of return of between
30% and 36% and a payback of 3.3 years. Clearly, the analysis undertaken during project
appraisal showed that this project would be a “win” for the chiller owner; a “win” for the
electricity supply companies; and a “win” for the global environment in terms of both a
reduction in ODS and in GHG emissions.

17.     However, implementation has not proceeded apace. As of early 2013, this project is in
the midst of a restructuring. Several lessons can be drawn from these challenges. The first is
linked to the overly complex project design (three instruments and complex financing and
institutional arrangements); the second to the change in financial intermediaries, and the third
to the time consuming process for registering a project with the CDM Executive Board. In the
meantime the opportunity to tap carbon resources has effectively disappeared. In addition, the
GoI became reluctant to see public resources under this project channeled to support private
sector chiller owners. Further, during the short period of project implementation, no chiller
owners consulted expressed an interest in utilizing the second approach to obtaining the
subsidy through reliance upon carbon payments even though it was designed to be more
lucrative than the up-front subsidy. Most chiller owners considered it to be too complex and
fraught with risk of non-payment (which now appears to have been true). Finally, the
complexity of the institutional set up is no doubt leading also to ownership issues, and might
explain, in part, the reluctance of the Government of India noted above.




                                             74
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Philippines Chiller

18.     The structure of the chillers project for the Philippines is very similar to that of India,
and consequently the story of the implementation of the project and of the problems faced is
very similar. The project is currently in the process of being restructured to remove the carbon
finance aspects of the project. The Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement between the
buyer (KfW) and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) has been
terminated and, as a result, the performance targets of the project will be scaled down to what
is achievable with MLF and GEF funding only, targeting 50 chillers only in lieu of the 195 as
originally intended.

19.     The project provides financial incentives on a grant basis to support 15% of chiller
replacement costs, in exchange for chiller owners surrendering potential carbon credits to the
overall program. Alternatively, the project would have coordinated the redistribution of carbon
finance revenues from energy savings to the individual chiller owners, minus a 20% fee to cover
program administration, marketing, and various CDM-related costs. Based on discussions with
stakeholders during preparation, it was established that no more than 20% of the chiller
owners would prefer that option – even if it potentially meant less financial returns (with
hindsight, however, and as noted above in the India case, the chiller owners were justified to
take a cautious approach and preferring an immediate cash benefit).

20.      Based on lessons learned with the previous projects, and in order to be more attractive
for chiller owners, project funds are dedicated to covering the costs of data loggers connected
to a centralized management information system. Whilst this addresses the issue of cost, it still
leaves the door open to reluctance from participants to provide centralized data regarding their
operations. The project also explicitly allows the replacement of all “inefficient” chillers,
including HCFC chillers, rather than only CFC-based chillers. Whilst this evolution in the
eligibility criteria was largely driven by the chiller replacement methodology which emphasizes
the age of the equipment to be replaced, it also brings a welcome element of flexibility. (Eligible
chillers must not be so old that they should have been replaced already due to having reached
their full expected lifetime).

21.     As with other similar projects, the fate of the recovered refrigerant is not directly
addressed, in line with the funding policies of the Multilateral Fund. Chiller owners can either
keep the recovered refrigerant for their later servicing needs, or they can hand it over to the
Ozone Desk at the DENR’s Environmental Management Bureau. However, the country lacks
access to appropriate destruction technology. To address the lack of funding through the MLF
for the destruction of unwanted ODS, the World Bank is engaged in a separate technical
assistance effort with MLF funding to work with the Governments of the Philippines and
Indonesia to facilitate the destruction of unwanted ODS. This effort will hopefully lead to
providing a solution for the ODS recovered through the project, even though it is not designed
to directly address the project.




                                              75
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


Indonesia chiller

22.      The project as designed will offer a financial incentive for the replacement of old
inefficient chillers with CFC/HCFC-free energy efficient chillers. A grant incentive payment will
be about 15% of the cost of a new energy efficient chiller. GEF grant in the amount of $3.66
million is available to fund the incentive. The grant amount is estimated to be sufficient for the
replacement of approximately 160 chillers of average cooling capacity of 350 TR (ton of
refrigeration).

23.      In order to simplify and provide clarity to stakeholders regarding the financial incentive
to be paid by the Project, the payment is to be calculated on the basis of a normative price –
assumed to be approximately $400/TR – multiplied by the rated cooling capacity of the new
chiller (but not to exceed the rated cooling capacity of the old chiller), and multiplied by 15%. At
the start of project implementation, the Project Management Unit will conduct a chiller price
survey to confirm the normative price or propose adjustments.

24.      The incentive payment to chiller owners will be disbursed as a lump sum after
confirmation that the chiller replacement activity has been completed in compliance with all
relevant provisions in the agreements. It will be the chiller owner’s responsibility to pre-finance
the chiller replacement and provide adequate co-financing from own resources or financing
arrangement to cover the costs of new chiller(s), and any ancillary costs of chiller replacement
activities (except certain measurement and monitoring services provided by the project). The
ancillary costs are estimated at 10% of the cost of a new chiller.

25.    Similar to the Philippines project, the project documentation acknowledges the issue of
destruction of unwanted ODS, but cannot directly address the issue since this cannot be
covered by MLF funding. As noted above, this is addressed through related efforts, and the
project documentation notes that “the World Bank will assist the G overnment of Indonesia to
explore funding opportunities for the disposal of unwanted ODS”.

26.     As in the other related projects in this portfolio, and due to donor requirements
although this was already highlighted as detrimental in the Implementation Completion Report
for the first, the Thailand project, the Project must track and report separately for each source
(MLF and GEF) of funds. This also is adding rigidity and complexity to both project design and
implementation, for no apparent benefit.

27.     Finally, in spite of considerable efforts and resources spent in the preparation of this
project by the Bank team and Indonesia counterparts, and of the significant energy savings and
CO2 emissions reduction that would accrue, the project was not approved at final Endorsement
stage by the GEF CEO responding to issues raised by a number of GEF Council members
regarding the global warming potential of refrigerant in replacement chillers the private sector
are most likely to select, and a desire to fund only replacement chillers using “natural” low GWP
refrigerants in the circumstances. The Bank and Indonesia concluded the project would be non-
viable under these circumstances given the specifics of the application.


                                              76
                          Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits



Choice of refrigerant (R134)

28.    HFC-134a is considered a good alternative refrigerant, but it has a high GWP of 1300. At
concept approval stage, one GEF Council member had therefore requested exploring
alternatives to HFC-134a use in new chillers and recommended the use of ammonia, which has
a GWP of zero, in order to tap the full climate mitigation potential of the project. In the case of
roof-top chillers, the Council member considered hydrocarbons a viable alternative for HFC-
134a, and maintained that these cooling agents and technologies are already available at
reasonable costs for new chillers in the international market and are in use in some developing
countries. However, the UNEP Technical and Economic Assessment Panel of the Montreal
Protocol endorses the use of HFC-134a in new chillers.

29.     Ammonia and hydrocarbons have significant safety issues as their use can conflict with
building safety requirements and would for example trigger additional World Bank safeguard
policies. In particular, ammonia is a strong poison and hydrocarbons are explosive and
flammable. Their application in chillers in commercial and residential buildings such as in office
towers, hospitals, malls and other places frequented by large numbers of people, the focus of
the Indonesia chillers project, therefore poses significant safety considerations within the
prevailing building safety requirements which limits its attractiveness with the private sector.

30.      An analysis of the GWP of HFCs and their alternatives – if conducted on a life cycle basis
– and of the climate benefits of the proposed chiller replacement program shows that the
claimed advantage of zero and low GWP refrigerants is not clear in practical applications. The
life-cycle analysis accounts for the high leakage rate (up to 30%) of high GWP refrigerants in
existing chillers and considers that modern chillers have a leakage rate of only about 1% and
reduce GHG emissions due to their much higher energy efficiency. Given the practical
difficulties with predicted low uptake and implementation delays of introducing ammonia and
hydrocarbon based chillers, the net climate benefits of a replacement strategy that permits the
use of HFC-134a in new chillers is positive.

Elements of lessons learned

31.     In general, carbon finance in and of itself has not driven the financing of chiller projects
largely due to doubts associated with the status of the Clean Development Mechanism in light
of the political uncertainty regarding the post-Kyoto timeframe, as well as the current depleted
state of the carbon market. Where the integration of carbon finance has been tested, it has
tended to overburden projects with heavy monitoring procedures and, in general, higher
transaction costs. Moreover, within the context of chiller replacement, the principal barrier lies
in the opportunity cost of access to up-front financing for the investment, a challenge that can
also be compounded by low energy tariffs. The India experience, in particular, shows that as a
result of this barrier, participants will choose up-front compensation over greater
compensation in future.




                                              77
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


32.     Analyses drawn from an extensive study on chiller replacement in India formed the basis
of the World Bank’s design to secure MLF financing for the global chiller demonstration
program. Based on the recognition that carbon finance would not address the opportunity cost
barriers, the strategy adopted was for MLF and GEF funding to cover the upfront costs for the
first round of chiller replacement and, once carbon finance returns started to flow, these could
in turn be utilized for upfront financing to bring additional chiller owners onboard.
Unfortunately, this premise could never be effectively tested given the global economic
downturn and subsequent collapse of the carbon market.

33.    Nevertheless, a number of important lessons have been generated. For one, project
boundaries must be clearly thought out, balanced against goals and purposes at the time of
project design, then carefully monitored throughout implementation. The emphasis on chillers
in the Thailand project, for example, was considered ultimately to have been too narrowly
defined in view of the fact that greater EE outcomes might have been generated if a broader
“cooling system”-oriented approach had been followed. Nonetheless, the project’s results did
compel the Thai government to establish an Energy Conservation Fund that went on to support
the replacement of an additional 500 chillers, allowing for both the MLF and GEF financing to be
reimbursed.

34.      Another lesson involves the choice of refrigerant. The more recent projects are hindered
by uncertainty regarding what constitutes the most appropriate alternative refrigerant to use.
Fairly significant differences in perception exist at present with respect to commercial
availability, cost effectiveness, and suitability, including safety considerations, of alternatives
for use in different circumstances: for example between a resort hotel complex with outside
space to locate their chillers safely, and a large urban area where chillers are located inside
buildings, which poses greater safety challenges. Experience demonstrates that independent
external reviews are not sufficient to bridge the view held by different stakeholders involved.
This issue is further exacerbated by the fact that the views and policies espoused by the
different funding mechanisms are not always fully coordinated, nor are their expressions of
opinion or oversight restricted to their areas of comparative advantage. This has manifested
itself in pressure being applied to promote adoption of specific alternatives which, while of
interest given their low or no-ODP/GWP properties, pose concerns with respect to commercial
availability, costs and safe use. A consideration might be to make available additional funding to
compensate – where possible – for the additional barriers associated with the use of less
proven alternatives.

35.     Experience with these projects has also demonstrated that multi-source financing tends
to lead to heavy implementation structures and procedures. There is a need to simplify
procedures and processes not only to streamline obtaining financing from multiple sources, but
also with respect to reporting requirements imposed during implementation. At present, for
example, it is a requirement to maintain strictly separate progress reporting and accounting of
relatively small amounts of MLF and GEF financing for ‘blended’ projects, despite the
similarities between the instruments and their quasi identical shareholder base. The design of
similar future projects should strive to simplify procedures and minimize additional


                                              78
                         Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


administrative requirements, and may consider exploring the potential for joint project design,
approval and oversight functions in order to enhance efficiency and reduce transaction costs.

36.     The experience gained in Turkey on the other hand demonstrates how positive results
may be derived through application of a simple and targeted project design, which can rapidly
deliver the desired market transformation. Here, non-grant instruments were used to
overcome the opportunity cost, low energy tariffs and lack of fiscal incentive barriers that were
faced. The Turkish counterparts who managed the project on the ground offered an interesting
financing package and also actively promoted chiller replacement, which ultimately led to the
project achieving a high success rate.

37.      Finally, another salient feature of this cohort of projects has been the relatively small
level of grant financing, which limits impact and visibility in the middle income large countries
in which the projects are being implemented. Had a larger sum of funds been made available, it
is likely that greater impact would have been manifested, due in part to the convening power
that larger sums of upfront funding generate. Large-scale World Bank lending projects, for
example, build synergies in support of full market transformation.




                                             79
                             Resource Mobilization for HCFC Phase-out and Climate Mitigation Co-benefits


           ANNEX VI – Opportunities for Synergies – Models and Examples

This Annex provides additional illustration for the model examples described in Section 4.2 of
the Report. Figure 1 provides an overview of the financing structure of the Mexico Efficient
Lighting and Appliances project, while Figure 2 gives a graphic description of the Mexico NAMA.

Figure 1. Mexico Efficient Lighting and Appliances project financing




Source: Mexico Efficient Lighting and Appliances Project Fact Sheet, World Bank (2011)

Figure 2. Structure of Mexico’s Domestic Refrigerator NAMA




Source: Mexico Refrigerators NAMA, DNV KEMA (2013)




                                                     80
