AFGHANISTAN
Women's Role in Afghanistan's Future –
Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                     ACS4474
        ACS4474


Islamic State of Afghanistan
Social Development and Gender




                    AFGHANISTAN

Women's Role In Afghanistan's Future -
Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Cballenges




SASDS
SOUTH ASIA
2013
        IWomeD'    o RoletnMpamlotan'o Futare •
         1'aldllf StDck orAdlliM:IIlots 8Dd C:..lltlllaed Cb.oll...,..




 This volume is a product of the staff of the Intcrnati.oual Bank for Reconstructiaa and Devdopmcntl The
 World Bank. The £indinp, interpretatiom, and <Oncluainao ezpRSSCd in this paper do not oocaoarily mica
 the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governmmts they repreoent. The World
 Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The botmdaries, colon,
 denominatioc.s, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
 part of The World Bank concerning the legal statw of any territruy or the endor:xment or acceptance of
  sucll boundaries.


  Copyright Statement:


 The materiol. in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
 without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The Intcrnati.oual Bank for Reconstruction and
 Development! The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to
 reproduce portions of tbe work promptly.

  For permiJsion to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, pleo.oe send a request witb complete
  information to tbe Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danven, MA 01923, USA,
 telephone 97S.7S0.8400, f:u: 97S.75Q.4470, bnp://www.copyright.coml.

  A1l other queries on rights and lic:enses, including subsidiary rights, should be addre...d to the Office of the
  Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, f:u: 202·522-2422, e-mail
  pubrights@worldbank.org.



        I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Future·
            Taldq Stack of AdlliM:IIleJitllod ~- ChaJieD&e•
                                 Womn'o Roleln~n'o Future·
                                 1'akbiJStocl<ofAdlleftmenbi1J1dConUnuedCballeDpl .
                                                                                         I   2013




The World Bank would like to thank the following photographers:

On the Coyer
Front: Leslie Knott (bottom left); Leslie Knott (bottom right); Graham Crouch (large)
Back: Aga khan Foundation

Chapter 1
Graham Crouch(p. 21)

Chapter 2
Bay Ismoyo (p. 33)
Leslie Knott (p. 39)
Leslie Knott (p. 41)
Bay Ismoyo (p. 52)

Chapter 3
Graham Crouch (p. 61)
Graham Crouch (p. 69)
Graham Crouch (p. 74)
Graham Crouch (p. 77)

Chapter4
Graham Crouch (p. 91)
Reza Shir Mohammadi (p. 102)
Aga Khan Foundation (p.l11)
Sandra Calligaro (p. 116)

Chapter 5
Sandra Calligaro (p. 121)
Aga Khan Foundation (p. 148)
Graham Crouch (p. 150)

Chapter 6
Graham Crouch(p. 155)

                                 Women's Role Ia A~i~Jumlsbm's Flltare ·
                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb iiJid CDntlllued Cballeqes
                                                                                         I
                                                                Table ofCimCBDbl    I   2013




Table of Contents
Acknowledgements                                                             4

Acronym List                                                                 6

List of Graphs, Tables and Information Boxes                                 9

Map                                                                          11

Executive Summary                                                            13

Chapter 1: Introduction                                                      23

Chapter 2: Health                                                            35

Chapter 3: Education                                                         63

Chapter 4: Work and Employment                                               93

Chapter 5: Legal Rights and Voice                                            123

Chapter 6: Conclusion                                                        157

References                                                                   162

Annex 1: Key Areas for Future Research/Data Collection                       167


                             Women's Role Ia AJillumlsbm's Flltare -
                             Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                    I
2013    1 Admowl....,..._




                          Acknowledgements




    This report was prepared by a team led by Asta Olesen (SASDS) with support
    from Rebecca Lynn Haines (Consultant), Najla Sabri (SASDA), and Samuel Hall
    Consulting. Support and early comments were also received from sector
    colleagues working in the Afghanistan Country Team. The report benefited
    from a series of organizations and individuals who made time to be
    interviewed, including the Afghanistan Public Policy Research Organization,
    the Aga Khan Foundation, BRAC, Building Markets, CARE, Catholic Relief
    Services, Concern Worldwide, the International Center for Women's Economic
    Empowerment, the International Foundation for Electoral SysteiiiS, the
    International Rescue Committee, Kim Motley (Esq.), Medica Afghanistan,
    Oxfam, Save the Children, the UNAMA Police Advisory Unit, and the United
    Nations Fund for Population Affairs.

    Valuable comments and advice were received from the Peer Reviewers for this
    task, Apichoke Kotikula (PREMGE), Maitreyi Das (SDV), and Nina Bhatt
    (MNSSO). The report benefited from guidance provided by Maria C. Corriea
    (Sector Manager, SASDS) and from additional comments from Richard Spencer
    (SASDE), Bingjie Hu and Kritika Saxena (SARCE), during the virtual review
    conducted between May 1 and May 16, 2013. The report was prepared under


4       I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
            Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieDte•
                                                                  Admowledpenbl        I   2013


the overall supervision of Maria C. Corriea (Sector Manager SASDS) and Robert
Saum (Country Director, SACAF).

The report has also benefited greatly from very useful dialogue at a workshop
in Kabul on 12 May 2013 organized by the Ministry of Women's Affairs
(MoWA) with representatives from ministries and governmental agencies
active in the various sectors covered by this report. Useful feedback was also
received from the Mghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) donors'
Gender Working Group. More generally, the report takes as a foundation the
vision for Mghanistan set forth in the Mghanistan National Development
Strategy {2008) and in the National Action Plan for the Women of Mghanistan
(NAPWA), 2008-2018.

This report constitutes a synthesis of existing information collected from
various sources ranging from the databases of several line ministries,
independent evaluations and assessments, and the NRVA 2007/08. As data
was compiled during 2013, the report has used the latest NRVA to be
published at that time. However, the 2011/12 NRVA was published in January
2014, which provides additional relevant data. The report is building upon the
World Bank Country Gender Assessment prepared in 2005 - Afghanistan:
National Recons'truction and Poverty Reduction - The Role of Women in
Afghanistan's Future and attempts to the extent possible to identify the
achievements and gains towards gender equity since 2005. The report is not a
policy document. but constitutes input for the Government and international
community in the ongoing debate on women's role in a post-transition
Mghanistan. The challenge now is to sustain the achievements, and in
partnership between the Government of Mghanistan and the donor
community, to provide practical and effective programs that will ensure
women's continued and increased participation in shaping Afghanistan's
future.

                                                               Kabul, February 2014




                               Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                               Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDbl aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                       I     S
2013      1 Aaoaym Llot



    Acronym List
    AFD                Agence Francaise de Developpement
    AIHRC              Mghan Independent Human Rights Commission
    AMICS              Mghanistan Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
    AMS                Mghan Mortality Survey
    ANA                Mghan National Army
    ANDS               Mghanistan National Development Strategy
    ANP                Mghan National Police
    AREDP              Mghan Rural Enterprise Development Program
    AREU               Mghan Research and Evaluation Unit
    ARTF               Mghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
    AusAID             Australian Agency for International Development
    BHC                Basic Health Center
    BPHS               Basic Package of Health Services
    BPRM               Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration
    CDC                Community Development Council
    CHC                Comprehensive Health Center
    CHW                Community Health Worker
    CIDA               Canadian International Development Agency
    CMAM               Comprehensive Management of Acute Malnutrition
    cso                Central Statistics Organization
    DAN IDA            Danish International Development Agency
    DCC                District Coordination Council
    DDA                District Development Assembly
    DFID               Department for International Development (UK)
    DH                 District Hospital
    DoWA               Department of Women's Affairs
    EMIS               Education Management Infonnation System
    EQUIP              Education Quality Improvement Program
    EVAW               Elimination ofViolem:e Against Women
    FHH                Female-headed Household
    FRU                Family Response Units
    GDP                Gross Domestic Product
    Gil                Gender Inequality Index
    HDI                Human Development Index
    HSC                Health Sub-center
    HMIS               Health Management Information System



6         I   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve -
              Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJiae•
                                                                 AorvDym Llot    1 2013


HP        Health Post
IARCSC    Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
          Commission
IDUs      Injection Drug Users
IEC       Independent Election Commission
ILO       International Labor Organization
KOICA     Korea International Cooperation Agency
LARA      Land Reform in Afghanistan project
MAIL      Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock
MDGs      Millennium Development Goals
MIS       Management of Information Systems
MISFA     Microfinance Investment Facility for Afghanistan
MMR       Maternal Mortality Ratio
MoE       Ministry of Education
MoHE      Ministry of Higher Education
Mol       Ministry of Interior
MoJ       Ministry of Justice
MoLSAMD   Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs, and the Disabled
MoPH      Ministry of Public Health
MRRD      Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development
MoWA      Ministry of Women's Affairs
MSM       Men Who Have Sex with Men
NABDP     National Area-Based Development Program
NAPWA     National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan
NATO      North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NERS      Nutrition Education and Rehabilitation Sessions
NGOs      Non-governmental Organizations
NHLP      National Horticulture and Livestock Program
NRVA      National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment
NSDP      National Skills Development and Market Linkages Program
NSP       National Solidarity Program
NZAID     New Zealand Agency for International Development
PC        Provincial Council
REACH     Rural Expansion of Afghanistan's Community-based Healthcare
          project
RUTF      Ready to Use Therapeutic Foods
SHARP     Strengthening Health Activities for the Rural Poor
SBA       Skilled Birth Attendant


                          Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                          Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                 I   7
2013     1 Aaoaym Llot



    SIDA             Swedish International Development Agency
    SNTV             Single Non-transferrable Vote
    SOP              Standard Operating Procedure
    sv               Stichting Vluchtelin
    TDR              Traditional Dispute Resolution
    TTC              Teacher Training College
    TVET             Technical and Vocational Education and Training
    UNAMA            United Nations Assistance Mission in Mghanistan
    UNO DC           United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime
    USAID            United States Agency for International Development
    USIP             United States Institute of Peace
    WDR              World Development Report
    WHO              World Health Organization




8        I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve -
             Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDae•
                                         u.tofGnopho,TableundiDfonutlon- 1               2013



List of Graphs, Tables and Information Boxes
l:abJ&a
Table 1: Key Women's Health Indicators
Table 2: Use of Skilled Birth Attendants by Education Level and Residence
Table 3: Infant and Under 5 Mortality Rates by Year
Table 4: Number of Health Facilities by Type
Table 5: Total Number of Midwives/Province
Table 6: Key Education Indicators for Women and Girls
Table 7: Enrolled Students by Type of Education
Table 8: Percentage of Female Students to Male Students Enrolled in
         Government Schools
Table 9: Key Employment Indicators for Women
Table 10: Percentage of Women's and Men's Responsibilities in Animal
          Husbandry
Table 11: Workers' Profile
Table 12: Key Indicators for Women's Access to Justice and Political Voice

!il:i.IW
Graph 1: Causes of Death
Graph 2: Cause of Maternal Deaths
Graph 3: Infant and Under 5 Mortality Rates by Region
Graph 4: Fertility Rate by Education Background
Graph 5: Percentage of Population Living within One Hour's Walking Distance
         from a Health Facility
Graph 6: Number of People/Doctor by Region
Graph 7: Number of Obstetricians and Gynecologists by Province
Graph 8: Percentage of Male and Female Students in Government Schools
Graph 9: Number of Government General Education Schools
Graph 10: Percentage of Government Primary Schools by Type
Graph 11: Percentage of Government Secondary Schools by Type
Graph 12: Percentage of Schools Without Buildings or Surrounding Walls
Graph 13: Increase in Number of Female Students and Female Teachers from
          2007-2012
Graph 14: Number of Students in Government Universities by Gender
Graph 15: Number of Government TVET Students by Gender
Graph 16: Percentage of Workforce in Each Sector
Graph 17: Contribution to GDP by Sector



                               Women's RolelaAli~Jumlsbm's Flltare-
                               Taldq Stack DfAclrlevements ud CDntlnued Claalleqes
                                                                                     I     g
2013    I   LlotofGnoplu,Tab""'amlloformaUonBouo



     Graph 18: Percentage of Employed Working Age Population by Sector
     Graph 19: Gender Distribution of Workers by Sector
     Graph 20: Percentage of Women Working in Each Occupation in Urban Areas
               Nationwide
     Graph 21: Percentage of Government Positions Held by Men and Women
     Graph 22: Percentage of Women Employed Across Ministries
     Graph 23: Percentage of Male and Female Employees by Province
     Graph 24: Female Civil Servants vs. Female Students by Province
     Graph 25: Gender Distribution in Each Sector
     Graph 26: Perception of Availability of Justice-related Institutions for Women

  Information Boxes
     Box 1: Family Health Action Groups
     Box 2: Accelerating Contraceptive Use
     Box 3: Expanding Access to Sanitary Feminine Products
     Box 4: Ehealth
     Box 5: Nutrition
     Box 6: Mental Health Service Delivery
     Box 7: Increasing Female Teachers
     Box8: Community-based Education
     Box 9: Support to Female Farmers
     Box 10: International Center for Women's Economic Empowerment
     Box 11: Police Training
     Box 12: Integrating justice and Health in a Response to Violence Against
             Women
     Box 13: Supporting Victims ofVAW
     Box 14: Leadership and Advocacy Training




10      I   Women"• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
            Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieD&e•
    .., 1       2013




            I
\       (
\




                 ..
                                                                lllaK:uiiYBSumDuuy    1 2013




                   Executive Summary




Women's rights, development, and participation in society have been at the
forefront of international involvement in Mghanistan since 2001. The
Government of Mghanistan has made a series of critical commitments to
women, including espousing equality in its Constitution, signing up to
international conventions on gender issues, integrating gender concerns
throughout its core national development strategy documents, and promoting
services for women within many of its key service delivery programs. Many
international actors have been particularly concerned to see gender issues
addressed, and have made women's issues central to the objectives of their aid
commitments to Mghanistan. In some sectors, these commitments have been
translated into demonstrable progress for women; this progress can be
unpacked and learned from, and considered for expansion, cross-sectoral
learning. and replication. In other sectors, advancement is less visible and
requires reexamination and a refocusing of effort to address obstacles to
progress for women.
This report assesses the overall situation of women in Afghanistan across key
sectors, acting as a follow-up to the report published by the World Bank in
2005, entitled Afghanistan: National Reconstruction and Poverty Reduction -

                               Women"• RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                               Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                      I   13
2013       1 -tlw 5ummuy



 Role of Women in Afghanistan's Future.l In 2005, reliable data on girls and
 women was difficult to find in every sector, but the report relied on a range of
 information sources, including qualitative studies and NGO initiatives, to
 compile a picture reflecting women's issues as they stood at that time. In 2013,
 there is more data available in some sectors, and more studies and analytical
 work have been produced in the intervening years, which help to round out the
 picture in each sector. That said, certain sectors or sub-themes still lack
 comprehensive quantitative data, particularly as related to women's
 employment practices and women's justice issues. Areas where the lack of
 comprehensive data is especially acute are identified in Annex 1 (p.167).
 This report has relied on national databases and quantitative surveys (where
 they exist), qualitative and perception-based surveys, program evaluations,
 qualitative research conducted in focused sites around the country, and a
 series of key interviews with donors, government departments, UN agencies,
 NGOs, and civil society actors. Key sources that have informed this report
 include the Health Management Information System (HMIS) at the Ministry of
 Public Health (MoPH) and the Education Management Information System
 (EMIS) at the Ministry of Education (MoE); data tracked by the Central
 Statistics Organization (CSO); large surveys including the Afghanistan
 Mortality Survey (AMS), the Afghanistan Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
 (AMICS), and the National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA); and a
 series of smaller focused information sources relevant to one or more
 chapters.
 The World Bank's programming. through support of key international donors,
 has made a significant contribution to most sectors covered in this report
 Programming such as the National Solidarity Program (NSP), Strengthening
 Health Activities for the Rural Poor (SHARP) with the Basic Package of Health
 Services (BPHS), the Education Quality Improvement Program (EQUIP), the
 Microfinance Investment Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA), the Afghanistan
 Rural Enterprise Development Program (AREDP), and the Horticulture and
 Livestock Program (HLP), are all examples of World Bank-supported programs
 and facilities, implemented in partnership with the Government of
 Afghanistan, that are making a difference for Afghan women.


 1
     Afrlhanlstan: Natlonalllecansti'IIC!fon and Poverty Reduction -tire Role of Women In Afrlhanlstan's Future. (Washington,
 D.C.: Wo~d Bank, 2005).




14         I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
               Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDae•
                                                                  lllaK:uiiYBSumDuuy    1 2013


What can be seen from the sectoral chapters included in this report is that, in
sectors where concerted and coordinated efforts have been made among a
collection of key actors (including the Government of Mghanistan, the donor
community, NGOs and civil society), significant improvements have been
achieved. Where well-planned systems have been designed, and consensus has
been garnered for the support of these systems, services are indeed reaching
more women and girls, and communities are becoming more accepting of
these services (most notably in health, education, and in the National Solidarity
Program, respectively discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, and under the
Community Governance sub-heading in Chapter 5). What is also shown in the
report is the innovative function that NGOs and civil society actors have played
in some of the sectors discussed, developing new mechanisms to include and
reach women, which have in many ways acted as models of good practices to
be considered for replication.
The report also highlights areas in which significant improvement has been
lacking, and a systematic approach to addressing some issues is still missing.
The prevailing lack of reliable data makes understanding the issues faced by
women in these sectors challenging. This is most pronounced in the justice
sector (Chapter 5), but can also be seen in the chapter exploring women's
employment (Chapter 4 ). Each chapter in the report concludes by distilling key
recommendations for the future, whether based on successes to date, or based
on a lack of progress and critical gaps in specific areas.
Health. One of the sectors where the most notable progress has been made is
in health. The key advances for women in the health sector since 2005 include:
a lower maternal mortality ratio; a lower fertility rate; an increase in qualified
female health professionals; and a far wider network of health facilities
capable of providing reproductive healthcare. In order to further these
advances, key areas of focus should be: further expanding the healthcare
system, such that uncovered areas gain access to proximate facilities; investing
further in health human resources while incentivizing work in rural areas,
such that more women can access health professionals (especially female staff)
closer to their homes; and a coordinated national effort on the nutritional
issues of women and children, an area that has not been strongly addressed to
date. For more information and further recommendations on the health sector,
see Chapter 2 (p. 58-9).




                                 Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                        I   lS
2013   1 -tlw 5ummuy



 Education. Another sector that has seen notable progress for girls is
 education. The number of girls attending school at each level of education has
 increased significantly, particularly at primary level, with more modest
 increases at secondary and tertiary levels. The expansion of the Government's
 network of schools has been remarkable, and there has also been an increase
 in the number of female teachers, a factor that has an impact on girls' school
 attendance, especially in higher grades. In order to maintain this momentum
 and address some of the prevailing barriers to girls' education, key areas of
 focus include: supporting girls through transition years and into higher grades
 and tertiary education opportunities (including teacher training); further
 expanding and improving education infrastructure and a transportation
 system, such that proximate access to adequate facilities improves; and
 expanding innovative education models to support girls to attend school
 regularly and safely. For a detailed discussion and further recommendations
 on the education sector, see Chapter 3 (p.89-90).
 Work and Employment. Related to women in employment.. the picture is
 less clear. Women tend to be employed in informal work that is often home-
 based, or takes place as an unremunerated contribution to the agricultural
 sector. They continue to be under-represented in other areas, such as in the
 private sector and as public servants. Qualified female professionals in social
 sector jobs (like health and education) have increased but are still scarce, and
 are a critical need for improving the delivery of social services to women. One
 area of success appears to be in microfinance, where women have readily
 participated and repayment rates are typically strong. In order to improve
 women's employment opportunities, policymakers and program designers
 should: support agricultural value chains (or portions of value chains) where
 women's contribution is strongest and most valued; strengthen quotas and
 incentives for women to participate in the public sector and in social service
 delivery roles; and target key barriers to women's employment (i.e. childcare,
 mobility, etc.). For an in-depth discussion of women's employment issues, see
 Chapter 4 (p. 93); for a discussion of female health human resources and female
 teachers, see Chapter 2 (p.Sl) and Chapter 3 (p.76), respectively.
 Legal Rights and Voice. Finally, the report addresses women's access to
 justice and public voice. While in the latter area, some space for women has
 been created and significant participation garnered, the former remains one of
 the areas of greatest need. Change in women's access to justice is very difficult
 to measure, but it is clear that violence against women is widespread. Crimes


16     I   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
           Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDae•
                                                                 lllaK:uiiYBSumDuuy    1 2013


against women are under-reported due to social stigma, and crimes which are
reported are most often handled through local informal dispute resolution
mechanisms, largely applying customary laws. Though some positive formal
legal reforms have been adopted, their application is inconsistent at best
Women are severely underrepresented as professionals in the legal system,
making access to justice even more difficult for female victims. Much is needed
to address issues of violence and access to justice: in the near term, more
support is needed for providers of legal aid and emergency response for
victims, and the reach of these services must expand. However, these are
short-term solutions; in the long-term, thorough education on legal protections
for women for all those involved in the legal process (including local justice
bodies and police), as well as a more reliable and accessible judiciary, are
critical. In addition. better data and qualitative information is especially
needed in this sector.
Also in Chapter 5 (p.138),the report explores issues of women's voice. Women
have been participating in the political process at unprecedented rates, both by
turning out for voting. and by running as candidates in presidential,
parliamentary, and provincial elections. Women's participation in unofficial
local governance and development bodies has also increased. However,
evidence from the most recent elections and other studies demonstrates that
their gains are restricted due to threats of violence and other barriers,
including the apparent misapplication of quota systems. Elections-related
provisions for women (both voters and candidates) require review and
strengthening. and women's meaningful participation in community-based
leadership must be continually improved and strengthened. Chapter 5
explores women's voice and makes recommendations for expanding their
participation in public life.

Cross-cutting Challenges
While specific issues can be identified as critical within each of the above
sectors, what is also notable is that some issues cut across all sectors as
prevailing barriers for women. One of these consistent themes is that the lack
offemale professionals in key areas (namely in health, education, and justice)
poses a barrier to other women and girls accessing these services. When a
woman is able to access a public service from another qualified woman, she is
more likely to be candid about her problems, access services more
consistently, receive more detailed information relevant to her situation, and


                                Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                       I   17
2013   1 -tlw 5ummuy



 gain more community and family support to access that service. A lack of
 professional women has a negative downstream effect on other women.
 Support for increasing educated and professionally qualified women is therefore
 a particularly strategic investment, given its potential to have a positive
 multiplier effect across sectors.
 Another cross-cutting impediment for women is insecurity, or the perception of
 insecurity. With a long history of security concerns which have affected most
 villages in the country at some point or another, many areas of Mghanistan
 have become highly restrictive of the movements of girls and women. From
 girls dropping out of school on account of not being allowed to walk. to female
 political candidates receiving threats and intimidation to remove themselves
 from political races, girls and women are restricted from services, opportunities,
 and participation due to a climate ofinsecurity.
 Although it has been treated in Chapter 5 in particular, violence against women
 is also a cross-cutting issue. High levels of violence against women can
 generate a severe physical and psychological impact Coupled with the
 accompanying social stigma, violence against women impedes women's ability to
 access services and pursue opportunities across sectors.
 In each chapter, issues of regional inequality and disparity between rural and
 urban areas can be seen across key indicators. This inequality is related to
 remoteness, insecurity, the availability of qualified human resources in a given
 area, and the uneven distribution of resources, among other factors. What is
 clear is that some provinces are far better provided for with social services than
 others, and that urban areas generally provide higher levels of services and
 opportunities than rural areas. While urban areas are typically better served
 than rural areas in most countries, the gap in Afghanistan is extreme. These
 disparities can fuel instability and conflict, and must be systematically factored
 into program design and policy-making, in order to close these existing gaps.
 In addition, barriers such as a lack of mobility, limited transportation options,
 inadequate infrastructure that omits women-friend{y features, and the
 prevalence of early marriage, tend to be repetitive cross-cutting barriers in
 many sectors. Special attention to these issues should be paid regardless of
 which sectoral programming is being considered.




18     I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve -
           Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalle:qes
                                                                 lllaK:uiiYBSumDuuy    1 2013


Finally, the report ends with a Conclusion chapter (Chapter 6,p.157),framed
through the lens of the upcoming transition years in Afghanistan, when the
Government of Afghanistan will take over more and more direct management
of services and security. These are critical years for women - for their
development and access to services, as well as their participation and decision-
making power in an evolving Mghan society. It is critical that advances for
women are identified, analyzed, and deliberately supported and expanded
during these years, in order to consolidate and maintain the gains that have
been made, and to build on these gains to steadily improve women's place in a
post-transition Mghanistan. Chapter 6 summarizes gender issues in this
context and makes recommendations for maintaining momentum on women's
place in Mghanistan's development through the transition years.




                                Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                       I   19
                                                                   Cluoptm-1.: Introduction   I   2013




                     Chapter 1: Introduction




          In Afghanistan, the role of women and their position in the society
          are inextricably interlinked with the national destiny. Women are
          symbols offamily honor but also carry the burden of embodying the
          national honor and aspirations of the country. Gender has thus been
          one of the most politicized issues in Afghanistan over the past 100
          years, where many reform attempts rightly or wrongly have been
          condemned by opponents as un-lslamic and a challenge to the
          sanctity of the faith and family. Notions of honor and shame
          underpinning cultural norms and practices emphasize female
          modesty and purity and define men as breadwinners and the
          protectors of the family. In 1929, the reformist king Amanullah 's
          government fell soon after he tried to impose social reforms,
          including the abolition of purdah (separation and veiling of women)
          and establishment of coeducation.z
The above quote from the World Bank Country Gender Assessment from 2005,
Afghanistan: National Reconstruction and Poverty Reduction - The Role of
Women in Afghanistan's Future, reflects that the question of women's role in

1
    1bid,S.



                                     Women'sRoleln~sFIItare-
                                     Taldq Staok DfAclllevemeDb and CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                              I    23
2013    I   Chapter 1• lntroductioo



 society has been a highly contested area for policy-makers in Afghanistan for
 almost a century and continues to be so. Following the fall of the Taliban
 regime in 2001, Mghan political leaders laid the path for specific attention to
 the role of women through the Bonn Agreement (2001), and then confirmed
 this path through the 2004 Constitution's recognition that •[a]ny kind of
 discrimination and privilege between the citizens of Afghanistan are
 prohibited• and •[t]he citizens of Mghanistan - whether man or woman - have
 equal rights and duties before the law."S Subsequently, The Afghanistan
 National Development Strategy 2008-2013 (ANDS), identifying gender equality
 as a cross-cutting issue, set out policies, outcomes and benchmarks for
 measuring progress in the subsequent years. The core strategy for women's
 advancement was defined as "gender mainstreaming- in the National Action
 Plan for the Women of Afghanistan 2008-2018 (NAPWA). However, the gap in
 gender equity is not easily closed and in 2012, Mghanistan still ranked 175tb
 out of 187 countries in the UN's Human Development Index (HDI), and 147th
 out of 148 countries ranked in the 2012 Gender Inequality Index (Gil). 4 While
 the HOI ranking is the same as for 2011, the Gil ranking has dropped from 141.
 The gender equity gap in Afghanistan has been high on the agenda of the
 international community since 2001, and in the preparations for the transition
 of international forces by 2014, expected to be accompanied with a decline in
 external aid, both national and international observers are voicing concerns
 that the future for Afghan women could be negatively affected by both the
 socio-economic and political impact of transition.

 Gender Equality and Development- Global and National
 Priorities
 The 2012 World Development Report (WDR), Gender Equality and
 Development,s highlighted the dramatic changes taking place across all regions
 in terms of progress towards gender equality. Building on cross-country data
 collection and analysis (with new field work from 19 countries including
 Afghanistan), the WDR focuses on the economics of gender equality and
 development in order to gain insights into how key gender outcomes emerge
 and evolve as the development process unfolds. It also explores the role of

 'C011stiM/on 0/ AJilhGnls!tJn. (Kabul: Government of Afshanlstan, 2004) Olapter 2, Article 2.
 • •Atghanisl:illn~' Human Dewlopm~nt Rrport 2013~ Thr Rift of th~ South: Human Prognrss of a D~ Warld- Summary.
  {United Notions Development Prt~~ram, 2013) 15 -18.
 'World Development~ 2012: CiMder Equality Gild Development. (Woshlnaton, D.C.: Wo~d Bank, 2011).




24      I   Women's Role In AJibmlstan'• Flltve ·
            Taldq Stack of Adllevemeots ud CAmdnued CllalleJiae•
                                                                                   Cluoptm-1.: Introduction   I   2013


policy in influencing these outcomes. The WDR pointed to four policy priorities
for gender equality:
     •    reducing gender gaps in human capital - specifically those that address
          female mortality and education;
     •    closing gender gaps in access to economic opportunities, earnings, and
          productivity;
     •    shrinking gender difference in voice and agency within society; and
     •    limiting the reproduction of gender inequality across generations.
The recently released Asia Foundation survey Afghanistan in 2012: Survey of
the Afghan Peopfe6 reported continued high support for gender equality as
nearly 9 in 10 respondents (87%) agreed that women and men should have
equal educational opportunities. Two thirds of the surveyed people were of the
view that women should be allowed to work outside the home; however, there
was a substantial difference between men's and women's attitudes in this
regard. Four fifths of female respondents (80%) said women should be
allowed to work outside the home, compared to just over half (55%) of men
who say so. Significantly more urban respondents agreed (81%) than their
rural counterparts (61%). The support for allowing women to work outside
the home has been steadily falling- from 71% in 2006 to 66% in 2012. The
reason for these apparently changing views is unclear, but security concerns
could be a key factor.
Assessing women's situation overall, almost one third of respondents (29%)
identify lack of education and/or illiteracy as the biggest problem faced by
women. After that, 10% cite the lack of rights/women's rights, 8% refer to
domestic violence, 6% to forced marriage/dowry/bride price issues, 5% to
general healthcare, and 4% to poverty. Since 2006, a lack of education and
prevailing illiteracy rates have consistently been identified as the biggest
problems for women in Afghanistan.

Evolution in Policy, Religious Guidance, and Institutional
Frameworks to Advance Women's Status
The Ministry of Women's Affairs (MoWA) was established by the Bonn
Agreement and was tasked by the interim and transitional governments of

'Af;/Nlnls!Gn In lOll: A SUM!YO/IM A/Qhrm People. [Washlnston, D.C.: Tho Asia Foundation, 2012].



                                                Womea'sRoleln~sFIItare·
                                                Taldq Staok DfAclllevemeDb and CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                              I    ZS
2013       I   Chapter 1• lntroductioo



 Afghanistan with responsibility for advancing the role of women. Since 2001,
 MoWA has had 4 ministers, and currently has 9 central departments and 34
 provincial departments. Its activities are regulated by Presidential Decree No.
 26 of 24 May 2004, according to which it holds the responsibility to implement
 political and social policies of the Government in order to secure and expand
 the legal rights of women. Implementation of the gender strategies in the ANDS
 and other policy instruments on women is in principle facilitated through
 MoWA's NAPWA, which outlines support to all ministries in incorporating
 gender into their respective planning, policy-making, programming, and
 budgeting, and supports other public agencies and institutions with the same.7
 With support from MoWA, 22 line ministries have established Gender Units,
 and a number have developed sectoral gender strategies and hired Gender
 Advisors or Gender Focal Points for specific projects or overall ministerial
 guidance, in order to be able to live up to some of the commitments in the
 ANDS and NAPWA. The Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
 Commission (IARCSC) has, together with MoWA, developed a Gender Equality
 Policy for the civil service, conducted gender awareness training, and set a
 target of 3 0% women for the civil service. This initiative is discussed further in
 Chapter 4, p.108.
 In the legislative field, the most noticeable initiative since 2005 has been the
 passing by Presidential Decree of the law on the Elimination of Violence
 Against Women (EVAW Law), under discussion in Parliament at the time of
 publication of this report This is discussed further in Chapter 5.
 Along with the formal legal system, the religious establishment develops
 positions and issues guidance on the legal framework for women and men in
 Afghanistan. In March 2012, the national Council of Ulema issued a 3-page
 declaration, outlining rights women enjoy under Islam and explaining the
 associated responsibilities of women. Among the rights were listed the right to
 property, ownership and commerce; the right to inheritance according to
 Shari'a, the right to mahr (dowry) as her exclusive property, and the right to
 choose a spouse according to her own will. The declaration noted that forcibly
 marrying an adult woman is not allowed, although consultation with the
 guardians - which is a religious rule - is practiced. Exchanging a woman as
 compensation for murder, or for establishing peace, or exchanging two women

 7
     Afrllltm/stan W""""' strltus ~. Ensllsh Translation. [Kabul: Ministry of Women'a Alfalrs,l389 -1391) 4.




26         I   Women's Role ID AJibmlstan'• Fu.tve ·
               Taldq Stack of AdllevemeDts ud CAmdnued Cllalleqes
                                                               Cluoptm-1.: Introduction   I   2013


in marriage, is forbidden, and a wife cannot be inherited. The merna Council
also listed women's duties and obligations, which comprise complete
observance of the hijab, avoiding mingling with strange men in various social
situations such as education, shopping, the office and other affairs of life,
avoiding travelling without a mahram, and the acceptance of polygamy as
religiously sanctioned. Further, the declaration noted that in 'consideration of
the clarity of verses 1 and 34 of Surah an-Nisa' [of the Qur'an], men are
fundamental and women are secondary'; also, lineage is derived from the man.
Therefore, the use of words and expressions that contradict the sacred verses
must be strictly avoided.' The Ulema Council proceeded to request the judicial
and law enforcement organs of the country to punish, in accordance with
Shari'a and national laws, the perpetrators of any kind of assault (teasing,
harassment, and beating) against women. without a Shari'a compliant reason.
The above pronouncement caused considerable debate not least because of the
pronouncement of women's 'secondary' position, which was seen by many as
running counter to the constitutionally defined gender equality which is also
spelled out in numerous national policies and strategies. In addition, the stress
on gender segregation in public life, of hijab and the requirement of a mahram,
were also seen as an attempt to curtail women's rights.
On the other hand, the Ulema Council's declaration clearly highlighted a
number of inalienable rights for women, which are identified in this report as
essential for sustaining women's rights and for releasing their potential in
support of national development Among these are women's rights to property,
ownership and commerce, which in numerous studies have been identified as
key constraints to women's economic empowerment Further, the declaration
strongly pronounced forcible marriage and a range of widespread customs and
practices as haram, and thus clearly religiously forbidden. Women's right to
education was assumed (avoiding co-education) and finally, it was reiterated
that violence against women (outside of Shari'a) was punishable by law.
This pronouncement typifies the position of women in Afghanistan in many
ways - in its demonstration of the opportunities for reform, its recognition of
women's subjugation under traditional and common extra-judicial practices,
but also its position within a contested space on women's place in society, and
its ability to call to mind the overlapping legal frameworks and worldviews
that affect Afghan women. What is clear is how critical it is to engage the
religious establishment through Mghanistan's transition, in discussions on


                                 Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                          I    27
2013    I   Cbaptm" 1• lntroductioD




 gender roles and in the promotion of the rights, opportunities, and the
 inclusion of women.

 The Millennium Development Goals
 Mghanistan has also defined its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), to be
 achieved by 2020. However, in many cases, there are major obstacles to
 reaching these goals by this date. The below table is a reflection of selected
 goals that significantly impact on women, along with the 2010 assessment of
 their status up until that point

                     Afal181list:an Millennium Development Goals Report 2010
  #            GOAL                        MDGTARGET                       Assessment (2010)
Goal2        Achieve         Target: Ensure that, by 2020, children        Radical improvements
            universal      everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be    achieved but dose to halfof
             primary       able to complete a full course of primary   school-aged children are not
            education                         schooling                  yetenrolledinschooland
                                                                        educational parit;y between
                                                                           boys and girls remains
                                                                                challe1111i1111
Goal3        Promote           a) Eliminate gender disparity in all   Potential to achieve the goal is
              gender           levels of education no later than 2020                 low
             equality      b) Reduce gender disparity in economic
                and                         areas by 2020
            empower              c}lncrease female participation in
              women              elected and appointed bodies at all
                                levels of governance to 30% by 2020
                            d) Reduce gender disparity in access to
                                     justice by SO% by 2015 and
                                     completely (100%) by 2020
Goal4         Reduce           Reduce by 50%, between 2003 and          Improvements achieved but
               child          2015, the under-5 mortality rate, and     Afghanistan remains one of
            mortality further reduce it to 1/3 of the 2003 level         the countries with highest
                                               by2020                               infant
                                                                              mortalitv rates
GoalS        Improve       Reduce by SO% between 2002 and 2015            Some improvements but
            maternal       the maternal mortality ratio (MMR), and      Afghanistan remains in the
              health         further reduce the MMR to 25% of the     lowest category in its maternal
                                         2002 level bv 2020                   health situation




ZB
        I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve -
            Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~ued Cllalleqes
                                                                                        Cluoptm-1.: Introduction   I   2013


Although the MDGs reflect the huge developmental problems Afghanistan is
facing. the lack of security is seen by most as the most pervasive issue facing
the country. This view is substantiated in the Asia Foundation Survey,a where
the people surveyed identified insecurity including attacks, violence, and
terrorism (28%), unemployment (27%), and corruption (25%), as the 3
biggest problems facing Mghanistan as a whole. Nearly half (48%) of those
surveyed reported fearing (often or sometimes) for their personal safety or for
that of their families.

The 2005 World Bank Country Gender Assessment
Since resuming its Mghanistan program in 2002, in alignment with
government policy, the World Bank has made considerable efforts to
incorporate gender across its portfolio of projects in Mghanistan, including
lending operations and analytical work. with a view to leveraging its
investment project portfolio to maximize its impact on the lives of Mghan
women.
The 2005 Country Gender Assessment established the Bank's country-level
gender mainstreaming strategy as follows:
(1)        Strengthening women's involvement and remuneration in agricultural
           and livestock production (extension and training, credit facilities,
           market opportunities);
(2)        Developing socially acceptable skilled and unskilled employment
           opportunities in the urban sector in response to the high incidence of
           poor female-headed households;
(3)        Collecting adequate sex-disaggregated data across all sectors to enable
           monitoring of future developments and effects of investments;
(4)        Enabling legal reforms to remove gender inequities; and
(5)        Substantially increasing women's employment in the health and
           education sectors, thereby directly and positively affecting girls' school
           enrollment, female access to health services, maternal mortality, and
           general child and family health.
In addition to operationalizing the above areas in ongoing programming, these
points have been studied through a range of tools and research approaches
commissioned by the World Bank. For example, the National Risk and

• ll,/Qhrmlmln In 2012; A Survey of1M Afgllan People. (Washlnl!lon. D.C.: llle Asia Foundation, 2012) 29.



                                                   Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                   Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                   I    29
2013        Chapter 1• lntroductioo



 Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA) collects national level gender disaggregated
 data on a wide range of issues. On a more qualitative scale, one series of
 studies has focused on constraints to girls' education,9 while others have
 addressed women's role in agricultureto and access to micro-finance.tt Other
 areas addressed have been women's voice in local level governance as
 manifested in their participation in the National Solidarity Program,t2 as well
 as gender perspectives on rural access and mobility.t3 Finally, a
 comprehensive study on "Gender Outcomes in Formal and Informal Justice
 Systems• is currently ongoing.
 In operations, the mainstreaming of gender perspectives and programming has
 followed a strategy of "picking the low-hanging fruit", building opportunities
 where tangible gains could be made in the near-term, by strengthening
 women's involvement in the sectors where they already had a socially
 accepted presence. Simultaneously, programming has worked to slowly
 expand the borders of what is considered socially acceptable, allowing for new
 interventions in critical areas. While significant achievements in reducing
 gender gaps have been made over the 8 years since the previous report,
 progress is uneven across sectors, between regions, and among social groups,
 as well as between rural and urban areas.

 Objectives and Scope of the 2013 Gender Stocktaking Report
 Building on the 2005 Country Gender Assessment, the objective of this report
 is to assess progress in addressing gender issues across sectors and identify
 critical areas where gaps or obstacles to gender-responsive actions still
 hamper growth, poverty reduction, and human well-being. A wider objective is

 • These studies Included the co-funded Aflhanlstan Resean:h and Evaluation Unlt (AREU) "Household Declslon-Maklns and
 School Enrolmen~ series   of cilse studies ilnd the briefing   p;~per: ~ookin1 Beyond the School Wt~lls: Household Decisioll-
 Maklns and School Enrolment In Afihanlstan" (2006); CARE lntemotlonars "Knowledce on flr.: attacks on education In
 Aflhanlstan" (2009); "Towards sreater sender equity In Education.• Aflhanlstan Gender Malnstreamlng Implementation
 Note Series, No. 1 {2009); and -rechnicil and Vocational Educiltion ilnd Tl"iiinin1 (lVET}... Ail;hilnistiln Gender
 MainstreamIns Implementation Note Se~es, No.4 (2009].
 10
    •Gender in Developing the Acriculture ,;nd Livestock Sectors." Afrlhanistlm GrndrrMoinstrmminglmp~ntrJtiDn Nate
 Serle!, No.2 (2009); "Undemanding Gender In Global Value Chains: The Case of Grapes/Raisins, Almonds and Saffron In
 Aflhanlstan" (20111.
 u Lyby~ Erik. "Micro-finance and Gender Roles in Afghiilnistan: A study report. • (World Bank, 2006); •Helpinl Micrufinance
 Wor1< Better for Women.• Afghanistan Gender Ma/nstroomlll!llmplemen!atlon Note Serle!, No. 3 (2009).
 "Azarbal)ani-Moshaddom, Slppl. "A Study of Gender Equity tllroush the National Solidarity Prosram's community
 Development Councils." (Kabul: DACMR, 2009}. NSP impact on p!'nder is also COY1i!red in the NSP llllmpilct Evaluation.
 "Ahmad, Maha and John Howe. •Rural access and mobility In Afihanlstan -• sender-sensitive analysis." (WoshlnBton, D.C.:
 Wo~d Bank, 2010].




30
        I   Women's Role In AJibmlstan'• F'lltve -
            Taldq StDo:k of Adllevem..,ts ud CAmdnued CllalleDse•
                                                                                   Cluoptm-1.: Introduction   I   2013


to highlight, both to the Government of Afghanistan and to donors, key
challenges to sustaining gender achievements in view of potential institutional
and policy changes and expected aid reduction. The report will also provide
guidance on any gender-related activities or areas that, in the above context,
may be critical for the World Bank, donors, and the Government of Mghanistan
to consider supporting, whether in the form of analytical work or technical
assistance.

Methodology and Sources
The report comprises an update on the 2005 report across the same sectors
(health, education, work and employment, legal rights and voice). Like its
predecessor, it is based on a compilation of available data across key sectors. In
2005, little research and national level data collection had taken place for
several decades, resulting in gaps in systematic knowledge about gender
relations beyond anecdotal evidence. The situation is somewhat improved
today, with the availability of the NRVA,14 the comprehensive AMS from 2010,
the NSP Impact Assessment, the comprehensive Management of Information
Systems (MIS) in a number of World Bank-funded projects and line ministries,
and the analytical work of the World Bank and other key actors.
Preparation for the report involved comparisons among a series of available
sources, including the major national sources named above, and a set of
smaller, more qualitative research sources that round out, corroborate, or
modify what is learned from national surveys and databases. In addition, a
series of key informant interviews were undertaken with actors in the
Government, international community, among NGOs, and in Mghan civil
society, in order to learn more about initiatives, approaches, and perspectives
from programmers and implementers operating in various parts of
Mghanistan. Once a draft was prepared, a workshop organized by MoWA was
held in Kabul in May 2013, presenting the draft report to representatives from
line ministries, and a further consultation was held with members of the donor
community in June 2013. Major points from these discussions have been
captured in the final version of this report




 The NRVA 2007/081s used.. since 2011/12 data were not yet IMIIIable ot the time af wr~ln1. Further, NRVA 2007/08 and
14

NRVA 2011/12 are not Immediately comparable due to differences In methodoiOC'f.



                                                Women'sRoleln~sFIItare·
                                                Taldq Staok DfAclllevemODts and CODtlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                              I         31
                                                                    Ouop!Br z. Hulth    1 2013




                       Chapter 2: Health




Since ZOOZ, the Government of Mghanistan and a series of other actors have
undertaken a set oflarge-scale interventions aimed at improving the country's
very poor health statistics. The pre-existing health indicators in the country
were particularly dire for women; therefore many of these interventions have
targeted female beneficiaries and focused on the specific health needs and
challenges of women in Afghanistan. As can be expected, a good deal of this
effort has been focused on issues of maternal health and family planning. while
other initiatives have sought to address health infrastructure, health human
resources, nutrition, and mental health, to name a few.
Consequently, the health environment in Mghanistan has improved in some
critical areas since the previous report in ZOOS. This is particularly the case for
women, for whom the baseline was especially low. Indeed, even accounting for
different methodological approaches and a lack of data in 2005, it is clear that
there have been notable improvements across several significant indicators:
life expectancy has increased for both women and men, fertility rates have
declined, and both infant and maternal mortality rates have decreased. These
improvements are reflected in the following key measurements:

                                 Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare -
                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                        I   3S
         Life Expectancy at Birth




        Under Five Mortality Ratio                172 fataUties/1,000 births

      Contraceptive Prevalence Rate

          Skilled Antenatal Care                                                                    47.9%23
                 Usage Rate

                                                                                                    38.6%24

      Proportion of population within
      1 hour's walking distance from


 Closely related to these improvements, the number of health facilities has
 increased significantly since 2005 across the country. There are now 2,047
 health facilities of varying levels that make up the national health system, as
 compared to 1,214 in 2005. In addition, there are a number of private health
 facilities operating in the country as well. Although the trajectory indicated by
 the above statistics is encouraging. gender inequality is still recognized as one
 of the main issues in the health sector in Mghanistan, and overall indicators
 are still low by global standards. Using data gathered from MoPH and a series
 of other national sources, the trends cited above, along with continuing gaps
 and challenges for women's health, will be explored further in this chapter.
 15
  For a comparison of similar data points datins back to 1960, see tile World Bank's 2005 raport:Afghanismn: Notional
 ReaN!Jtroctlon and PD"""Y ~uctlon -tile Rale of women In Afrlhanlstrm's Future.
 11
    Afrlhonistan: Notionrzl RKDnstructioo and Poverty R~ - thr Rol~ afWDmrn jn Afrlhanistan•s FuturE. (Wilshiqt:on,
 D.C.: World Bonk, 2005115-17.
 "Johhonlstan MorttJIIIy Sllflley. !Kabul: Ministry of Public Heo~h, 20W)129.
 '"Ibid, 123.
 10
    1bld, 40.
 ., Johhonlstan Muhf.lndlaltor Oustv SUtvoy. (Kabul: UNICEF, 2010/11120.
 "Ibid, 20.
 22
    1bld, vl.
 21
    1bid,vi.
 "lbld,vl.
 25
    Ntltlonal Risk and VU/neroblnty A<re.ument. (Kabul: central statistics orsonlz.otlon, 2.0117/S)Iv.



36        I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve-
              Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJI&e•
                                                                                            Ouop!Br z. Hulth      1 2013


Gender Differences in Mortality
Life expectancy in Mghanistan is low for both men and women but has steadily
improved since 2004. In 2004, the HDI listed the average life expectancy at
birth for men and women as 43.1.26 In 2008, the MoPH published life
expectancy figures of 4 7 years for men and 45 years for women,27 and the
World Health Organization's (WHO) figures gathered in 2009 record life
expectancy as 47 years for men and 50 years for women.zB Most recently, the
2010 AMS reports that life expectancy is 63.6 years for men and 64.2 years for
women.z9 Compared to data for the broader region, life expectancy by sex for
Pakistan and Iran are as follows: 64.2 for men and 67.9 for women in
Pakistan,30 and in Iran, 68.6 for men and 71.6 for women.31 One reason for the
improvement in Mghan women's life expectancy is that mortality ratios for
women aged 15-49 have fallen dramatically since 2000 (dropping from
103/1,000 to 52/1,000).32
This positive trend in Mghanistan is encouraging; however, mortality rates are
still high and a breakdown of causes demonstrates gender differentials that are
instructive.

                          --
        60 ~----~~~-------G ~p_
                             ~ h_l_
                                  :ca
                                   __w.
                                      __s
                                        _af
                                          ____
                                            De ~
                                               _ h
                                                 ____~~--~--
        50
        40
     "30
        20
        10
         0
                 Cornmunic.illble~
                                            Noncommunicable            Injuries            Unclassified
              maternal, perlrliltJIIond
                                               diseilses
              nutritional conditions

                                                    (Sou ret~: AMS 201 OJ



26
     •AfBhanistan,"' Humon ~~nt Rflpart .2CJ(}(. (United Nations Development Propam~ 2004)250.
"'Annuol Report 1387. [Kabul: Ministry of Public H""llh. 2008] 1.
•wtJrld Hoo/th StaDstic$. (WHO, 2012] 52.
l'SI The AMS l5the first   nationwide health 5Urvey, while prevlou5 estlmate5 were b•Hd on more loQ~II:zed 5•mplln& partly
explalnlns the slsnlflcant shllt In data.
"'""Pokimn.• Am!ssed 28 April 2013. http:l/en.worldrtot.inlalAsiillPakistilnl.
" "Iran.• Accessed 28 Aprll 2013. htto-flen worldstat lnfofAsla/Jran.
"AfrJirtJnl<tan Moltr1lr!y Survey. [Kabul: Ministry of Public Health, ZOW] 107.



                                                   Women"• RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                   Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemODb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                                 I       37
 The greatest proportion of deaths in Afghanistan is due to communicable
 diseases, maternal/perinatal conditions, and nutrition-related conditions.
 Looking specifically at the causes of death among women, the most common
 causes of death are: infections and parasitic diseases (18%), cardiovascular
 diseases (18%), respiratory infections (15%) and maternal/perinatal
 conditions (17%). Maternal conditions account for 1 in 5 deaths among women
 aged 15-59.33

 Maternal and Child Mortality
 A series of causes can result in maternal mortality, with some clear trends as
 demonstrated in the below graph:

                                  Greph Z: Ceuses of Matern•I Deaths



                                                                  ·llomo-
                                                                      .......
                                                                  • ~rr.~        OIIItrudelll .......r




                                                                 .   ....... . . .
                                                                 ·--/Eel
                                                                  tlottwDirectCIYMI



                                                                    _,,
                                                                  IJ lndiNft~l.l. .

                                                   (Source: AMS 2010)

 Tracking improvements in levels of maternal mortality is difficult due to an
 historical lack of comprehensive data. The most frequently cited maternal
 mortality ratio until 2010 was 1,600 fatalities per 100,000 live births among
 women of reproductive age. However, this data was gathered from only four
 provinces (Kabul, Laghman, Badakhshan and Kandahar), and extrapolated as a
 representative national figure. Recent figures, on the other hand, are derived
 from surveys that gained broader coverage, designed with the aim of being
 more nationally representative. In these studies, maternal mortality ratios are
 cited as 327 per 100,000 live births,34 and 460 per 100,000 live births.3s 36 In


 "Afph<mlmln Mortality Su1'110)'. (Kabul: Ministry of Public H.. ~h. 2010) 130-137.
 54
    1bld,l29.
 "World Hoolth Statistics. [World H.. ~h Orsanization, 2012) 66.
 "While ne~her of these sourao• was able to cover every district of At&llanl•tan due to Insecurity, they represent the most
 comprehensiVe data collected In Afshanlstan to date. The previous flsure (1,600) wos based on a limited sample area, while




38
        I   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve-
            Taldq Stock of Adllevemeats ud ~ued ChalleDte•
                                                                                         Chapter 2 : Health      2013



comparison. maternal mortality In Pakistan Is 260/100,000,17 whlle Iran has a
ratio of21/100,000.38
Major factors in generating these changes are likely to be improvements in two
main areas:
1. Antenatal care: The number of women receiving antenatal care (at least
   once during pregnancy} from a skilled health worker has increased.
   According to the AMS, pregnant women participating in at least one
   antenatal visit rose from 57% in the period 36-59 months (4- S years)
   before the survey, to approximately 68% at the time of the survey, in
   2009/10." Approximately 3% of these are with a Community Health
   Worker (CHW}, while the remainder are with a doctor, nurse, or midwife.
   The gains in coverage were observed in both urban and rural areas, and
   represent a three-fold increase compared to 2003.40 Still, approximately
   32% of women receive no prenatal care liDked to the healthc.are system,
   and only 16% of women reported having at least 4 antenatal visits;u the
   minimum necessary to provide adequate screening for pregnancy
   complications.

2. Attended Deliveries: The NRVA's figures in 2007/8 found that 24% of
   births were attended by a Skilled Birth Attendant (SBA).4Z In the AMS,
   32% of children were delivered in a health
   facility.43 The AMICS report shows that
   38.6% of births were attended by a skilled
   professlonal..w Th1s Increase has to do
   both with the decision of a couple to seek
   an attended birth, and the availability of
   quallfled birth attendants, a point looked


..111biH *-'lid ln.
                                                                                          ""'re.
11>e AMSwas based on dcllltto national s.al!'4lllnr. The WHOftrune has 11een based on 1heAMS       ~additional

""P~~:tst~n.• Aa:uled 2JIA!K112013. bt!p;//M!O!l!cs.wgrl!l!!rfk.qs/cM!cr/llQuniT1!!!!e!s!!ta•·
• " l " ' n . • - 3 Apr1 :IOU. h!!p:/Jc!otl!!z!alcl.warldbonk.an!lpndor/_,ntryl!,..,d•lomlc:!w!.
• M/llllNffllll Mr>ttrlllry Su/w)< {l(abul: Mll'llllry of Public l!eaht\. 2010)66.
"lbld,66.
• lblcl,129 •
..lblcl,129•
• lblcl,l29 •
..lblcl,129.



                                                 Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                 Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges            39
       at in more depth under the sub-heading HHealth Human Resources", below.
       Table 2 analyzes the effect of a mother's education levels and urban vs.
       rural residence, as factors that impact the choice to seek out an SBA.
             Table Z: Use of Sldlled Blrtb AttelulaDt II)' l!ducaiiOD l..eftladll.eddeace
                                                              hrc;at.qll u.lq.
                                                            Sldlleclllrda.AibladaDt
                                                  .AMS2010M                .AMICS 2010/11*
                                                 (llue: 16.998)              (Bae:: 4,865)
                       No Education                                 30.1        34.2
      Mother's
                       Madrassa                                     41.6         -
                       Primary                                      60.9        63.9
      Education
                      Secondary                                     77.7
                                                                                83.0
                      Hillher                                       80.0
                      Urban                                         70.9        74.3
      Residence
                      Rural                                         25.7        30.5
 As the table demonstrates, a more educated mother (especially in urban
 areas), is the most likely to use an SBA. Data was not available on the effect of
 the education levels of other members of the household (i.e. the father or the
 mother-in-law) on the use of SBAs.
                                       Box 1: Family Health Action Groups

     Various public health models have been used to provide increasing information to women
     on reproductive health. One interesting public health model that helps to reach women is
     the establishment and support to Family Health Action Groups, now a widely used model in
     Afghanistan. For example, through Save the Children (funded by UNICEF and AusAID), this
     model has been implemented starting in August 2011, in Istalif and Guldara districts of
     Kabul province and in Dehrawood district of Uruzgan. establishing 49 groups in total.
     These groups Include the participation of 326 women, each responsible for outreach to 10
     - 15 households. The groups are a venue for women to provide and exchange information
     with other women, aimed at increasing knowledge (and therefore outcomes) as related to
     birth preparedness, antenatal and postnatal information, and newborn care. Community
     Health Worlrers are trained to support the Family Health Action Groups, building
     sustainability into the model In districts where this model is being implemented, Save the
     Children has seen a very strong interest by participating women in acting as advocates to
     other women on what they have learned about safe births. Most notably, in lstalif and
     Guldara, Save the Children has seen rates of attended births Increase from 56.7% to 80.6%,
     indicating that these groups can be a highly successful model of awareness-raising and
     advocacy.


 "Nr/lrDnlstan Mortalfly Su"'"Y. [Kabul: Mlnl•try of Public Health,. 2010)79.
 • NriiNJnistan Multip/o lndic:tltar CJustotSu"'"Y. [Kabul: UNICEF, 2012) 99.



40       I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
             Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieDte•
Whlle maternal mortality ratios are Improving. they are still particularly poor
among adolescent girls (aged 15 -19).1n Afghanlstan,.l4% of girls In this age
bracket have begun chlldbearlng. with an additional 2% who had a live birth
prior to the age of 15 (with a likely higher percentage who were pregnant but
did not have a live birth before 15).4' Some regions show particularly high
rates of early child-bearing, namely the West. South, and Central Highlands.
This issue is closely connected to the prevalence of early marriage; indications
from anecdotal evidence and qualitative studies show a strong link between
poverty and early marriage, as high bride prices help to offset debt payments
or alleviate the poverty of a girl's family.
Some of the complications reflected In
Graph 2 above do not always cause
fatalities (and are therefore not reflected
In the statistics). However, birthing
complications, such as prolonged or
obstructed labor, which do not result In
the death of the mother, can cause long·
term health problems for women. The
most severe of these long-term conditions
is obstetric fistula, a fissure that forms in
the vaginal wall to the bladder or rectum.
Obstetric fistula is particularly common
among girls who become mothers in their
teenage years, and can also correlate to
areas with high rates of under-nutrition. as
it is linked to pelvic under-development
Obstetric ftstula         causes lnfecUon.
reproductive health compUcatlons, and
sodal alienation for women due to chronic
lnconUnence and odor. At present, the only 2 facilities performing flstula
repair operations are Malalal Maternity Hospital and CURE Hospital, both ln
Kabul.48



.. lbld,.90.
""'lleehtt..,..rlhln),lry, OIMIIIt~FIIblt:AProlllemthtQon Be~.· ~UAp1120U.
l)tSp;//qynryptT'q yntpppf'llgfltwnlstm'WtJW2af9.Dittc cMd"f1h tntJrv *'CPfG tktll• • R'*cm 1bot qn
~



                                                                                                  41
 As with maternal mortality, changes in child mortality are difficult to assess
 with complete confidence, given the dearth of early data and variations in
 methodology used. However, as the table below illustrates, most key sources
 show that the levels of under-five and infant mortality have progressively
 declined.
                              Tillie 3: lldmtPCI UDder 5 MortalitY..._ bYY....
                                 2005"                  NRVA 2007f8A                 AIIS2010U
                                                                                                                 AMICS
                                                                                                               2010/1111
       IDfant                       115                         111                          77                     74
      Mortality               fatalities/               fatalities/1,000            fatalities/1,000         fatalities/1,000
        Rate                 1,000 births                    births                      births                   births
       UoderS                     172                          161                         97                       102
      Mortallty            fatalities/1,000             fatalities/1,000            fatalities/1,000         fatalities/1,000
           Rate                 births                       births                      births                   births


 As the two most recent data sources, the AMS and AMICS figures are fairly
 close on this issue. Expressed by region, child mortality rates disaggregate in
 the below pattern:

                             Graph 3: Infant and Under 5 Mortality Rates by Reclon
     140
     120
     100
      80
     60
     40
     20
      0
                 West    South East Central              North       North East Central              South      East
                                   Highlands
                              • Infant Mortality Rate                   • Under Five Mortality Rate


                                                   (Saura: AMICS 2010/11)


 "Mlhanlstan: NatlonGI RealnstTuctlon and Prwerty Reduction- the Role of Women In Mlhanlstan's Futu~. (Washlnaton,
 D.C.: World Bank, 2005) 15 •
 ., NatioiNJJ RisJc and Vulmtrobt1ity Assessment. (Kabul: C..ntrol Statistics Orpnization, 2007/8) iii.
 "Mlhanlstan MortaJ(Iy 5"""'1'. (Kabul: Ministry of Public Heo~h, 2010) 192.
 "Afl1hanlstan Mu~ lndlcGtol' au.r.r S"""'l'. (Kabul: UNICEF, 2012) 20.




42         I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
               Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~ued Cllalle:qes
                                                                                               Ouop!Br z. Hulth      1 2013


Disaggregated by region of Mghanistan, the findings from the AMICS report
illustrate that the highest rates of both infant and under-five mortality are in
the West, Southeast, Central Highlands, and North. Again, one influential factor
relates to the number of skilled health professionals available in each region,
as compared to population size. This issue is explored more under the sub-
heading HHealth Human Resources», below. While these figures represent
steady improvement, they are still significantly higher than South Asian
regional comparisons. The average Infant Mortality Rate for the South Asian
region was 53/1,000 live births in 2010, where the Under-five Mortality Rate
was 77/1,000 live births.53
An issue that has been identified as a serious problem in nearby countries is
the sex ratio discrepancy at birth, resulting in a skewed overall demographic
trend, where there are significantly more boys than girls. This is often related
to the practice of sex-selective abortion, but can also include cases of female
infanticide among other issues. According to data available on recorded births,
the gender ratio at birth in Afghanistan is 115.7 males/100 females.s• This
represents approximately 10% more boys than is considered natural (and is
more pronounced in the South than any other region). However, there is no
evidence of sex-selective abortion in Mghanistan; the skewed gender ratio
most likely reflects the widespread practice of not registering births, especially
those of girls. Differential treatment of female and male children after birth
may have a gendered effect on the mortality rates.

Fertility and Family Planning
Encouragingly, the literature continues to record decreasing rates of fertility
among Mghan women. In 2005, the fertility rate was 6.3.55 The most recent
government figures placed the figure significantly lower in 2010 at 5.1.56 This
compares to rates of3.6 for Pakistan,57 1.7 for Iran, 58 2.8 for India, 59 and 3.2 for
Tajikistan.6()

""Gender Equality In Sooth Aslo: Rlsl111 to the Chollen1e." WDR 2012 COmpanion -South Asia (unpublished). (Washlnllon.
D.C.: World Bank, 2012).
"Afllhonl•tcrn Morlllllly Su~~~q. (Kabul: Mlnl5try of Public Heo~h, 2010] 38.
"Afli!Janlsttm: NatlonD/IIea>ll5trtlr:tlon and Ptwerty l!eductlon- thel!ole of women In Afi!Janlstan's Alt!l,... (WashlnKton,
D.C.: World Bank, ZOOS) 20.
"Afli/Janlstan Mortcrllly Su~~~q. (Kabul: Mlnlslr( of Public Healltl, 2010] 40.
""Gander Equality In Sooth Asia: RlsiiiiJ to the Challansa." WDR 2012 COmpanion -South Asia (unpublished]. (WashlnKton,
D.C.: World Bank, 2012).
51
   ..1ran.· Accessed 28 Aprtl2013. http·IJdatatopJc.s wortdbank orafsender/country/lran -ls!amlc:rep




                                                   Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                   Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemODts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                     I          43
Commensurate to this decline in the fertility rate, the use of contraception is on
the rise in Afghanistan. In 2005, only 5% of women aged 14-49 used any kind
of contraception,61 while the AMICS from 2012 shows that more than 20% now
use some form of modem contraception.6Z This figure disaggregates widely by
urban vs. rural areas, at 28% for urban areas, and 13% for rural areas.
However, knowledge of contraception is still much higher than use. According
to the AMS, approximately 90% of women knew of some contraception
methods, with knowledge most widespread in the West and least in the
Southeast 63 However, despite knowledge and an increase in use, the use of
contraception is still low and fertility rates remain high.
There is a direct link between educational achievement, the use of
contraception and fertility rates. Only a fifth (20%) of women with no
education use contraception compared to 38% among women who have
attained at least secondary education.64 In a similar vein, according to the AMS,
fertility rates ranged from 5.3 among women with no education to 2.8 among
women with higher education.6S


                                       Graph 4: Fertility Rate by Educational Bacqround




                                                     (S'Quru: AMS 2010)


•"'Gender Equality in South Asiil: Risina: to the Chilllence,:" WDR 2012. Camponion -South Asia (unpublished). ~Wilshinston~
D.C.: World Bank, 20121.
"'"Tajilcistan.• Aa:essed 28 Aprll2013. ht!p;{fdatatoplcs.worldbank.orllsender/country/talflcfstan.
"Afrlhanistun: National Reamstructicm <md Po~~erty Reduction- the Ra/e af Women in AfrlhanistDn's Futu,... (Washingtort,
D.C.: world Bank, 2005}"'
., AfrlhanistDn Multipr.. lndiw!Dr Oustv Sulwy. (Kabul: UNICfF, 2012)'"·
a AfrlhanistDn Mormiity Suf!ley. {ICabul: Ministry af Public Health, 2010} ...
"AfrlhanlstJJn Multiple indicator Oustv Suf!ley. (Kabul: UNICEF, 2012} "'·
"'Afrlhonlstan Mortalit)l Suf!leY. (Kabul: Ministry of Public: Hea~h, 20W) 41.




       I   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
           Taldq Stock of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieD&e•
                                                                        Ouop!Br z. Hulth    1 2013


Other notable demographic differences in fertility rates include the variation in
rates between urban and rural populations (4.7 and 5.2 respectively), the
variations between the most and least remote quintiles (5.1 vs. 4.8), and the
lowest and highest wealth quintiles (5.3 vs. 4.8). In terms of regional
differences, the highest fertility rates are in the East and Southeast (at 5.6 and
5.5 respectively), while the lowest rates are in the Central Highlands and the
South (at 4.6 and 4.7).66 Of course, if the birth of girls is underreported most
commonly in the South as per the skewed sex ratio discussed in the HMaternal
and Child Mortali~ sub-section above, this could affect the fertility rates by
approximately 5%.67

                          Boz 2: Accelerating Contraceptive Use
 From 2004-06, Management Sciences for Health (MSH) implemented a Hewlett
 Foundation-funded family planning program called Accelerating Contraceptive Use, in
 partnership with MoPH and through 4 local implementing NGOs. The project sought
 innovative ways to increase levels of contraceptive use in specific locations, including
 selected districts in Ghami, Herat, and Kabul provinces. During the program, they worked
 with 3,708 households, 35 health posts, and 65 Community Health Workers. MSH and
 partners employed a variety of approaches, including:
 • Working with mullahs and partnering with them to provide information to
 communities;
 • Using quotations from the Qu'ran on birth spacing when discussing contraception;
 • Educating men and women about the correct use of contraceptives;
 • Advocating two years of breastfeeding and pregnancy spacing;
 • Communicating that oral contraceptives are safe and effective if used every day, and
 that fertility returns when stopped. Simple instructions for use were included.

 The project found that the mullahs' main concerns were typically about safety and
 infertility, rather than religion. By using some of the methods outlined above, all of the
 mullahs In this project accepted the concept of birth spacing using modern contraceptives.
 During the program, the use of contraception increased significantly, by between 24% and
 27% in the project districts.

 After its completion, Accelerating Contraceptive Use was used as a pilot project that was
 scaled up In a partnership between TechServe, USAID, and MoPH, and was Implemented In
 all USAID-funded provinces in the health sector (within USAID's REACH project). The
 REACH project increased contraceptive use from 16% to 26% over a period of two years in
 13 provinces.



.. lbld,42.
57
     1bid,42.



                                     Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                     Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                            I   45
 Related to fertility issues is women's menstrual health. Sanitary napkins are
 typically not used and not available, especially in rural areas. Because
 menstruation still often carries a strong taboo, it is difficult for many women to
 find appropriate means for cleaning and disposing of the garments being used.
 Without the ability to clean clothes and expose them to sunlight in the drying
 process, the cloth does not get adequately cleaned. The potential for
 reproductive tract infections is significant, even to the point of causing sterility.
 In some regional countries in South Asia, models have been developed to have
 locally produced sanitary napkins sold and distributed by women to other
 women. This could be one way to improve menstrual hygiene and prevent
 infections. In addition to supply, discrete, hygienic disposal methods are also
 critical, along with better information on hygienic cleaning methods, in order
 to protect women from reproductive complications caused by a lack of
 menstrual sanitation.

                      BoJ: 3: E:qJandiDgAc:cess to Sanitaey Feminine Produc:ts
     In Badakhshan province, Concern Worldwide - Afghanistan has created a mobile shop
     model to fadlitate women's ability to shop for themselves in rural areas. In areas where
     women cannot travel to shop for themselves, men often shop for women. This means that
     it is more difficult for women to request the procurement of personal items, like sanitary
     feminine products. The mobile shop rotates from house to house, managed by different
     community women in rural areas. This model was co-designed by lrishAid-funded local
     women's groups to address their self-identified need. Where available, the mobile shop
     includes sanitary napkins and other feminine products, along with other goods. Where
     feminine hygiene products are not available In the bazaar to stock the mobile shop,
     Concern has found that there is unmet demand for these products, even in remote areas.
     From a livelihood and income-generation perspective, an interesting addition to the model
     is that the hosting woman is allowed to charge a small profit on sales, creating a new
     home-based Income-generation method.

 Health Infrastructure
 The number ofhealthcare facilities has increased significantly since 2005, and
 their coverage in rural areas has greatly improved. Today, there are 1,844
 government medical facilities at District Hospital level or below (the levels
 serving rural areas), nearly double the number of facilities existing in 2005.
 Every province has at least 20 or more health facilities at these levels, with the
 exception of Nimroz province (which has 17).611 The tiers of healthcare

 •Health Manacemont Information System data, as of January 2013 (unpubllshodl. Aa:ossod Marth 2013.




46
         I   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve-
             Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                                            Ouop!Br z. Hulth     1 2013


facilities that form the frame of the national healthcare system are set up and
supported by MoPH's BPHS program. In the design of BPHS, the structure
includes the following levels offacilities:69
Health Post (HP) - HPs are intended to be staffed with CHWs who offer
outreach care for common maladies, and dispense contraception and
micronutrient supplementation. Female CHWs help with pregnancies,
deliveries and referrals for complicated issues. The aim is to have a catchment
population of 1,000-1,500 people.

Health Sub-Center (HSC) - HSCs are intended to cover a population of about
3,000-7,000 people, providing health education, immunization, antenatal care,
and family planning. In addition, HSCs are meant to treat common infectious
diseases.
Basic Health Center (BHC) - BHCs are intended to offer the same level of care
as HPs and HSCs, but with more complex outpatient care, including: antenatal,
delivery and postpartum care, family planning, routine immunizations, and
identification, referral and follow-up care for mental health patients and the
disabled. Each Center is designed to treat 15,000-30,000 people.
Comprehensive Health Center (CHC) - In addition to the services outlined
above, CHCs should be able to handle grave cases of childhood illnesses,
treatment of complicated cases of malaria and mental health issues. They are
also intended to have limited inpatient care facilities and a laboratory, serving
a population of 30,000-60,000.
District Hospital (DH) - Operating at a district level, this tier is intended to
manage all of the BPHS functions including major surgery, x-rays, and
emergency obstetric care. They should have comprehensive inpatient and
outpatient facilities. DHs should serve a population of 100,000-300,000 people.
In addition to the above list of facilities, there are secondary and tertiary
medical facilities at provincial, regional, and national levels, dealing with more
advanced cases. It should be noted that the above descriptions relate to the
system design, rather than the achieved reality to date. Many of these facilities do
not have the staff or services available that exist in the design. The table below
demonstrates the prevalence of health facilities as the system has grown:
•For a comprehensive desc~ptlon of each level of sel'llce dellvert •lon1wfth the quallflcatlons required by each member of
staff, refertc MoPH'sA ll<lslt ~ofHOG/th !ieV/tesforA/ghtlnlstan20lO/l389, 5·7.



                                                 Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlsbm's Flltare ·
                                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                 I      47
                                 Table 41 Nlllllber olllealtb Pacllltlel by '1'YD1 70
     FKIJII:r Type                              Z006       Z007          Z008        Z009        Z010       Z011        Z01Z
     Health Sub-Center                                                   154          283        356         453         488
     Basic Health Center                         695        693           6B1         777        7B9         804         BOB
     Comprehensive Health Center                 413        380           379         371        374         385         382
     District Hospital                            68         57           57           59         61          68          73
     Mobile Clinic (MOB)                          3          5             5          45          76         102          93

 While the numbers of BHCs and HSCs continue to increase, the numbers of
 District Hospitals and CHCs have decreased slightly since last year. This is an
 indication that the health system is decentralizing. and that more local facilities
 are triaging cases and handling them at their respective levels without the
 need for onward referrals. According to a World Bank report from 2010,71
 HSCs (introduced in 2008) appear to be making a positive impact, providing as
 much as half the new antenatal care services provided by BHCs, and at closer
 distances to target populations.
 What is clear overall is that coverage of BPHS facilities has increased steadily
 since 2006. However, this coverage is not always evenly distributed. While it is
 noted above that all provinces have more than 20 BPHS facilities except for
 Nimroz, at present some provinces have more than 100 health facilities among
 the various types listed above, whilst others have just over 20. While
 population sizes differ among provinces, this still represents a disparity in
 access. for example, Badakhshan, Balkh, Herat, Kabu~ and Nangarhar
 provinces have more than 100 BPHS health facilities, while Nooristan, Panjshir,
 Nimroz, Uruzgan, and Zabul have fewer than 30 and Badghis, Farah, Jawzjan,
 Khost, Paktika, Paktya, and Samangan have fewer than 40. Nearly 43% of
 people still live more than one hour's walking time away from their nearest
 health facility, a reality disaggregated by province in the below graph. Cultural
 mobility constraints are an additional barrier for women, impeding their
 access significantly more than that of men.




 711
       Healttl Manasement Information Sy.rtl!m data, as of January 2013 (unpublished]. Accessed Mardi 2013.
 11
   BuHd/rlfl on Early Gains In Afllhanlstan's Healt1!, Nutrlllon. and PojJUJatlon Sector. Challenges and Options. (Woshln&ton,
 D.C.: World Bonk, 2010) 102.




48          I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
                Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDae•
                                                                                           Ouop!Br z: Hulth        2013


                           Gn~ph    5: Percentqe of Population LlviiiJ within One Hour's ·
                                                      Distance from a Health Facility



100 96
 90
         ~   ....   ~
                        'DLIU   IIHI1]9 n
 80                                         76
                                                 IL   /1/170 ,;~.,,
 70
                                                                      6060 ~~
 60                                                                             -~~5049

"so                                                                                         3936
 40
 30                                                                                                  26
 20                                                                                                   . : 171A
 10                                                                                                   I I I • •       8
  0                                                                                                   I IIIII



                                                      {Source: NRVA 2007JBJ

  As mentioned, despite the above descriptions of services to be provided at
  various levels, there are often cases where the appropriate health human
  resources are simply not available to properly staff a given facility in a certain
  locale, limiting the services which can be offered. Due to this constraint, many
  of the above listed facilities do not offer all of the services intended in the
  system design.




                                                        Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                        Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                               I    49
                                                  Boll: 4: Ehealth

     In order to expand access to healthcare in difficult to reach places, starting in 2007, the Aga
     Khan Development Network has developed an ehealth program, linking basic rural
     facilities to more advanced ones in other parts of the country and region. Funded by AFD,
     the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs,, and Roshan Telecommunications, ehealth Involves
     digitally linking facilities to each other, such that consultations with doctors in other areas
     can be done remotely. This provides connections to specialists at sophisticated facilities to
     remote areas where access to only basic care is available. It is even possible to send digital
     x·rays to enhance remote diagnostics. In addition, capacity·bullding for local staff is
     possible through this system, with trainings provided remotely to staff on how to upgrade
     their skills and knowledge.

     To date, AKDN has linked six facilities in Badakhshan province (including three BHCs in the
     remote border regions, one CHC and one District Hospital In central Badakhshan. and the
     Provincial Hospital in Faizabad), Bamyan Provincial Hospital, the French Medical Institute
     for Children in Kabul, the Khorog Diagnostic Centre in Tajikistan, several small facilities in
     northern Pakistan. and the Aga Khan University Hospital in Karachi. Among these facilities,
     6,000 teleconsultations and teledlagnostics have been performed, and 2,000 staff members
     have been trained and have upgraded their skills through this system.


 In addition to the prevalence of health facilities, there is a further issue related
 to how Hwomen-friendly" the facilities are considered to be. Some facilities are
 not constructed with adequate care taken for female privacy, especially as
 related to labor and delivery. Areas for labor and delivery should be carefully
 separated from areas of the health facility that may have male patients or
 visitors. Some communities have even voiced the need for additional waiting
 rooms or accommodation facilities to be constructed and attached to clinics
 and hospitals, in order to allow women to have a safe and private place to stay
 as they wait for labor. This could aid in increasing the number of attended
 births. Por a related discussion on "women-friendly" infrastructure needs in
 Education, seep. 69-7~

 Despite disparities, the uptake of services is significantly higher among girls
 and women (above age 5) than it is among males of the same ages (while the
 number of under-five patients treated is broadly similar for both sexes).
 Nationwide, in the Persian calendar year 1391 (21 March 2012 - 20 March
 2013) BPHS facilities treated 11,218,951 females over age 5, and 5,820,877
 males of the same age.72

 "Health Man...,ment Information System data. as of January 2013 {unFMJbllshedl. Accessed Ap~l2013.



             Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
50       I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieD&e•
                                                                                                 Ouop!Br z. Hulth   1 2013


Health Human Resources
Encouragingly, the number of midwives employed by MoPH has steadily
increased over the last three years, from 2,181 in 2009/10 to 3,227 in 2013.73
However, in the table below one can see the highly uneven distribution of
midwives across provinces, with some provinces still dramatically
underserved.

                              Tllble 5: Total Nlllllber oflllllwtn./PrlwlllmH
                                 Total Nlllllber of                        Total Nlllllber of
          PnwiDc:e                                          Prftbu:e
                                     lllthrhw                                 lllthrhw
         Badakhshan                      136                   Kunar              42
            Badabls                         23                        Kunduz                           102
            Ba2hlan                         127                       Lasrhman                          61
             Balkh                          170                        LoDr                            33
           Bamyan                           139                      Nangarhar                         124
           Dallmndi                          55                        Hlmroz                           25
             Farah                           73                       Nw1stan                           12
            FaYWb                           97                         Palldlla                        47
            Ghazni                          115                        Paktiya                          23
              Ghor                          55                        Panlsblr                          22
           Helmand                           64                        Parwan                           60
             Herat                          176                      Samanpn                           49
            Jawzjan                          93                        Saripul                         59
             Kabul                          809                        Takbar                          175
          Kandahar                           72                       Urozgan                          44
            Xaollll                          33                       Wardak                           44
             Khost                           60                         Zabul                          8

What is clear is that many women, particularly those in rural areas, still give
birth at home without the assistance of a skilled healthcare professional. Only
33% of births take place in a health facility and the difference between urban
and rural women is stark; while two thirds (66%) of urban women give birth
in health facilities, this figure drops to only 25% among rural women.7s

"Ibid.
74
   1bid.
75
   AfiiiNrn/stan Stalls!/<QI Yrattlook 2011-2012. (Kabul: Centnol Statistics Orpnlzatlon, 2012) 108.



                                                    Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                                    Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                    I   51
2013    I   Chapter 2 'H...uh



 Although 77% of all government medical facilities now have a female SBA.,76
 MoPH estimates that another 3,022 midwives are needed in order to properly
 staff all BPHS facilities nationwide.77 Both the AMS in 2010 and the AMICS in
 2011 show that factors such as level of education of parents and place of
 residence are directly related to the likelihood of having an SBA present
                                                         MoPH          supports
                                                         regional     midwifery
                                                         training     programs
                                                         which incentivize the
                                                         placement of midwives
                                                         in challenging locales
                                                         by recruiting students
                                                         from those areas and
                                                         guaranteeing      them
                                                         work placements in the
                                                         medical facilities in
                                                         their home districts.
                                                         This has helped to
                                                         ensure not only that
                                                         the overall level of
 midwives is increasing, but also that a more even distribution can be achieved.
 A similar system has also been launched for Community-based Nurses.
 However, more must be done to prevent attrition from these placements.
 Despite these gains, large gaps in the human resource needs for the national
 health system persist In order to deliver basic healthcare, WHO estimates that
 at least 23 doctors, nurses and midwives are needed for every 10,000 people.7B
 The Mghan public health sector has 4.8. Dividing the population by the number
 of government doctors in each region shows how many people are served by a
 single doctor.




 n Healttl Management lnformiltion System data~ as of November lOU (unpublished). Accessed November 2012.
 ., National Prlorltv Program: HOQith tor All Afghans. [Kabu~ Ministry of Public H.,.llh, 2012].
 "Tilt! Wcrld ~lth R~ 2006: W!riino ttJ(ltthotforhOQith. [Gon...,a: Wcrld Hoallh Organization, 2006].



            Women'oiiDie In AJibmlstan'• F'lll:ve •
52
        I   Taldq smd<Df Adllevemona -~ l:llalleqes
                                                                                               Ouop!Br z: Hulth       2013



                                   Gn1ph 6: Number of People/Doctor by Rqlon

      ~0     .--------------------------------------------------
      7000 +-------------------------------------~~--
      ~0 +-------------------~~~~~~--
      5000   +-------------------
      ~0 +-------~~--

      3000   +-= :-::---
      2000
      1000
         0




                                     (Source: CSO SW.timr:al Yfl<lrilook2011f12)

Unfortunately, the ratio of doctors per ten thousand people has remained the
same since 2006,79 as population growth has outpaced the employment of
qualified physicians. There continues to be a particularly acute shortage of
obstetricians and gynecologists (see Graph 7 below). It is notable that 10
provinces are completely without any MDs trained in either of these two areas
of women's health.
                                       Gn1ph 7: Number of Obstetricians and
                                            GynecoloJirts by Province
2~ ~~~~.-------------------------------------------------------
200   ~-----------------------------------------------------

1~ ~-----------------------------------------------------

100 ~---------------------------------------------------
 50 ~~~~~~~~~~~~----------------------------­
             . ;;~~     7 55 4 4 4 4 3 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 0




                                                (Source: CSO SW.tistir:a/ YI!Qrilook 2012)


        "'Afghanlstlln Sratlstfcal YI!Qrboo/c 20ll-20J2. (Kabul: l:entroiSI3tlstlcs 011anlzatlon, 2012) 110.



                                                  Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                  Taldq Stock DfAclllevemeDts aad CODtlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                  I    53
 In addition to the availability of trained healthcare professionals, there
 continues to be a cultural reluctance to allow women to be treated by male
 health workers. Given this ongoing challenge, it is of particular concern that
 currently, nearly 25% of healthcare facilities still do not have female health
 workers.Bo This is related to both a shortage of female health workers
 generally, and also to a difficulty finding female health workers willing to work
 in remote or insecure areas.

 Nutrition
 South Asia (including Mghanistan) is characterized by high levels of
 malnutrition, with most countries in the region demonstrating stunting and
 wasting proportions between 20 - 60% of the population.Bl South Asia
 accounts for approximately 90% of global child malnutrition,sz and has under-
 nutrition rates roughly double the global average.B3 In Mghanistan, the
 stunting and wasting prevalence is 55% and 17.8% respectively, and 31.2% of
 the population is deemed underweight.84 These figures include both moderate
 and severe cases. This phenomenon has a significant gender dynamic. Women
 and girls are more likely than men and boys to be malnourished in South Asian
 households, partly due to being allocated lesser portions and poorer quality
 food, and having more limited access to medical care.
 Many factors have been shown to correlate with the nutritional status of
 women and girls, including the education levels of household men, the
 education levels of household women, poverty levels, urban vs. rural locations,
 household size, and women's decision-making power in the household. The
 malnutrition of women affects that of children in a variety of ways: a mother's
 malnutrition during pregnancy is a key determinant of underweight babies and
 their poor nutritional status in infancy, while under-nourishment in mothers
 has been shown to affect their capacity to engage in critical childcare practices
 (including breastfeeding), contributing to poor nutritional status in early
 childhood.BS Poor nutritional status in infancy and early childhood not only


 ., H""ltll Management Information System data, as of November2012 (unpublished). A<eessed November 2012.
 "SoutnAJJQSodCII Devolop_,ti.Jnlt, Dl5semi11Gtlon Notr No.3. (W05hlnston, D.C.: World Bank, 2012).
 " "Gender Equality In SOIIIII Asia: Rlsln•to the O.allen..,• WDII2012 companion- SOuth A5J<J [unpublished). [Washl.,.ton,
  D.C.: World Bank, 2012).
 " Soutn A5J<J Soc/ell~~ Unit, Dl5sem/11G!Ion Notr No. 3. (Woshlnston, D.C.: World Bank, 2012).
 ,. Afrlhanlstdn Multipk Indicator ctustrr SU""'Y· (Kabul: UNICEF, 2012) v.
 15
    1bidjv.



             Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve.
54       I   Taldq Stac:kof Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDp:s
                                                                         Ouop!Br z. Hulth    1 2013


affects survival rates, but also has long-term effects for surviving children, such
as lower school attendance and attainment rates.

                                      BOI 5: Nubition

 Since 2008, Save the Children has been implementing a CIDA and AusAID·funded nutrition
 model that integrates both a clinical method called Comprehensive Management of Acute
 Malnutrition (CMAM), and a community-based public health approach, called Nutrition
 Education and Rehabilitation Sessions (NBRS). CMAM Includes therapeutic treatment In
 health facilities (both inpatient and outpatient treatment, as required) for children and
 pregnant or lactating mothers. CHWs are trained to identify and refer cases to clinical
 facilities. NERS is focused on sessions with mothers that teach what to cook. what is best to
 eat among local products, and how to recognize signs of malnutrition In their children. This
 model is implemented in 7 provinces, in partnership with the local BPHS implementers.
 Implementing both models in the same communities allows for prevention and also
 follow-up to severe cases, creating a partnership between the clinical facilities and
 community-based efforts. Save the children is also providing technical assitance to MoPH
 to integrate CMAM into the national system.

 Another model of a community-based nutrition intervention is implemented by the Aga
 Khan Development Network in 16 districts of Badakbshan province, since 2012. This
 CIDA·funded model includes acute therapeutic feeding in local clinical facilities as well,
 along with training to farmers on crop diversity and techniques for growing healthy foods
 for household use, dw1ng all seasons. This Is coupled with public health promotion
 activities and messaging.

Government health facilities do provide therapeutic feeding in the form of
Ready to Use Therapeutic Foods (RUTF) and supplements for pregnant
women, along with some public health outreach education on nutrition.
However, RUTFs are sometimes in short supply as they are typically imported
from neighbouring countries and then must be distributed to health facilities
nation-wide. A comprehensive nutrition approach at the community level,
linked to micro-nutrient analysis and food security/crop diversity measures
has not been integrated into the national health system as yet

Other Health Issues Affecting Women
HIV/AIDS
Accurate data about the prevalence of HIV in Afghanistan is hard to find, and
estimates vary as to how many people suffer from the illness. Men are
statistically more likely to carry HIV than women, although some developing


                                      Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare -
                                      Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                             I   55
 countries have seen a shift over time to women becoming the fastest growing
 group of HIV positive members of the population. As of 2011, 638 cases of HIV
 were reported in Mghanistan,B6 an increase since 2006 when only 48 cases
 were reported.B7 It is not clear whether this represents a growing problem in
 Mghanistan, or rather an increase in screening.
 Those who are most at risk of contracting HIV are Injection Drug Users (IDUs),
 men who have sex with men (MSM), prisoners, and female sex workers. Some
 of these issues overlap. In 2007, 76.2% of IDUs reported paying women for
 sex.aa A World Bank paper shows that only 17-32% of IDUs who paid for sex in
 the previous six months used a condom.e9 These are risky behaviors that may
 spread HIV in future to new demographics.

 Abortion
 Abortion remains largely illegal in Afghanistan, and is punishable with long.
 medium, or short prison sentences, depending on the circumstances. Notably,
 if the abortion is performed by a trained medical professional, they are to
 receive a maximum sentence, unless they are doing so to save the life of the
 mother (in which case, they incur no penalty). The pregnant woman is also
 penalized for abortion, if she submits to one willingly. She is punishable with a
 short prison sentence and a fine. There is no mention in the penal code of
 abortion in the case of a pregnancy caused by rape.9D
 Mental Health
 Despite being an integrated part of the national health system design, where
 various BPHS tiers are intended to offer systematic mental health services,
 there are still very few trained medical workers who are able to treat
 psychological or mental illnesses, and there is no dedicated university faculty
 to train mental health workers in Mghanistan. Given the decades of conflict
 experienced by Afghans, there is a concern that mental health problem rates
 may be quite high; however, there is no information to provide an accurate

 16
   HIV/AIDS In Afghanistan. Al:a!Hed 25 May 2013. [Kabul: World Bank, 2011), foond at:
 btm·Usfteraoua;es wortdb@nk orB/AFGHANISTANEXJl!IIRc:sgyrc;c:sf3Q5984-12971113Q58S4/HNAIQSbrtcfAFFeb2Q11 pdf
 "AfrlhonistanStlltistical Yrarboolc l387. [Kabul: Cantr.ol .sutistics Orpnization, 2001!)95.
 "Todd C.S., et al. "HIV, Hepotltls C. and Hepatitis B Infections and Associated Risk Beh..torln Injection Drua; use ..:
 EmeiJhlQ lnfectJous orseo.,., 13(9)(5eptember 2007] 1327-1331.
 ,. HIV/AIDS in Afghanistan. Aa:eHed 25 May 2013. [Kabul: World Bank, 2011), foond at:
 http·lfslb:resources wortdbank or~fAFGHANISJANEXffl/Resourccs/305984-1297184305854/HIVAipSbrlefAEFeb2011 pdf
 ,. "Aflhanlstan Abortion Law." Accessed 28Aprll2013. http://eybor.law.harvard.edu/oopulatlon.



             Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve •
56       I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJI&e•
                                                                                          Ouop!Br z. Hulth     1 2013


picture of the prevalence of mental health illnesses in Afghanistan.9t According
to the CSO, there are only 50 specialists in psychiatry in the country - 44 of
them are in Kabul and the rest are in Nangarhar, Baghlan, Samangan, Balkh,
and Faryab. There are none in any of the other provinces.92
For women, harmful traditional practices that particularly impact them are
widespread and overlap with mental health issues. While there are no
definitive national figures to show the extent of these practices, frequent
reports and media coverage demonstrate cases of forced marriages, child
marriages, and domestic violence (these issues are further discussed in
Chapter 5). These types of practices are sometimes linked to suicide among
women, including cases of self-immolation.93 By some indications, female self-
immolation appears to be on the rise; however, without comprehensive data
defining the existing prevalence, this is a difficult phenomenon to track. An
increase in reported cases may only indicate increasing willingness to report
and an increasing social acknowledgment of the issue, rather than a greater
number of cases. While these cases are outwardly noticeable, it is likely that
women also suffer from a high prevalence of depression, anxiety, and post-
traumatic stress disorders.94




.,_Sayed, Ghulam Dastaslr. "Menbl Hea~h In Afihanlstan: Burden. Challenses and the Way Forward." (Kabul: World Bank,
 2011).
"Afghanistan Stotlsttall Y""'boolc ZOJJ·10J2. (Kabul: Central Statistics Orpnlzrtlon. 20121111.
,. ComparatiVe An~Is of Fmnl/y lrJW In tiN! context of /s/Gm. (Kabul: Afihon Independent Human Rllhts COmlsslon, 2006)
 10.
"Sayed, Ghulom Dastaslr. "Mentol Hea~h In Aflhonlstan: Burden. Challenses and the Way Forward." (Kabul: World Bank,
 2011).



                                                 Women's RolelaAJIIumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                 Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemeDb aad CDntlllued Cballeqes
                                                                                                               I         57
                               Box 6: Mental Health Service Delivery

     Today, a small group of NGOs provide mental health services to Mghan women, but much
     of this work is confined to urban areas:

     •    Medica Afghanistan provides professional psychological counseling services to women
          and girls affected by war and violence in Kabul, Herat, and Mazar..i-Sharif, among other
          services. Since 2002, Medica has provided psychosodal counseling for 2,630 women,
          and currently has a case load of 359 women. Medica has also provided Basic
          Counseling Training for 440 health workers, social workers, and health professionals,
          and 143 women activists.
     •    The International Medical Corps (IMC) has been working with the Ministries of Higher
          Education and Public Health to improve advanced psychiatric education at medical
          universities in Afghanistan.
     •    The International Psychosocial Organization (IPSO) is currently working with MoPH to
          address mental health more fully in the national health system, and train doctors and
          nurses in mental health in provinces across the country. To date, IPSO has trained
          nearly 150 health professionals. With MoPH, they aim to now train 70 Mghan mental
          health trainers, who can then disperse to various provinces and train other health care
          providers.


 Policy Implications
 Despite the improvements noted in the foregoing chapter, there are dearly still
 a number of challenges for women in the health sector. Looking ahead, the
 recommendations for the future are:
         1. Access to Healthcare - Extend coverage of the BPHS system, reaching
            remaining uncovered areas still without access to basic healthcare
            facilities.
         2. Invest in Health Human Resources - Invest in female health
            professionals, including mental health professionals. Many of the
            existing BPHS facilities are not fully staffed according to the BPHS
            design. Approaches that allow for equitable regional distribution of
            human resources nationwide are ideal.
         3. Skilled Birth Attendants - Continue training midwives and other
            SBAs, expanding midwifery school coverage to all provinces, and
            incentivizing the work of graduates in rural and underserved areas.


              Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
58        I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                 Ouop!Br z. Hulth    1 2013


4. Contraceptive Use - Continue and expand infonnation outreach by
   CHWs and other actors regarding contraceptive options and benefits.
   Many men and women are still unaware of the family planning methods
   available to them, and the number of men and women who use
   contraceptives is still low across the country.
5. Nutrition - Integrate comprehensive nutrition programming into the
   national healthcare system, particularly in a way that seeks to address
   the specific gender dynamics at work. Malnutrition prevention work is
   most needed, as an integrated part of the national health system.
6. Legislation - Remove abortion from the Mghan penal code, and further
   define medical and other justifications for accessing safe abortion (i.e.
   after rape).




                              Women"• RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                              Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                     I   59
           "'t><
~:"i""--.,-r •.t~..
 .WJ..,.   -~~     •   '~
                                                                                      CUptm-3: l!ducdlon      I    2013




                            Chapter 3: Education




The 2005 Country Gender Assessment'J5 reflected a critical moment in
Afghanistan's history, just four years after the fall of the Taliban. At the time,
the available data was already showing significant increases in the number of
girls and women in education as compared to the period under the Taliban
administration. This rapid increase was a clear indication that demand for
girls' education was strong. Despite shortcomings in the education sector,
there was a sense of optimism that the ensuing years would witness a
continuation of such changes.
Many of the key indicators that influence girls' education attainment show that
Afghanistan continues to move in the right direction. Female literacy is
currently at 12%, a 7% increase over 2002, where early estimates were that
female literacy was at 5%.96 More promising is that for the age bracket 12 - 16,
female literacy is at 36%97 (although the same age bracket for boys is at 62%).
Despite the remaining spread between boys and girls, the gap seen in this age
group is the smallest gender gap in literacy ever seen in Afghanistan.98 This
15
   A/ghrznistun: National Reoonstroction and PoVBty Rrduction - tM Rok of Wannm in Afghanistrm~s Future. (Wilshingto~
D.C.: Wo~d Bank, 2005).
"Khan, Ahmad. 'Women & Gender In Afshonlston.• (Kabul: Clvii-MIIItary Fusion centre, 2012) 1.
07
   1bid, 4.
• 'HIIh Stakes: Girls' Education In Aflhanlston.•[Kobul: OXfom, 2011) 22.

                                                Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Futare -
                                                Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                              I         63
 compares to 98% of female youth in Iran,99 nearly 100% in Tajikistan,too and
 61% in Pakistan.tot
 The total number of girls and women in education has notably increased,
 2005. This relates to the low participation of both boys and girls in education
 at that time, which necessitated significant gains in boys' education as well.
 Gains in girls' education in real numbers have been achieved at all levels of the
 education system, while some levels also demonstrate proportionate gains,
 indicating a closing of the gender gap. Essential to the increased number of
 girls and women in education has been a dramatic increase in education
 facilities within the government system countJywide, along with an increased
 number of female teachers.


           Proportion and Number of Female                                 34%                                 40%
                           Primary                                  (real number not                      (2,141,833)1 04
                   School Students
          Propol1ion and Number of Female                                                                    35%
             Secondary School Students                                                                    (513,320)105
       Proportion and Number of Female Higher                                                                  34%
             Secondary School Students                                                                    (246,648) 106
          Propol1ion and. Number of Female                                  19%                               19%
                 University Students                                      (5,890)                          (14.811) 107
          Proportion and Number of Female                                                                      31%
                          Teachers                                                                         (53,636)108


 While the increases in real numbers are encouraging. the gap persists between
 girls' and boys' education, and is particularly wide at higher levels, indicating
 early drop-out rates for girls. This clearly demonstrates the need for continued
 efforts not just to increase the supply of educational opportunities, but to tailor
 10
      "Iran.• Acces"'d 25 May 2013. ht!p·ljwww lndCl!ll!undl comlfllctsl!pnll!teuey=gte.
 lllll "Tajikisttm:" Accessed 25 May 2013.http:/fwww.indexmundi.mm/@ct!iltajikistanl!iteracv-rate.
 101
       .. Paklstan." Accessed 25 May 2013. httn:l/www.lndeiOTiundl.mm/farts/paklstan/litl!racy-rate.

 ""Fora compo~son of slmllordato points datlns bock to 1960, seethe Wo~d Bank's 2005 report: AfghanlstDn: National
 Reamstroction and PGverty Reduction- the Role of Women in AfghanimJn~s Futun.
 "'Nl/hanlstan: National Roconstructlon and ~""rty -ton -liN! RoM of women In Nl/hanlstan's Future. (Washlnii\On,
 D.C.: Wo~ Bank, 2005).
 ""Education Mana1ementol Information System, os of 1390, PerJian Calendar yeor (unpublished]. Accessed November
 2012.
 105
     1bid.
 106
     1bld.
 ""Afrlhonr.ran srtJrrsrrttll Yearlloo/t 2011·2012. (Kobul: central Stotlstlcs Otpnllltlon, 2012] 51-3.
 ... Ibid, 57.
 "'rbld,SO.
               Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve .
64         I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieD&e•
                                                                                                CUptm-3: l!ducdlon   I   2013



 those opportunities to girls and women and to target key obstacles to their
 educational attainment.
 One key achievement since 2005 is the increase in data that is now available in
 the education sector in Mghanistan. The sector is among the most data rich in
 the country, making it possible to see the situation of girls' education from
 various angles and understand barriers to education at a more detailed level.
 This chapter will explore some of this data, relying on the MoE database, and
 some other key sources of data and studies exploring dynamics of education in
 Afghanistan.

 Enrolment and Retention
 Since 2005, female enrolment has increased substantially year on year. For
 example, there was a 10.2% increase in the number of enrolled female
 students in 2011-12 compared to 2010-11.110 Despite this, the table below
 shows the distribution of students by type of educational institution, with girls
 and women remaining in the minority in each case. One notable exception is in
 community-based education classes, where girls make up over half of students
 enrolled.

                                         lllrolled
                                                  ....
                              Table 7: EDrollecl Sbadeats by 1'YIM ofEduc:atlon
                                                       lllrallMl
                                                        F.-le
                                                                    '-!;
                                                                    qellale     rem.~e
                                                                                                   .._      ....     Tacal

                                                !iltlldealll       StuUDUI          s.~   ...        ~
General Education                              4,580,701          2,901,801           61.22              38.78     7,482,502
Community-based Education                       94,733             124,437            43.22              56.78      219,170
Islamic Education                               169,940             32,014            84.15              15.85      201,954
Teacher TraininR" ColleR"e                       40,652             19,523            67.56              32.44       60,175
Technical and Vocational                         33,190             4,139             88.91              11.09       37,329
Education Training {TVI!T)
Adult Literacy School Students                  11,162             9,054              55.21              44.79       20,216
Total                                         4,930,378          3,090,968            61.96              38.04     8,021,346

                                               {Sourct!: EMIS do !:II for 1390)




 "' AfiltantstrJn StatiJtlcDI YMrboolc ZOll-2072. IK.obul: Contra IS13tistlcs o,...nlzatlon, Z01ZI so.



                                                      Womea'sRoleln~sFutare·
                                                      Taldq Staok DfAclllevemeDb and CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                     I       65
 With all education types combined (up to higher secondary options), girls and
 women make up an average of just over 38% of enrolled students. The table
 above demonstrates enrolment across types of educational institutions. While
 in most types of education there is a considerable gap between the percentage
 of male and percentage of female students, there are two notable exceptions.
 Firstly, Community-based Education is the only type of education that actually
 has a higher enrolment rate for girls than boys. This is further discussed under
 the sub-heading "Community-based EducationH, below. Secondly, the gap
 between men and women in Adult Literacy Schools is considerably narrower
 than for other forms of education, indicating high demand for literacy
 education among women. The tables below take a closer look at government
 general education schools (i.e. the national public education system), which
 account for the vast majority of students in Mghanistan. The following table
 disaggregates female enrolment by region (as compared to male enrolment),
 demonstrating that some regions are approaching parity, while others have
 less than a quarter the number of girls as boys.
                           Table 8: ~ otP..we Sludelltl m 111a1e Sladeatll
                                        braDed.la. ~Sc:llaokU1
                                   ........
                   Central Highlands                                                43.8%
                   Western Afghanistan                                              41.5%
                   Northern Afilbanlsbn                                             41.01)6
                   Northeastern Mghanistan                                          40.2%
                   Eastern AfRbanlstan                                              39.596
                   Central Mghanlstan                                               38.6%
                   Southeastern Mghanistan                                          27.1%
                   Soud!westem Afillllmllti.D                                       24.496

 By province, the following disaggregation of female and male students is
 instructive. Badakhshan is the closest province to achieving parity in
 Afghanistan, while provinces like Uruzgan, Zabul, and Paktika demonstrate a
 gender gap in education far worse than the national average. In Uruzgan,
 barely above 10% of all students enrolled are girls.n2


 111
       Education Manasement or Information System, as or 1390, Persian Colendaryear [unpublished). Accessed November
 2012.
 112
       1bid.


                   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
66             I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDae•
                                                                   CUptm-3: l!ducdlon     I   2013



                           Gr~ph 1: ~rmnt.lp of M~l• ~nd F•m•l•
                              Students In Govemment Sc:lhools
10096
 9096
 8096
 7096
 6096
 5096
4096
 3096
 2096
                                                                           I
 1096                                                                      I     I        I
  096                                                                      I     I        I




                               (Soun:e: EMIS duta for 1390)


  The above table shows a combined proportion including all grades from
  primary to upper secondary. When analysed by grade or level of education, the
  figures reveal a diverse picture. While in Panjshir girls actually have a higher
  enrolment rate in primary school than boys (51%), the province then moves to
  14th place nationwide by secondary school, where girls make up only 33%.
  Uruzgan has the lowest recorded percentage of girls in primary school in the
  country (12%), with a steady decline in the upper grades. Although Paktika has
  22% girls at primary school, by upper secondary, there is not a single recorded
  girl in education in the province. By contrast,. Nimroz manages to maintain
  rates of 44% girls in secondary and 36% in upper secondary, whilst being a
  remote and sometimes volatile province.
  Despite a diverse set of trends that speak to a complex field of factors
  influencing girls' education, what is clear is that in all provinces, there are a
  significantly higher number and proportion of girls in primary school than in
  secondary and post-secondary. The MoE's national figures show that 41.5% of

                                   Women's Role Ia AJillumlsbm's Futare ·
                                   Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                          I    67
 Grade 1 students are female, but by Grade 12, the figure drops to 30.6%.m
 Another way to look at this is through the Hsurvival rate" in primary school, or
 the rate of students who progress from being enrolled in first grade, to
 completing sixth grade.114 In 2009, the World Bank estimated the survival rate
 for boys was between 53% - 55%, and 35% for girls.m This is an issue of
 retention, and by these figures, it is clear that retention is poor for both boys
 and girls. This points to general problems in the education system, while girls
 face additional gender-specific challenges. In Afghanistan, retention of girls in
 school is affected by a series of interconnected factors, including early
 marriage and early motherhood, cultural perceptions of appropriate activities
 for pubescent girls, mobility constraints coupled with a lack of secondary
 facilities in close proximity to home, a lack of female teachers, a perception of
 education having low value and low return on investment (particularly for
 girls), a lack of job opportunities for women, and poverty.116 In addition, the
 education of parents is often correlated to that of children, especially
 daughters. While a father's education does not appear to consistently correlate
 to girls' education {with other factors influencing girls' education much more
 strongly), a mother's educational attainment and literacy appears to correlate
 strongly to girls' education, especially to test score outcomes.117 Other sources
 note that the possible refugee experiences and degree of exposure to secular
 education of both parents can influence their attitudes toward the education of
 all children.ne
 Retention of girls in schools suffers most acutely at the following key stages:
 Grades 1 and 2, Grade 5, and Grade 9. Girls drop out in Grades 1 and 2 largely
 because their families may have enrolled them without ever having a strong
 intention for their daughters to attend regularly. Due to starting at an older age
 than internationally typical (between ages 6 - 9), students are often 12 years
 old or more by Grade 5, a critical age for girls for puberty and early marriage,
 "' Educrtlon Mana1ementof Information System. as of 13!l0, Persian c.alendar 'f"•r (unpublished]. Accessed November
 2012.
 114
     "A Master Prosramme In Edu<ltlonal Researth and Development In Afllhanlstan 2008- 2.010: Elcpenen..., and
 Outcomas.• (Kabul: International COOperation In Hlsher Education. 2011) 29.
 "''Wortd Bank CountJy Profile." (World Bank, 2009].
 "' Althoush state education Is ostenolblv free, there are many asooc:lated costs (such as transport] tllat are prohlbltlvl! to
 some. For many families, dauehters often play an Important role In household operations and Income pneratlon, and IIIey
 tilnnot iifford this loss of income alon1 with ildditional costs for schooling.
 117
     "A Master Prosrammeln Edu<ltlonal Researth and Development In Afllhanlstan 2008- 2.010: Elcpenen..., and
 Outcomes.• (Kabul: International COOperation In Hleher Education. 2.011] 47.
 111
       Giustozzi. A..   11
                         Nation-Buildins is Not for All: The politics   of education in Aflhanistan•. (IC3bul: Afshilnimn Analysts
 Network. 2010).



                Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
68          I   Taldq Stock of Adllevemeats ud ~ued CballeJI&e•
                                                                                        Chapter 3 : Education           2013



or for household duties to increase.tt9 Those who make it to Grade 9 (thro\l,Kh
lower secondary), often drop out due to further travel distances, a lack of
female teachers to teach segregated classes, marriage, and motherhood. Some
agencies working on education issues have implemented special measures to
support retention, including consolidation classes and tutoring, along with
family outreach and discussions with School Shuras, in order to help girls
remain in school through the difficult transitional years when drop-out rates
are highest.




Infrastructure
There are currently 13,562 state-run general education schools across the
counay,uo a large increase since 2002, when data showed that there were only
3,800 schools.



....AMaster Pros ram me In Educational Researdl and Develcpmem In Al'lllanlstln 2008-2010: fllpe- and
- . • (Kabul:lntamllllonol~ In HW.r£Aullon,l0l1)4!.
'"'t:ducallon Man.!lement ollnfonna11on $VSUI'I'I, as ol1390, Penlan c a - r year (UI'CIUbllltled}. AccKied Nc:Nembef
2012.


                                                  Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                  Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                  69
2013     I   Cbapter3 •l!ducatioD



                     Graph 9: Number af Government General Education Schools




                     2002                    2003                     2010                     2011


                                       (Sourcs: World Bank and EMIS 1390)

 In Afghanistan, three models of schools exist, at various levels. There are all-
 boys' schools, all-girls' schools, and NmixedH schools. Mixed schools can either
 have mixed classes (usually in primary only), or multiple shifts during a given
 school day, with boys' and girls' classes taking place at separate times.
 Currently, 68% of general education schools run one shift (mixed, all boys, or
 all girls), 28% of schools run two shifts, and 3% of schools run 3 shifts.121
 The following graphs assess the number of mixed, all-girl and all-boy schools
 by province, at various levels of the education system. As can be seen in these
 graphs, the majority of schools can be considered mixed, although this is not
 the case for every province. It is important to keep in mind, however, that
 sometimes names of schools can be misleading; even in cases where schools
 are named "girls' school" or Mboys' schoolH, they have often in practice taken on
 varying usage practices that do not necessarily coincide with their name,
 making categorization challenging.




 ut Education Management of lnfonnatlon System, 11s of 1390, Persian Calendar year !unpublished). Accessed November
 2012.



             Women's Role In AJibmlstan'• F'lltve ·
70       I   Taldq Stack of AdllevemeDts ud continued CllalleDae•
                           ~dn~~~~~~~~i                                      j         ~ ~ ~ j j § ~                     I I i
                                                                                                                                           ..
              Nuristan                                              Kapisa                                               ~
              Lachman                                             SariPul C                w                                     ~  !d
               Badghis                                            Parwan     .r"""' ~                                   ~
                 Kunar
               Panjshir
                                                                 Laghman     r                                                    .J.S
                Faryab
               Jawz]an
             Nangarhar                               t              Logar
                                                                     Ghor
                                                                  Badghls
                                                                             -
                                                                  Panjshir .!""';
                                                                           ...___
                                                                             .:
                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                             ...
                                                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                                                 J.'ti:l

                                                                                                                                 ~ ...
                                                                                                                                'ii--I
                                                                                                                                       ;;
                                                                                                                                                Gl

             Farah                                   ~     c
                                                                             ~                                                                  ::r
                                    I                      ~
                                                                  Wardak                                    ...                 5-I
                                                                                                                                   ~            .,
                                                                                                                                                ;

                                                     I
           SariPul              I                          lC        Khost .r-
         Samanpn                                                  Jawzjan         ..                                              "iii
                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                        ...!:
       c                                                                                                                         ~              i!
       !: Kunduz
       !C.
             Lopr
              Uruzpn       ..                        i.
                                                           ~ Dalkund
                                                           ~   Paktla            ";::"'1                                        .....IWi::l
                                                                                                                                ~               i
II                         .                                       Kunduz 'lr'


                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                ~

~-
       •
       ,;:
               Parwan
               Bamyan                                      •      Nurlstan
                                                                    Farah    ~
                                                                             r;::"                           ...
                                                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                f
       it                                                  [
~·
                 Khost                                              Kuna .!"';::                                                   1.11
                 Ghor
                                                                                                                                                3
                           ..                              ii"    Uruzpn -I"'J!:                                                  ......        I


li
       •        Paktia                                      Badakhshan .!':!!                                                                   a
       ~
                                                                                                                                 ..IWt:::l
       ..
       ~


            Ghun
                 Balkh
                  Hin!lt
                 Zabu
                                              ....   J    Kabul Province .:
                                                                  Faryab
                                                                  Paktlka
                                                                             e .-
                                                                          ./11!
                                                                             n                        ...
                                                                                                                          ~ "'...-J.2:::1

                                                                                                                                   &--1
                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                :1
                                                                                                                                                ~
l~         Baghlan
                                                     f          Samanpn
                                                                   Gham      .1:-r                                      .J!. """
                                                                                                                                                f
                                                                                                                                                ~
i~
                                                                                                                                                      I!
          Daikund
                                                     ~          Kabul City                      .,.                               "fii          ~
           Wardak
5      Badakhshan                                    i            Bamyan
                                                                Nanprha                                                         ....LZ          ~
                                                                                                                                                1


i
                                I
            Takha                                                  Takha               :--                                ~
                                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                                                                      :.
            Kapisa                                                Baghlan
                Kabu
               Paktlka
                                                                     Hlra
                                                                 Kandaha !!"
                                                                                                                         ~;s,
                                                                                                                                   ""-
                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                      !I
                                                                                                                                   1--1
               Nlmroz                                               Balkh    ~                                      ~~                                -
             Kandaha                                                 Zabu                                                                             N
-.,J          Hllmand                                                            r..                                      ~
                                                                                                                          if"---                      0

"""'
             Kabul City                 ...                        Nlmro
                                                                  Hllman
                                                                             ~
                                                                                 ~                                 ·~                                 1:::
 Looking at the availability of schools in each region reveals an interesting
 picture. In primary education, it is clear that girls in several provinces are
 oveiWhelmingly worse off than in any other locations.m For example,
 Helmand, ZabuL and Uruzgan have very high proportions of all-boys' schools,
 with very low proportions of both mixed and all-girls' schools. This severely
 limits the educational opportunities for girls. By contrast, places like Kabul,
 Herat, Nangarhar, Baghlan, Takhar, and Bamyan have a strong majority of
 mixed schools, where boys and girls study in mixed classes or in separate
 classes or separate shifts. This is often the best option for increasing access for
 girls, since it does not require funding for separate facilities and supplies
 (which might be difficult to secure). However, it is also clear from the above
 graphs that mixed schools are more prevalent at the primary level, and notably
 decline in frequency as the grades increase, making the availability of all-girls'
 schools a more salient factor in the higher grades.

 The graphing of secondary schools shows some provinces which still have few
 all-female schools but high proportions of mixed schools. This is usually an
 indication of relatively less conservative areas where utilizing shared facilities
 (even if in different shifts) is still acceptable in secondary school. This can be
 seen in such diverse locations as Herat, Takhar, Daikundi, Bamyan,
 Badakhshan, Balkh, Kabul, and Nimroz. On the other hand, in Helmand, 83% of
 secondary schools are for boys only, while only 17% are mixed and none are
 only for girls. When only looking at upper secondary, where the proportion of
 mixed schools is significantly lower, it is important to take a look at the
 proportion of all girls' schools. In Paktika, Helmand, and Zabul, the proportion
 of girls' schools remains below 10% at this level, while mixed schools are low
 as well. When secondary schools are fewer, girls have to travel much longer
 distances to reach them, creating a situation where mobility constraints
 augment as well. One study has shown that every mile a school is away from
 home, girls' enrollment decreases by 19%.123
 In addition to the availability of educational institutions, the quality of
 education, and the perception of its quality on behalf of parents, is affected by
 sub-standard facilities, including inadequate buildings (or the lack of one),


 "' Primary 5Chool educates children from JlfOdes 1~, Lower Secondary school or Middle school educate~ children from
 srades 7-9, and Hllher Secondary school educates <hlldren from llldes1CH2.
 "'"HICto Stakes: Girls' Education In Afahanlstan." (Kabul: OXIam, 2011122.



            Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve .
72      I   Taldq Stac:kof Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJite•
                                                                                              CUptm-3' l!ducdlon             2013



   unsafe drinking water, insufficient books and supplies, and a lack of sanitation
   facilities. Unfortunately, many existing schools are still lacking these basic
   items. A 2 011 Oxfam study demonstrates that only 28.7% of students say they
   have access to stationary, and only 65% say their school has sufficient books.ll4
   According to UNICEF, in 2009 three quarters of state schools did not have
   access to safe sanitation facilities, including drinking water,12s and the MoE
   data points out that almost half (48.2%) of all schools have no buildings,1Z6
   while 64% of state schools do not have a surrounding wall.m Some of these
   infrastructural gaps can be seen in the graph below:tza


                                     Gr11ph 12: Percentase of Schools without
                                          Bulldlnp or SUrraundl.,.walls

100"
90"
80"
70"
60"
50"
40"
30"
20"
10"                                                                                                                               I•
 0"
                                                                                                                                  II



          • Percentage of schools with available information without buildinp
          • Percentage of schools with available information without a surrounding wall




   ,.,.Ibid, 19.
   "'"AFGHANISTAN: Thou50nd5 of ochool51ookdrlntlnrwoter, •anltatlon.• Aooe5Md 0!1 June 2013.
   http;//www.lrlnnews.oMrlntrepart.asDX?reoortld=84336.
   118
       Educ.ation Milniilll!'ment of lnformoition System, i15 of 1390, Perliiln Cillendar ysr (unpublished). Accessed November
   2012.
   117
       1brd.
   ""Ibid


                                                      Women's RolelaAfrllumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                      Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                        I        73
2013    Chapter 3 : Education




 These deffclendes disproportionately Impact girls. Where such requirements
 are missing. parents may be less supportive of education In general. but are
 more likely to keep their daughters at home than their sons. This Is largely
 because some of these gaps present challenges to cultural values of modesty
 for girls (I.e. absent boundary walls and lack of separate latrines). The Issue of
 having segregated latrines for boys and girls can particularly affect girls after
 puberty, and they often miss days out of each month due to menstruation.
 Without separate latrines and a method of discretely cleaning sanitarY cloths
 during menstruation, girls who are still able to attend school after puberty
 often begin attending inconsistently and falling behind. This may then increase
 the drop-out rate further. Moreover, the NRVA 2007/08 noted that distance
 from school is the single
 most significant barrier
 nationwide to children
 attending school (as per
 household reSJPOliiSe.!l:].
 This reality Is a far
 greater constraint to girls
 than to boys due to
 their reduced moblllty,
 and contributes strongly
 to girls' drop-out rates,
 particularly in lower
 secondary and above.


 Content and Quality
 Education in Afghanistan suffers from qualitative challenges in the content of
 the curriculum, and the pedagogical capacity among teachers, many of whom
 are not certified. Due to a lack of teachers, early grades suffer from over-
 crowding, and subsequently have high drop-out rates. Like infrastructural
 deficiencies, qualitative weaknesses engender disinterest and a default to more
 traditional training, especially for girls. If parents suspect that the quality of
 education their children receive does not meet their expectations, they may
 prefer to maximize skills learned at home through domestic work at a young
 age, which prepares children for their adult lives. They may be more likely to



        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
74      Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                                      CUptm-3: l!ducdlon        I   2013



make this choice for their daughters than their sons. Furthermore, higher
levels of education do not always result in higher levels of income, particularly
for women. If a tangible livelihood result from educating girls cannot be
observed, families will be less likely to keep their girls in education into the
higher grades. An additional challenge to linking girl's education to household
benefit is that a girl's future includes changing households upon getting
married; a girl's family may not be willing to heavily invest in her income-
generation potential, due to the fact that she will join another family, taking
her income-generation capacity out of the household she was raised in.
One content issue relates to the way girls and boys, women and men, are
discussed and presented in the education curriculum. Gender stereotypes are
portrayed regularly in Afghanistan's textbooks, with more pictures of boys and
men, doing more active things. Women and girls are almost exclusively
portrayed doing traditional chores such as making food at home. Lessons and
stories most often have male leading characters, and exclusive language is
often used with only male references, pronouns (in Pashto), and names.
Occupations and household divisions of labor are consistently represented in
traditional ways, where women rarely are shown participating in life outside
of the home. Pashto language texts have a particular challenge due to a unique
linguistic structure of the language; in Pashto the language structure alters
depending on whether there is a male or female speaker, making the whole
language thoroughly gender-specific. Studies that have interviewed teachers
show that many of them have similar beliefs and worldviews, in terms of the
clear division of roles between women and men.t3o Unfortunately, these
portrayals reinforce stereotypes, limit the role models and perceived
opportunities for girls, and reaffirm for boys that girls and women should be
confined to the household. According to a World Bank study, curricula and
textbooks which only present favorable adult role models for boys hinder girls'
participation and ability to Iearn.131
The influence of anti-Government forces continues to play a role in shaping
Afghanistan's domestic policies. As one report highlights, the Taliban have
used the school curriculum as leverage in peace negotiations.m This is an
DC.A Milster Propilmme in Edutiltionill Reseilrch and Development in Aflhilnistim 2008-2010: Experiences ilnd
Outcomeo: (Kabul: International Cooperation In Hlsher Edu<atlon, 2011) 90.
'" "E,..nderlns Development: Throush Gender Equality In Rlshts, Resour<es, and Voice." (New Yorl<: OXford University
Press and the World Bonk, 2001) 11.
"' Glustoul, Antonio and Ooudlo Franco. "The Battle for the Schools: The Taleban and State Edu<atlon.• [Kabul: Afshan
Analysts NI!'!Work, 2011)11.



                                                Women's Role Ia AfJIIumlstan's Futare -
                                                Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemODb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                I    75
 important area to monitor as state and international actors consider ways in
 which to include opposition forces in national governance, as education in
 general, and the content of the curriculum especially, is likely to be a contested
 space in any future power-sharing arrangement at national level. This could
 potentially affect how women and girls are portrayed in the curriculum, what
 they are taught, and could also limit their access to education in general.
 The creation of private schools and private universities may provide part of
 the solution to the low quality of education in some areas. However, as may be
 expected, most of these institutions are located in urban areas rather than
 remote rural areas. There are now 492 general education private schools in
 Afghanistan.m Yet women are still underrepresented in these schools
 (perhaps even more so in private schools than in public schools). Women
 constitute only 14.8%134 of students in private university, while in Government
 universities, this figure is 19.1%135 (see below under the sub-heading !ertiary
 Education" for more on women in universities). The cost of sending sons or
 daughters to private schools/universities is also likely to be prohibitive for
 most families, given levels of poverty across the country. What is more,
 sending children to private school is no guarantee of quality education.
 Following a probe into private education in Afghanistan in 2011, MoE closed
 down 10 schools, while others were fined or received written warnings.

 Female Teachers
 The proportion of female teachers has increased since 2005 {when 28%m of
 teachers were women), to a current proportion of 31% of all teachers. The
 increase in real numbers more clearly demonstrates the progress made, with
 the number of female teachers more than doubling since 2005. However, with
 the significant increase in demand for girls' education, the supply of female
 teachers has not kept pace. According to MoE, 245 out of 412 urban and rural
 districts still do not have a single qualified female teacher, and 90% of female
 teachers are in urban areas.



 m EdUCition Milnillementof Information Syste~ as of 1390, Persitm Cilendilr yeilr (unpublished]. Accessed November
 2012.
 'M A/V}!Gn!Jrtm SttJ!IJtlaJI y..,rlloolr 2011-2012. (Kabul: central SutiJtlcs organization, 2012) 63.
 us Ibid, SS.
 '"MIIKlnls!tln; Ntl!/onal Recon.rtntctton and l'oi.W!y Reduction - IM /IDle otWo"""' In MI/Klnls!tlrr's FU!Ure. [Wuhlnston,
 D.C.: World Bank, 2005) 43.



             Women'• Role In AJilbmbtan'• Flltve -
76       I   Taldq Stac:kof Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                          Chapter 3 : Education   2013



In fact, the lack of female teachers has become a significant barrier to fw1her
increases in girls' education. In primary scllools, mixed classes are far more
common and the need for female teachers is often less important. as the
demand for completely segregated schools is considerably lower than at higher
levels of education. However, for many families, male teachers teaching girls'
classes, especial)y in secondary grades, is a major barrier to girls' school
attendance. The scarcity of female teachers is particularly acute in secondary
and tertiary education. When girls cease to be allowed to learn from male




teachers, there are often no female teachers to take them on In higher grades,
which contributes to drop-out rates. Furthermore, girls have been shown to
score hlgher In test scores when they have female teachers, possibly due to a
greater willingness to participate in the classroom or due to more attention
received from their teacher.m Thus the supply of qualified female teachers is
imperative for improving educational retention and advancement among
women.


"""A MaiUf Propllrm~e tl EAU:aUanal ~ch and Dewloprnenttl ~llllln 200.1-2010: Elcpetfencesand
0.-,11." (l'IIIHII: 1-.wll"""l ~Irion In H'a!lor £du-.l01l) SO.



                                          Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                          Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges    77
2013       I   Cbaptm" 3 : l!ducatiDD




                    Gr~ph   13: Increase In Number of Female Students and Female Teachers from 2007-2012
     500   .-----~-----------------------------------------------
                                                                                                   . Student Gain"
                                                                                                   • Teacher Gain"
    400    +---------------------~----------------------------------


     300   t--------------------1---------------------------------
     200   +---------------------~----------------------------------

"



                                  {Sourr:e: CSO Statistical Yearboola 2009-10; 2011-12)


 The above graph shows the increase in the number of female students and
 female teachers in government general education schools, expressed as
 percentages to facilitate comparison. The number of female teachers has
 increased in almost all provinces since 2007 (Uruzgan and Paktika are clear
 exceptions), while the number of female students has also increased in all
 provinces. While the graph may demonstrate a correlation, it cannot fully
 represent causality. The divergent levels of growth clearly demonstrate that
 strong factors other than female teacher numbers do also impact the number
 of female students.
 At a provincial level, the number of female teachers varies greatly. In Paktika
 for instance, only 12 of the 3,220 teachers are female. In Kabul City on the
 other hand, there are actually many more female teachers (16,710) than male
 teachers (5,768). In fact, the shortage of female teachers nationwide is
 exacerbated by the crowding of female teachers in Kabut.m At university level,
 there are also very few female teachers. In 2012, only 15.2% of lecturers were
 female. This issue is discussed further below, under the sub-heading "Tertiary
 Education».

 "'Afghanlrtan Statistical Yeatl>ook10JJ-20J2. (Kabul: Centro IStatistics Orpnlzatlon, 20121 82.



               Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve -
78         I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                                     CUptm-3: l!ducdlon      I   2013



One of the exacerbating factors for increasing female teachers is that women
are still underrepresented in teacher training facilities. In 2011/12, there were
19,523 women in teacher training, which constitutes 32.4% of the total
number of trainees in government Teacher Training Colleges (TTCs).13~
Encouragingly, 39.9% of new students for teacher training were female in
2011-2012.'40 The Government is expanding its teacher training facilities by
adding district level "satelliteu colleges (affiliated with Teacher Training
Colleges in provincial centers), an approach that could have a positive impact
on the ability of female secondary graduates to attend TICs, due to proximity
of the district facilities to their homes. District TICs are allowing students to
teach whilst attending TICs as well, an approach that acknowledges the
widespread practice of secondary graduates taking on local teaching
responsibilities without being officially certified as teachers. This approach
makes it possible for young women to earn money by teaching, while
simultaneously attending higher education close to home and becoming
certified professionals. While benefiting these women, this approach can also
increase the availability of female teachers, with a downstream impact on
numbers of female students. Further incentives are also needed to encourage
women TIC graduates to then work in more remote or underserved areas
where need is greatest.

                                   Box 7: Increasing Female Teachers

  In order to Increase the number of available female teachers, some NGOs have developed
  strategies for mentoring female secondary school students into teacher training. Save the
  Children has developed a model called the Girls' Urgent Early Steps to Teaching Success
  program (GUESTS), with support from the Open Society Institute and AusAID. In this
  mode~ they deliver teacher training to girls who have progressed to Grades 11 and 12, In
  parallel to their regular curriculum education. Save the Children works with families to
  agree to have their daughters attend their regular school shift, and then attend a teacher
  training session. which takes place at their secondary school. This model is implemented
  In Uruzgan. Nangarhar, and Bamyan provinces. To date, 235 female students have been
  graduated from the GUESTS program, with 191 more in training. A significant majority of
  graduated students have become teachers and/or have gone on to tertiary education,
  demonstrating that this kind of "apprenticeship" program can be successful in developing
  more female teachers and in supporting girls into tertiary educatiorL




"' Education Manarementof Information System, ao of 1390, Persian Cllendar yeer (unpublished]. Accessed March 2013.
'""'AfrlltanisttJn Statf.stlc:al YombooJcZOll-2012. (K.obul: Central Statistics 0'1"nlzatlon, 2012177.



                                               Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlsbm's Flltare ·
                                               Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                             I        79
 Security
 Afghanistan has a history of attacks on schools, most recently by Taliban
 elements, but in the past by other factions. This phenomenon has been viewed
 as a means by which to strike out at the state and counter its influence.
 Ideological attacks on state schools (especially girls' schools) and subsequent
 closures were reasonably common occurrences from 2005-2008.t4t According
 to a report by the Civil Military Fusion Centre, 49% of girls' schools in Paktika,
 69% in Zabul and 59% in Helmand were burned or attacked between 2006-
 2009.az Despite a decline in frequency of what appear to be ideological attacks,
 a number of schools have been targeted recently, resulting in school closures
 once again. For example, in May 2012, anti-government groups set fire to a
 girls' secondary school in Wazir village in Khogyani district of Nangarhar
 province, destroying two school buildings and equipmentm
 More recently, widespread public opposition to the targeting of schools has, to
 some extent, limited these attacks. 144 However, attacks of other kinds appear
 to be common, including criminal attacks, asset theft, and targeting schools due
 to their alternative uses. For example, schools have been widely used as polling
 stations across Mghanistan during elections, and are often targeted during
 election seasons in an attempt to disrupt voting. During the 2009/10 election
 cycles, there were between 200-250 cases of violence, threats, or pre-emptive
 closures of schools directly related to the elections, with approximately 90
 direct attacks on schools used as polling stations.145 In August 2009 alone
 (leading up to the presidential election), there were more than 500146 indirect
 threats on schools related to the elections.H7 In addition, local Mghan National
 Army (ANA) or Afghan National Police (ANP) officers have at times been
 instructed to guard schools, or have even in some cases occupied schools or co-
 located with schools; this is a controversial practice as even their temporary
 presence may in fact attract politically-motivated attacks. Since 2009, more

 '" •Knowledge on Fire· Attock$ on Education In Afsllanlstan: Rloko and Meaoureo for Succe5sf\ll Mltlptlon.• (Kabul: CARE,
 2009)21.
 1G Nijssen,    Stefillnie -n,e Peiice Proaess and Afl;hanistiln's Women.• (Kilbul: Civil-Military Fusion Centre, 2012) 6.
 "'·uN Mission In AfBhanlstan Condemns Attacks on Schools by lnsu~Bents." Aocessed 09 June 2013.
 http:ljwww.un.ors/appslnews,lstarv.asp?NewsiD=41984&Cr=AfBhan&O'l=II.UKCWRicsmQ.
 144
     Giu!rtozzi~ Antonio and Oaudio Franco. -rhe Battle for the Schools: The Taleblln and State Education:• (Kabul: Afghan
 Analysts Network, 2011) 26.
 loU    Care lntemtltionill and UNICEF. Forthcominc sb.ldyon attilcks on schools (forthcoming. in Summer 2013).
 146
    1ndlrectthreats Include cases of threats throu1h radio broadcasts and other medla announcementstarptlnlschools
 within ran••·
 1ol7   Care lntemationill and UNICEF. Forthcomin1sb.ldyon attilck:s on schools (forthcoming. in Summer 2013).



                Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
80          I   Taldq Stac:kof Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieD&e•
                                                                                        CUptm-3' l!ducdlon       I   2013



than 60 cases of military operations and searches have been reported at
schools.t48 Schools have also been collateral damage (in more than 50 cases
since 2009), due to proximity to a high profile target or an ongoing operation.
This is often due to an ANA/ANP checkpoint being established close to a
school, or schools being constructed close to a district governor's office, etc. It
is critical that schools remain non-politicized spaces, disassociated from state
functions and likely targets like state security forces, and that site selection is
carefully considered.
In addition, there has been an escalating trend over the past 1 - 2 years of
alleged poisoning incidents, typically at girls' schools (approximately 30 cases
reported nationwide).149 To date, evidence is not concrete about the nature of
these incidents, who is involved, whether these are indeed chemical attacks,
etc. Conclusive evidence of the use of chemicals has not been established based
on soil or water tests, or medical examinations of the affected girls. This trend
warrants further study to better understand the nature of these incidents.
However, despite a lack of information around these cases, they have
nonetheless increased the perceived security threat to female students.
Unfortunately, whether anti-education in nature or not, any attack on a school
creates concerns around the safety of education. Attacks on schools deter
parents from sending their children back to school and may force schools to
close down. A World Bank-funded CARE report from 2008 found that many
schools (85%) stayed closed for 1-3 months following attacks.tso The report
also found that in 5 out of the 8 provinces studied, female attendance was
more likely to be affected by threats/attacks than male attendance. For
example, female attendance dropped by 39% in He rat, compared to 1% among
males, after attacks. Interestingly, threats/attacks affected male attendance to
a greater extent than female attendance in Ghazni (68% of boys compared to
22% of girls) and Khost (58% of boys compared to 46% of girls).tst This
warrants further study, to better understand the gendered dynamics at work
in family decision-making regarding returning to school after attacks.



141
      1bld.
~Ibid.
150
  'Knowted1e on Fire -Attacks on Education In AfKhanlstan: Risks and Measures for Successful Mltlptlon.• (KIIbul: CARE,
2009139.
mlbid,41.



                                                 Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Futare -
                                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                                 I        81
 Community Involvement
 Community engagement and support to education, especially for girls, can be a
 critical factor in girls' retention rates and attainment levels. Various education
 actors, including MoE, through the World Bank-funded Education Quality
 Improvement Program (EQUIP), and key NGOs supporting the education
 sector in Afghanistan, have utilized models of community engagement to
 support girls' education, in recognition of the strong role that family support
 and community attitudes have on their ability to attend school. These models
 have included the establishment, training, and support of School Shuras,
 School Management Committees, Parent-Teacher Associations, or Mothers'
 Fora.
 While various models exist, these committees often take on responsibilities
 related to monitoring their local schools, observing quality, teacher attendance,
 use of resources, child safety, and collectively making decisions related to their
 local school and the education of their children. Depending on the model, the
 committees are made up of parents, village elders, religious leaders, students,
 and school administrators. In many areas, women are able to participate as
 members of these committees. To date, the Social Mobilization Unit of EQUIP
 has established 12,712 School Management Shuras. Key NGOs implementing
 education programming have established more than 6,300 of such
 committeesfcouncils.tsz

 Community-based Education
 Due to the immense challenges of geography and culture, and the limitations of
 government resource and capacity at this time, in 2012 the MoE reaffirmed its
 commitment to Community-based Education (CBE), developing a policy and
 recognizing existing classes as part of the broader national education system.
 As can be seen in Table 7 above, CBE is the only form of education where
 national enrolment of girls outstrips that of boys, largely because boys are
 more likely to be permitted to attend government schools, where girls may not
 be for a variety of reasons. Due to the closeness of classes and the ability for
 communities to be heavily involved in their local CBE class, they may be more
 comfortable sending their girls to this kind of education, allowing CBE classes
 to reach out-of-school girls. CBE classes are located in local communities,
 "'Thlo fl1ure Include• dlltll from CARE,tlleSwedloh Committee for Afallanlotan, Save tile Children, BRAC, the Ala Khan
 Foundation. the international Rescue Committee, and catholic Rellef5ervloes.



            Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
82
        I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleDte•
                                                                                         CUptm-3: l!ducdlon   I   2013



usually in a room in a family's home, and a teacher is nominated by the
community as a trusted person for teaching children. This is done in
communities where the nearest government schools are still too far from a
village, and is seen as an important tool for increasing levels of education in
remote and rural areas, espedally where governmental presence is lightts3
CBE has been shown to disproportionately benefit girls, as they are more likely
to miss out on school due to mobility constraints that come into effect when
travel is required to get to school. A government school may be several hours'
walk away, and only provides approximately 3 hours of instruction per shift in
a day. This means that a child might be required to walk 4 hours or more for 3
hours of instruction. Many families do not view being away from home for 7 or
8 hours a day acceptable for girls. CBE classes are typically only a few minutes
from their homes, at the home of a trusted member of the community.
Some of the main criteria for establishing a Community-based School are:
i) The host community must allow girls to attend the school;
ii) The host community must be at least 3kms from the nearest government
school;
ii) It must provide appropriate shelter for the classes, and;
iii) It must play an active role in establishing and partidpating in a School
Shura.ts•

By the end of 2014, MoE has committed to supporting 4,800 community-based
classes directly, in areas where the conditions for establishing a formal
government school cannot yet be met (with the aim of eventually establishing
formal schools and transitioning the CBE classes).l55 This is in addition to CBE
implementation by a set of key development partners.




m"Policies ilnd Guidelines for Community-&ised EdUCiltion.• (Kabul: Ministry of Educiltion1 2012) 10.
154
  1bld,12.
""Hattonol EduaJtlonal S!ra!rf~Jc Plan 2011).2014. (Kabul: Ministry of Educ•tlon, 2010).



                                                  Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Futare -
                                                  Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                              I    83
2013         Cbaptm-3 •l!ducatiDD




                                    Box 8: Community-based Education
     A broad set of NGOs have chosen to implement CBE as a means of increasing access to
     education in underserved areas, and reaching out-of-school girls. CBE implementers
     fadlitate establishing a class in a community and forming a School Shura (or School
     Management Committee), which nominates a teacher who is acceptable to the broader
     community.
     CBE has been shown to overcome some of the major bani.ers to girls attending school.
     namely the bani.ers of distance, mobility, safety, and time involved when government
     schools are too far from home. In addition, because CBE teachers are selected by the
     community, implementers find that there is broader trust in the person selected, and
     communities typically express high levels of satisfaction and ownership toward their local
     CBE class. In this model, girls can often attend school more consistently and for longer.

     A range of NGOs implement CBE in Mghanistan, often in partnership with each other. CBE
     implementers include UNICEF, CARE International. Save the Children.. Catholic Relief
     Services, the Aga Khan Foundation, the International Rescue Committee, the Swedish
     Committee for Mghanistan, and BRAC. These implementers have been supported by
     AusAID, USAID, CIDA, DFID, DANIDA, NZAID, SIDA, KOICA, Stichting Vluchtelin (SV), the
     Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (BPRM), the Netherland's Ministry of Foreign
     Affairs, the Jochnick Foundation, and Caritas Australia. Among these organizations, CBE has
     been implemented In 28 provinces, In support of nearly 13,000 classes. CBE lmplementers
     have typically provided teacher training (both In academic subjects and In pedagogy) to the
     community-selected teachers. Different implementers have incorporated various additional
     components into the model, including clustering CBE classes, linking CBE classes to
     government "hub schools", facilitating teacher-to-teacher peer learning circles, establishing
     adolescent reading centers to support students in continued learning after they graduate
     from CBE classes, and running mobile CBE classes for nomadic communities.

  CBE classes cover different grades depending on the location. Some classes have focused on
  Grades 1 - 3, while others cover all of primary school. One challenge in the CBE model is to
  begin addressing the widening gap between boys and girls in secondary education,
  preparing more girls for tertiary education. CARE International has introduced lower
  secondary into their CBE classes, an approach that is now being assessed and considered for
  expansion by other partners.




             Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
84
         I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                                       CUptm-3: l!ducdlon   I   2013



Tertiary Education
The number of women in universities has increased significantly since 2005.
However, similar to the proportion of women at other levels of education, the
proportion of women in university has remained the same. For the year 2011-
2012, the CSO reports that 14,811 (19%) of the 77,654 students in
Mghanistan's 26 government universities and institutes of higher learning are
women. For the same year, of the 34,713 students in the country's 43 private
universities, there were 5,123 (14.8%) women.tS6 With government and
private university figures combined, only 17.7% of all university students are
women. While the actual number of women in tertiary education has nearly
doubled, the proportion has not changed since 2003 when the World Bank
reported that 19% of students in university were female.1S7 This demonstrates
that the increase in male students in universities has outpaced the increase in
female students; hence, while actual numbers of women in universities have
increased, the absolute gap between the number of men and the number of
women enrolled in universities is widening.
The Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) states that it aims to increase the
overall enrolment to 115,000 students, and the proportion of women to 30%,
by the end of 2014. 158 However, these targets are highly unlikely to be
achieved, given the current levels. By comparison, women make up 65% of
university students in Iran1S9 and 41.5% in India.t6o Looking back over the last
five years, the CSO offers the following figures, which highlight the growing
difference between male and female student numbers.




"'At;hGniJttm stat/Jtl<tll YetJI'IIDolt 2011-2012. (Kabul: central StatiJtlcs Ol'pnlzatlon, 2012)54.
"'Af;hGnis!an: N a t i o n a l - and~ Rodur:tion -the /lolo a{Wo,., in Afii!Gnistan's FuturR. (Washincton,
D.C.: World Bank, 2005)41.
"'Accessed April2013. http;//mohufBI!ani•tan.af.
159
    Esfandiari, Haleh. ~e Women's MCM!ment.•Accessed 28 April2013. http://iranDrimer.usip.org/resource/womens-
~
1110
       •Enrollment of Women in Hi&fler Edutation lntreilses.• Actessed 15 June 2013.
htto://articles.tlmesoHndla.lndlatlmes.com/2012-09-04/news/33581042 1 hlsher-educatlon-total-enrolment-lakh-women.



                                                     Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Futare -
                                                     Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                            I    85
                     Graph 14: Number of Students In Government
                                Universities by Gender
     70000 ~------------------------------------------~~r----
     ~00 +-----~~~~WW~-----------------------

     50000     +------------46oa!r-----
     40000
     30000
     20000
     10000
           0
                      2007-ll                                      2009-10               2010.11            2011-12


                               (Source: CSOStatistic:al Yearboola 2011-12 and 2009-10)

 In simple numerical terms the difference between the number of male and
 female students has increased from 32,073 in 2007-8 to 48,032 in 2011-12.
 Cultural barriers continue to hinder progress in this area. By the time women
 reach university age (and indeed before this) they are often married and are
 restricted from pursuing further academic aspirations. Most people appreciate
 the importance of some form of education for girls, but this becomes harder to
 justify the older the child gets. Since children often complete primary
 education later than international standards, many women would progress
 through to university long past the typical marriage age acceptable to many
 families.
 The gap between women and men in tertiary education is likely partly
 exacerbated by the fact that of the 4,873 university teachers (in both
 government and private institutions), only 603 (12.4%) of them are women,
 with several universities (Kandahar, Khost, Paktia, Ghazni, Helmand, and
 Kunar universities) without a single female teacher.161 Another obstacle may
 be places in female dormitories. Of the 34,104 students in dormitories, only
 2,006 (5.9%) are women. Some provinces do not have any places for female
 students in dormitories, including Khost, Takhar, Badakhshan, Jawzjan, Kunar,
 and Laghman.162 Even if a girl gains a seat at a university in a location where it
 might be feasible to attend, universities often do not have adequate dormitory

 '" Afii/Klnlstan SIJJ!Istlctll Yearoook 2011-2012. (Kabul: Central Stotlstlcs Orpnlzallon, 2012] SO, 57.
 ""Ibid, 58.



             Women'• Role In AJilbmbtan'• Flltve -
86       I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                                        CUptm-3' l!ducdlon       I   2013



facilities for female students, and she may be unable to attend university due to
inappropriate housing options. Interestingly, the gap in the graduation rate is
narrower than the enrolment gap. In 2012, a total of 12,275 students
graduated from government universities, with 2,713 (22.1%) of them being
women (compared to 19% of the overall student body).163
There are, of course, other important factors that may impact on the number of
women in universities. The university entrance exam (the Kankur), allocates
both degree courses and actual universities to students, so students may not
necessarily be allocated to attend their nearest university (for example, in their
provincial centre). A girl who does earn a seat in university may not be able to
take it up, as she does not have the flexibility to select a university she may be
supported by her family to attend. The proportion of girls writing the Kankur
exam is increasing year on year, from 25.8% in 2009/10 to 29.4% in 2012/13.
However, increasing girls writing the Kankur has not closed the gap between
proportions of women and men at universities. There are few university seats
available, as compared to the growing number of secondary school graduates.
Each year secondary school graduates increase, but university opportunities
have not kept pace, making competition stronger.t64
In addition to universities, there are many technical and vocational
education/training providers in Afghanistan, either private, offered through
NGOs, or offered by several branches of the Government In order to ensure
that young people are trained in skills relevant to the Afghan labor market,
MoE and the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Martyrs, and the Disabled
(MoLSAMD) aim to increase the number of TVET institutions across the
country and to increase the enrolment of girls to 30%. TVET centers are an
important part of reconstruction and development efforts in Mghanistan as
they help to build a capable, responsive workforce that will contribute to
economic growth.16S

However, figures show that while the total number of female students has
increased since 2009, as with other education institutions, the gap is widening
between male and female students. Moreover, the percentage of students who

'"Ibid, 55.
1
 .."A Master Protriilmme ln Educatlonal Research .and Development ln Afa;hanlstan 20011- 2010: Experiences and
Outcomes.• (Kabul: lntem.tionill Cooperation in Hicher EdUCiltion, 2011) 18.
'" "Afilhanlstan Technical and Vocational Education Training [TVEl} Provlclerolnventory.• (Kabul; United StateoAgencyfor
lntemotio,..lll<l!wlopmont.2011) 1.



                                                 Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Futare ·
                                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                                 I         87
 are female (15.3%) is still far short of the government target This is largely
 because many of the vocational areas of training are traditionally dominated
 by men and are often sectors that women would find it very difficult to
 function within, given current cultural constraints.

                          Graph 15: Number of Government TVET Students by Gender

~0 .-----------------------------------~~~---------
30000 +---:-=::-------------~1-H!~-----------
20000    +-......;.::.o::o--------------
10000
    0



                    2009-2010                   2010-2011                  2011-2012


                                      (Soura: MoE TYliT Data)

 As mentioned, there are also a series of private providers of TVET services.
 However, these have sometimes been uncoordinated, and links between
 vocational training supply and market demand have often not been thoroughly
 researched. Despite a proliferation of training centers and courses, skilled
 workers still often must be imported from abroad as they are not available
 locally. Key areas of training include business, IT, mechanics, construction, and
 textiles. 166
 That said, the World Bank-funded National Skills Development and Market
 Linkages Program (NSDP) was one such program that saw strong
 employment-related results for women. In Bamyan, women's employment
 rose to 81% higher for those who participated in the program than for those
 who did not. In Badakhshan. although employment rates did not rise
 dramatically, women's income among the trained group rose to five times
 higher than those who did not participate in the program. By contrast, in
 Khost, wages rose slightly, but employment rates rose from 14% for women
 outside of the program, to 70% for women who went through the program. In




 ... lbid.14-15.



            Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
88      I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChaJieD&e•
                                                                                     CUptm-3' l!ducdlon       I   2013



Samangan and Kandahar, employment rates increased slightly, but wage
earning increased three-fold.167

Policy Implications
This chapter has highlighted a number of practicable methods that have been
demonstrated to improve education for girls and women in Mghanistan.
Capitalizing on considerable momentum, recommendations for the future
include:
     1. Access to Appropriate Education Facilities - Extend coverage of
        government schools to become closer to communities, and ensure that
        boundary walls, water supply, separate latrines, books, and supplies are
        available at each school. This will require a systematic budgetary
        exercise to upgrade existing facilities such that girls can derive
        maximum advantage from existing infrastructure, while planning for
        expanded coverage. Consider transportation options for children,
        especially girls.
     Z. Community-based Education - Expand the CBE model for areas which
        do not currently have regular government schools. Work to integrate
        CBE classes as part of a wider network of government education
        facilities, supporting CBE teachers and capitalizing on knowledge
        gained from existing CBE implementers.
     3. Female Teacbers - Support and expand the District TTC model already
        functioning. and continue to monitor and measure its impact on female
        teacher levels. Develop further models for incentivising female teachers
        to teach in more remote or underserved areas.
     4. School Secut1ty - Work to minimize attacks on schools, firstly by not
        using schools for purposes beyond education, which may politicize the
        facilities and locations. Further analyze recent cases to better
        understand them.
     S. Transition Years and Drop-out Rates - Provide additional support for
        girls during years that show statistically high drop-out rates, in an effort
        to intervene at the highest risk points in the retention of girls in school.
     6. Tertiary Education - Invest in various tertiary education programs
        that produce professionals for social service delivery (i.e. in health,

'""Tracer Studies: Tralnlnl of Chronically Poor Women In Bocllkhshan, Bamyan, Somanaan, Kandahar, and Khoot, In NSDP.•
(Kabul: World Bank, 20101.



                                                Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Futare ·
                                                Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                              I      89
          education, justice), and create incentives and affirmative action
          measures to bring women into the programs and deploy them upon
          graduation. Perform strong market analysis for skills development
          training, to ensure employability and income generation possibilities
          for female trainees.




         Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve-
90   I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- CllalleDae•
            Chapter 4: Work and Employment




In 2005, the World Bank's Gender Country Assessment focused on the
predominantly agrarian nature of Afghanistan's economy, women's largely
unpaid participation in various elements of horticultural and livestock
employment, and the gender division of labor in the agricultural sector.16B The
general structure of the agriculture sector and the way women participate
within it remains largely similar to 2005. Urban and formal employment of
women has slowly grown, at least in specific sectors; however, many more
professional women are needed to ensure access to various services for other
women. The majority of women are employed in domestic labor in their own
households, are involved in agricultural production, and take part in various
other types of informal labor. Many women are involved in handicrafts such as
tailoring, carpet weaving and embroidery, which may be for their own families
or may be for sale.
Despite the upward trend of women in formal or paid employment, the
findings presented below show that strong cultural norms and economic
pressures often tie women to activities that are of low economic value. Even

111
      Afghanistan: NatiDnal RNonstrurtion and Po !IeTty Reduction -the Role of Women in A/ghanistrm~s Futu~. (Wilshin~to~
D.C.:   Wo~d   Bank, 2005) 53-66.

                                                    Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                    Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                  I         93
2013            Cbaptm" 4-' Word IUid lmplvymeDt




 those women who do take part in the formal economy are generally less well
 paid than men and have fewer managerial opportunities.
 A significant challenge to analyzing the employment and economic activity of
 women is a lack of data. Compared to the health and education sectors, in
 which there is a large volume of at times contradictory statistical information,
 Afghanistan's labor market suffers from a dearth of fundamental information,
 and very little is gender disaggregated. Women's employment is particularly
 difficult to measure, since it is comprised primarily of reproductive labor and
 informal labor (often unpaid). Characteristics of informality are common to the
 Afghan economy in general, but are particularly prevalent as related to
 women's work, making women's work an additional challenge to measure and
 study. However, there are some indicative studies, which can help researchers
 piece together the complex issue of women and work in Afghanistan. The most
 recent NRVA (2007/08) is a key source for looking at women's employment.169
 Based on the information available, the following represents part of the picture
 of women's employment




 111
     Altho1111h the NRVA 2012/13 is forthcominc. the indi..tors will not be directly comporoble to 2007/01.
 '"'Ibid, sa- 66.
 111
     Even In 2005~ this was a disputed fla:ure. The ftsure was based on another World Bilnksource:
 http:Udevdato.worldbank.orcleJ<temal/dpector/aso1W=O&RMDIC=110&SMDK=473885, and is discu....t on p.111 of the
 2005 Country Gender ASiessment (footnote 168]. Whilst more conaetelliures were not available atthattlme, experience
 in other similarly conflict-ed states, with comparable levals of povarty, consilb!ntly demonstrates mud! hi8her levels
 of women's employment (often Informal], simply based on household survhrallmperatives. AIJ1!ady at that time, the Biven
 data did not matd!the NRVA 2003/04 data as well. As this chapter explores, this lslarsely due to onsolns chollensesln
 defininc and rneilsurinc women's work in Afshaniltilln.
 m National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. (Kabul: Control Statistics Orpnlzatlon, 2007/8] 27.
 "'This does not Include what Is considered •reproductiVe" labor, lncludln& household <leonln& chlldc:are, cooklns, etc. This
 distinction is explored further below, under the sub-headin& awomen in Afihanisl:iln's EconomY'.
 114
       Ibid. 33.
 175
       1bid, 25.



                Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
94          I   Taldq Stoclkof Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJI&e•
Although the above table lists women's working hours as being significantly
less than those of men, this is primarily a demonstration of the above-
mentioned difficulty in measuring their work Women's true work hours and
labor force participation are very difficult to calculate in an environment
where they are often not well-integrated into the formal paid economy. This
issue is discussed in greater detail in the below sub-section 'Women and
Afghanistan's Economy".
Using the available data from some larger quantitative studies, along with
qualitative work, this chapter will explore the modalities of women's work,
both in agriculture and other growing sectors in Afghanistan, and in the closely
linked informal and formal economies.

Women and Mghanlstan's Economy
In general, the informal sector176 dominates the labor market in Afghanistan.
while the formal sector is underdeveloped, with the public sector making up its
majority.177 This means that a large percentage of the workforce, both in rural
and urban areas, is working in informal, sometimes unpaid, and/or subsistence
employment. Formal labor market opportunities in Afghanistan are extremely
limited, representing only 9.4% of total employment nationwide. The
urban/rural disaggregation demonstrates that formal employment makes up
29% of urban jobs, and only 6% of rural jobs.178 Women's employment is more
likely to fall within the informal economy than that of men, and it is also more
likely to be unpaid.
In addition to being characterized by informality, women's employment is
doubly difficult to measure, as much of the work women do can be considered
"reproductive" labor. Reproductive labor is unpaid labor that often takes place
within the household and contributes to the ongoing functioning of the family,
in contrast to work that is considered to be "productive" labor, which goes
through market transactions and has a monetary value attached to it. whether

"'The Informal seaor Is broadly characte~zed as conoi.Ung of unlto - d In the production of BOOd5 or services, which
typically operate at a low 1...,1 ofo,..nlzatlon.. with little or no division between labor and capital as factors of production
and on il smiilll SCille. Lilbor relations -where they exist- are based mostly on casual employment, kinship or personal ilnd
social relatlono rather than contnctuolarransements with formalsuarantees. AcC<!SSed 14 April 2013.
http:{/S13t:S.oeal.orclslossary/datall.asp?ID=1350.
"'NGtlonal Risk ond VulrrenJblll!y Assessment. [Kabul: Centnol5tatl5tlc5 Orpnlzatlon, 2007/8) 9.
"' "Chollenaes and Opportunities for Inclusive Growth In Aftrhanlstan• (forthcomlns). (Washlnston.. D.C.: World Bank, 2013)
11.



                                                     Women's RolelaAliiJum1stzm's Flztare •
                                                     Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemODb aad CODtlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                                        I          95
2013    1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



 in the informal or formal economies.m Reproductive work often takes up the
 majority of women's daily time, including household chores and childcare.
 With fertility rates that remain high at 5.1 children/woman, and very limited
 access to external childcare, the reproductive work of raising a family is
 enormously labor-intensive. In addition, the burden of household chores is
 compounded in many areas by a lack of proximate water and a lack of
 electricity, among other infrastructural constraints, making basic daily tasks
 extremely time-consuming. This work is essential for the well-being of the
 household and facilitates the ability of others to participate in productive
 labor, bolstering the whole of the nation's economy in an often invisible way.
 However, it is classically difficult to measure, as it is often not considered
 "employment", and both men and women tend to under-report the time
 women invest in reproductive labor. Reproductive labor is twice-removed
 from the formal economy, making it more difficult to measure than even the
 informal economy. Hence, women's economic contributions are typically vastly
 underestimated, especially in societies where their participation rate in more
 formal employment is low.
 Given the inability to accurately measure women's economic contribution in
 reproductive labor, this chapter will focus on their productive labor, as a
 contribution to the formal and informal economies. However, it should be
 recalled throughout, that these contributions are almost always in addition to a
 significant number of hours of reproductive labor at home.
 Looking at the distribution of employment across various sectors shows that
 Afghanistan is still fundamentally an agrarian society. More than half (59%) of
 the population is involved in agricultural activity in some form, according to
 the latest figures from the NRVA in 2007/8, 180 meaning that the agriculture
 sector remains the most significant portion of the economy from the
 perspective of employing the workforce (even when counting only the licit
 agriculture sector, excluding poppy production, as below). Figures from this
 survey provide a detailed insight into which sectors employ the greatest
 proportion of the workforce.




 "' LDurdes,Bene~o. Gender, Development Gnd 6/obG/Izatlon (New Yor1< and LDndon: Routledae, 2003).
 ,., NatioiNJ/ RWc and Vulmtrobt1ity AsHssment. (Kabul: CA!nlrill Stltistics 0'1onization, 2IX17/8) 32.



            Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• F'lltve ·
96      I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~ued Cllalle:qes
                           Graph 16: Percentaae of Workforce In Each Sector

                                                            • Agriculture and livestock
                                                             • Construction, mining and quarT'fing

                                                             c Manufacturing
                                                             • Transportation and communication



                                                            I:! Education

                                                             C Other services

                                                             c Public administration


                                              {Sourr:e: NRVA 2001JBJ

In addition to employing the workforce, the agrtculture sector has also made a
steadily growing contribution to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in real
numbers since 2002, as the economy has consistently expanded. Speaking
proportionately, however, the contribution of licit agriculture activities to GDP
is actually slightly on the decline. This is because other sectors have been
growing at a faster rate, gaining proportionately over agriculture. Taking the
three largest contributing sectors to Mghanistan's GDP (agriculture, services
and industry), as of 2012, nearly half (46.4%) of Mghanistan's GDP was
derived from the service sectortst (including high volume sub-sectors such as
construction, security, transportation, telecoms, and              Industry, by        rn.
comparison, has remained relatively static as a proportion of GDP, although
the mining sector has begun to grow slowly in the past couple of years (from
0.6% of GDP in 2010, to 1.8% in 2012).182 The graph below demonstrates the
trajectory of the agriculture, industry, and service sector contributions to GDP
since 2002.




,., "AIJihoniston Economic Updne"(unpubiished).]Kobul: World Bonk, 2012] 4.
,., Ibid.



                                                Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                       I   97
2013   1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt




                              Graph 17: Contribution to GOP by Sector

        ~% ~--------------------------------------------
                                ~=
       :: t=::~~~;:::::::~~~==~~::
        ~~= t=::;;;;;~~~~::::~~=~~;;~~~~iiiiii~=
       10%
        0%
            +-------------------------------------------------
               +----.-----.----~---.-----.----.----.----,----.

                 2002/3 2003/4 2004/5 2005/6 2006/7 2007/8 2008/9 2009/10 2010/11

                          - -Asriculture     - - - Industry       - - -Services




                                      (Source: World Bank 2011]

 While this trajectory has been fairly predictable since 2002, it may become less
 so. The growth of the service sector is heavily supported by the presence of
 international donor countries, NGOs and NATO forces. Looking ahead, it is
 likely that the service sector will decline as aid funds decrease in the future,
 and the economy may revert to a greater dependency on agriculture.
 Graph 18 demonstrates proportions of the workforce across sectors,
 disaggregated by rural and urban areas. The picture for rural and urban areas
 looks strikingly different in several sectors. Agriculture is notably less
 significant in urban settings, with trade, services, and public administration
 making up higher proportions of the employment opportunities for members
 of the workforce. Por women, agriculture is a much more common area of
 employment than other sectors, creating a situation where women in rural
 areas have significantly higher employment rates than in urban areas, although
 their employment in agriculture is largely unpaid and informal.




           Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve -
98     I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued Cllalleqes
                                                                                  Chapter 4 : Word and Employment       2013



                        Graph 18: Percentase of Employed Worklna A&e Population by Sector

            ~    .-----------------------------------------------
            70 +-----------------------~~~------------------
            00   +---------------------------
            50   +---------------------------
            ~ +-----------~~----------
            30   +------------
            20   +-----=----=-=-----::-
            1~   p llillllii::Jili
                                         Urban                                                Rural
                 • AIIril:ulbJre and livestock                              • Construction, mining and quarrying
                 D Manufocturing                                            • Transportation and communication
                 • rrade                                                    DEducation
                 C Other services                                           C Public administration


                                                      (Souru: NRVA 2007/B)

There are a number of different ways to measure levels of employment and
unemployment, but informal employment through families and familial
networks makes this a particularly difficult figure to estimate, especially for
women. The labor force participation rate can be measured as the percentage
of the workforce (defined as people who are either working or looking for
work) who are employed. In 2007/8 the labor force participation rate was
67%, yet the difference between men and women in work was significant-
86% and 4 7% respectively.
Another way to measure the labor force participation rate is to look at the
proportion of all people who are of working age (16 years and over) who are
employed or unemployed - the employment-to-population ratio. In 2007/8,
the proportion of people of working age who were employed was 62%, varying
from 80% for men to 43% for women. The unemployment rate183 is the
percentage of unemployed individuals within the labor force - 7% for men and
women.184 These figures are fairly typical of many developing countries.
Whilst the gap between female and male employment is large either way it is
measured, in a regional context, a report by the World Bank in 2011 found that
levels of female employment in Mghanistan were among the highest in South
Asia. Only in Nepal (79%) and Bhutan (61 %) are a greater proportion of

1113
       Members of the labor force ilre dilssified iiS •unemployed'" if they Atisfy the conditions of "seekinc wort"'.
1114
       National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. (Kabul: Centn1l Statistics Orpnlzatton, 2007/8) 26.



                                                        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                        Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges            99
 2013      1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



   women employed. In Pakistan, only 22% of women are employed, and in India
   and Bangladesh, 29% of women are employed. The figure rises to 35% in the
   Maldives and 38% in Sri Lanka.185 Still, approximately 7 out of 10 workers in
   Afghanistan's workforce are men.1B6
   By sector, the distribution of female labor can be seen in the following graph.
                                Graph 19: Gender Distribution of Worllers by Sector

    PUBLIC NlMIN/GCNT
        OiliER SERVICS
            EDUCAnO~
                HEALlH
          RETAIL TRNlE
      WHOL£.W.E TRNlE
TRANSPORTAT., COMMUNI
       MANUFACruRING
         C0NSTRUCT10~
   RoAD OONSTRUCTlON
  MINING & QuARRYING
 AGRJOJLTURE/ LIVErnlC




                                                       • FEMALE • MALE


           (Saura: Challenges and Opportunitiesfor Inclusive Growth in lif11hanistan, World Bank, 2013)

   Although Afghan women have a higher rate of employment than some other
   women in South Asia, compared to men, women in Afghanistan still work
   fewer hours in paid employment, earn less, are more likely to work in
   vulnerable employment (a characteristic of informal employment), and have
   limited financial autonomy. Of the approximately 4 7% of working women, only
   25% of them are working in paid employment, and of these, most are working
   in the informal sector.187 Regardless of which sector women work in, the NRVA
   reports that 96% of working women are in vulnerable employment, compared
   to 88% of men. The International Labor Organization (ILO) defines vulnerable
   employment as being informal and insecure and typified by unstable and


   ""Mole and ~Jetter Jobs lnSOUrhAsfo.IW.shlngton, D.C.: World Bonk, 2011) 87.
   • ...Challen1e.s and Opportunities for lndusive Growdl in Afahanistan"' {forthcomirll). (Wilshincton, D.C.: Wortd Bank, 2013)
   6.
   ""Ibid.



              Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
 100      I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued ChaJieD&e•
inadequate earnings, low productivity and a lack of 'safety nets' to mitigate
risks during dire straits.1aa
In general, this under-employment of women and their lack of economic power
is likely to have repercussions inside the household. It has been demonstrated
consistently that women are more likely to dedicate larger portions of their
earned income to family well-being than men, whether toward household
nutrition, education, or health costs.l89 With limited direct economic earnings
of their own, women typically have less decision-making power over
household finances as weJl.190 This means that women's lack of economic
empowerment and vezy limited access to paid employment in Afghanistan
negatively impacts on other development indicators for children within their
households.

Rural Employment
In rural settings, female involvement in the workforce is significantly higher
than in towns and cities, due to the predominance of agriculture as the
majority employment sector and the role women play in production processes
and household farming strategies. In these settings, just over half of the female
workforce (54%) is in employment.m
Despite their relatively high participation rate, women are largely confined to
activities within agricultural production processes that are not related to
decision-making responsibility or brokering trade exchanges with the market.
As the World Bank reported in 2011, rural women have vezy few incentives for
increasing their productivity under the current socio-economic framework.192
This is largely because their work is often unremunerated and because they
must divide their time between other household tasks like domestic chores,
child-raising or caring for the elderly.



,.. Key rndir»tors of the Law Moria!~ SUc!h Edititm. (International Labor Orpnization, 2009].
,., •a.allenp• and Oppommities for Inclusive Growth in AfBhanistan" (forthcominll· (Washington, D.C.: Wo~d 8onk, 2013)
6.
• •Gender Milinstr&minc in Afchanisbn's Microfimmca Sector: An Impact Assessment.• (Killbul: Afghan Manapment and
Markell "'I Con•ultants and the Mlcroflnanc:e Investment Support Fadllty for AfJihanlstan) 1~24.
"' NcrtlonG/ R/.Jk Olld VU/~b/1/ly Assessment. (K<obul: central statlsUcs Oraonlzatlon, 2W7/8)27.
liEI "Understandinc: gender in Ac;riculturill wlue chain: The tc~ses of pilpe/l'illisins, almancb1 and saffron in A:(J:hini5tiln"".

(Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2011) U.



                                                     Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                                     Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                         I 101
2013       Chapter 4 : Word and Employment




 Horticulture

 Agriculture is based on
 access to land, either In the
 fonn of ownership, or
 through        sharecropping,
 tenancy, or encroach!Dg on
 land without ownership.
 Most women in Afghanistan
 do not own land, despite
 the fact that the Civil Code
 and Sharia Law give them
 the right to do so.193 The
 issue of land ownership and
 inheritance      is    highly ,____ __.
 complex, and varies widely across regions of the country and even from one
 community to the next. but many women who do inherit land depend on their
 husbands or brothers to administer land ownership claims and manage this
 land.l94 It Is not uncommon for a woman to renounce her Inheritance to her
 brother before marrying (ln order to keep her land ln her birth famlly's
 possession) or, If she carries land Into her man1age, to sign It over to her
 husband, based. on cultural expectatfons.t9s According to the Gender
 Assessment for the Land Refonn In Afghanistan (LARA) project, many people
 are not aware of the provfslons of the Clvfl Code and Sharla Law, and belleve
 that women are not allowed to own land.196 Some even consider the notion of
 women owning land to be shameful.197 Therefore, women's agricultural labor
 is often working on their husband's or fantily's land through unpaid labor,
 except if they are very poor, in which case they may be more likely to work on
 the land of others. For a further discussion on land ownership issues, the 2005
 Country Gender Assessment's exploration of this issue is still relevanttoday.m

 "'"!lind Rmlnn In Af(lltanlmn c;.nder Aslll!sanent.• {Kabul: UnHed satN •tK:rfor lntematlonallle'fl!loii"Mint. 2012} 12.
 "'"Wb> OWns the "'-"'•?   Ru"" Wam~~n'•-to Land and~· (Koi:U, A!ifwn -                     ..h ond E..r..Uon Unit,
 200S}20.
 ""rar alurthordlmmlan afwomon and land rf&hla In Afillantm"'- the Worid Bank'aliiO!iGoncHrca.ntry
 Asse:ssmem:~:Nafkw11~fmdPt:NMylltdul:llon-IMRolttlfWtlti!MOt~s~•
 ....!lind Rllfarm In Afillanlmn Golndar Aa.wmont.• {Kobul: UnHtld- !I,IIM!tfar lntllmltlanallle'fl!lap!TW11, 2012)
 14.
 "'rblot2L
 . . A/r1111JNrtftn: Naf:SoMI ~ fmd Pt:NtHty RI!IIWCfol!- tht! Rille tlfWIJIN!n In ~sfutwi':.(Washii\I!On,
 D.C.: Worill S.nk, :ZOOS) 65-8.



           Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
102        Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
Most fanns in Mghanistan practice subsistence farming and struggle to
produce for commercial markets. The pressure to provide food for the family
ties laborers (male and female) to a traditional production chain which acts as
a significant barrier to reforming women's place in agricultural production;
there is little room to experiment or take risks by changing traditional
production models when agriculture is so tightly linked to household survival.
Farmers who own small plots of land are especially reluctant to try new
technologies or techniques because the risk of failure far outweighs the
potential benefits. Poorer households generally require greater involvement of
female labor (and often in broader roles) than wealthier households, since they
cannot afford to forfeit unpaid labor that could contribute to household
livelihoods.
The traditional division of labor is deeply embedded. Qualitative research
conducted in 2009 among 360 rural households in Badakhshan, Bamyan, and
Kabul provinces found that women were mainly involved in roles such as
weeding. harvesting and post-harvest work such as threshing and cleaning
seeds. Respondents said that these roles had not changed in living memory.199
While these roles may be limited, this still reflects a fairly broad and external
participation for women, especially in weeding and harvesting. and is more
representative of some northern and central provinces as compared to other
regions. In some other regions, it is more typical for women to only participate
in the post-harvest processing elements, because these can be done inside the
household compound.
A baseline social assessment of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and
Livestock's (MAIL's) National Horticulture and Livestock Project (NHLP),
which started in November 2012, profiled agricultural practices in 23
provinces, and noted some interesting variances.2oo For example, in Herat,
cultivation and sales were primarily a man's role, while women were involved
in drying fruit and shelling nuts. Broadly similar in Badakhshan, women do
take part in the sale of some products, including vegetables. In Bamyan,
Panjshir, and Daikundi, both men and women are involved in the cultivation of
vegetables, cereals, and grains, and in Daikundi, orchards are harvested

'"' Ashrall, Hedayatlllloh. "Gender dimension of agrlcultUIII and rural emplo)'mellt: s~J«(al {ocus onll/Qhan rura/...,men's
txaJS  ta tlflrir:ulturr and rural ckveJopmrmt sector.• Aft:hilnistan Nationill Development Strmcv. ll<ilbul, Government of
Afallanl•tan, 2009}. 13.
"""Social Asse,.ment of the Nllllonal Horticulture •nd Livestock Project". (Kabul: Samuel Hall consuldn1. 2012}52 -75.



                                                  Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                  Taldq Staclk DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                  I      103
2013    1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



 primarily by women. In Takhar, women are heavily involved in harvesting.
 especially of vegetables. Due to this variation, the foregoing Horticulture and
 Livestock Project and the new NHLP have created sub-components that
 specifically target women through training on input supply, extension services,
 weed control, harvesting. post-harvest processing. packaging. and kitchen-
 gardening. To date, 368 female producer groups, comprised of9,426 members,
 have been trained in horticultural practices by HLP.2o1 This constitutes 46% of
 all producer group members trained through the program.
 Livestock

 Traditionally, women feed animals, do the milking. collect fodder, care for
 young animals, and sometimes treat sick ones. However, as with horticultural
 practices, women are often confined to activities which can be conducted in the
 household vicinity and have little or no access to the wider market. Again, this
 means that the activities they perform are often considered to be of low value.
 However, there are some areas of decision-making in which women appear to
 take larger roles (for example, in selling milk, eggs, and wool). The following
 breakdown of the division of labor for livestock activities reveals some
 interesting distinctions.
   1'llble 10: Perc:mllp o1w-·• uutMea'• ...,-sbCIIIJIII.Aidmld                                     llalbaD...,-
                                       Cattle                       Sheep                            Goats
                               Women            Men         Women            Men          Women               Men
                                                Wort!: ...,IIIIIOIClltJ
   Feeding                      69.14           19.46         59.7      26.6               63.86              23.37
   Grazing                      11.44           21.89         7.67     32.17               10.74              27.72
   Watering                     63.32           17.90        51.22     26.36               51.81              23.80
   Tending young                81.86            4.86        58.54     16.49               70.68              13.50
   Milking                      84.13            1.87        57A9       4.88               77.94              4.93
   Treating                     22.73           74.44        38.21     56.91               33.82              59.22
                                                   Dedi10D Dlllllilll
   Purchasing
                                33.65           65.63         28.69         68.76          33.96              60.23
   animals


 "'' Mlnlsby of Aarlcullure, Irrigation and Uvestoc:k, Horticulture and Uvestoclc ProJect. Accessed 14 April 2013.
 http:l/maii.!!O\I.af/en/paoe/3254.
 21;12 .,Gender In Developlnathe Asrir::ulture and Uvestodr: Sectors.• Afghanistan Gender Malnstreamrna Implementation Nate

 Series, No.2, 2. (Washlnl!on. D.C.: World Blink, 2012].



  ..
10.,
        I   Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tare •
            Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~- ChaJieD&e•
  Purchasing feed              28.95         70.37          24.39         73.05          27.29            66.91
  Selling animals              37.60         61.64          35.31         61.56          42.96            51.09
  Selling milk                 52.31         19.06          35.89         17.65          47.61            18.58
  Selling wool                                              34.03         25.90
  Selling fiber                                                                          40.35            21.92
  Treating                     34.09         64.63          46.23         50.41          38.61            54.57

The table above shows that women have greater responsibility for the
maintenance and care related components of animal husbandry, and are
involved in selling produce (likely locally) as many of these tasks can be
performed closer to home, while men have greater responsibility for
purchasing and selling livestock at the market, and for grazing. While these
responsibilities range from one area to another, generally men have greater
responsibilities for larger animals, while women take the majority
responsibility for smaller ones.
Similar to horticultural practices, the provincial profiles prepared for the NHLP
demonstrate provincial variations.203 For example, in Herat both men and
women are heavily involved in animal husbandry, although men take a more
active role with goats, and poultry are mainly looked after by women. Men
butcher, shear, and sell most commodities; however, women are typically in
charge of producing dairy products and selling eggs. In Badakhshan and
Takhar, women take part in the shearing of sheep, and are in charge of the
production of yarn from wool and of dairy products. Based on these roles,
NHLP has focused on training women in livestock care, animal health, and
poultry activities, since they have already been seen to regularly participate in
these aspects of livestock development. As above, 9,426 members of 368
female producer groups have been trained on improved animal husbandry
practices, and 25,000 women have also been supported in poultry farming
through HLP.
In addition to improved horticultural and livestock practices, HLP promoted
savings methods among farmers, by training on book-keeping, savings
methods, inter-loaning, conducting effective meetings of savings groups,
marketing, and access to finance. To date, SO% of women farmers in the
program are engaged in savings activities, a stronger percentage than for male


""'Social Assessment of the National Horticulture and Uvestock Project". [Kabul: Samuel Hall COnsultllliL 2012152-75.



                                                 Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                I 105
2013   1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt


 farmers (at 46%), and the women's groups have higher levels of savings and
 greater frequency of inter-loaning per group.
 One key requirement for HLP and NHLP, along with other agricultural support
 programs, in order to support a greater number of women in horticulture and
 livestock activities, is to have female extension workers. This is challenging.
 because extension work requires significant travel to rural areas; however,
 without the appropriate staff, women farmers will be overlooked. To date,
 HLP has been able to employ 46 female extension workers (24 for horticulture
 and 22 for livestock), to work with female farmers and producer groups on
 improved horticultural and livestock practices.
                               Box 9: SUpport to Female Parmel'll
  From 2007 to 2011, Mennonite Economic Development Associates (MEDA) worked with
  female farmers in Parwan province, through a project called Through the Garden Gate. The
  project focused on the target crops of carrots, onions, tomatoes, grapes, potames, and
  cucumbers, and aimed to increase household supply, generate income for women, and
  involve women themselves in more aspects of horticultural value chains. The project was
  structured around the "lead farmer" model, where women with mobll1ty and entrepreneurial
  potential are selected to be lead farmers (or group leaders J among other women The lead
  farmers were typically responsible for up to 25 other women farmers. MEDA assigned a
  female Village Facilitator from their own staff to support every 10 lead farmers. The Village
  Fac111tators trained lead farmers, who In turn trained and fadlltated the work of the other
  farmers in their group. In 1Dtal, MEDA trained and worked with 90 lead farmers, through
  female agronomist5 and Village Fadlitamrs. The lead farmers were trained in farming
  operations and business skills, including: land preparation, crop rotation, drip irrigation.
  mulching, greenhouse techniques, pest/disease management, weed control, grape trellising,
  solar drying, storage practices, record-keeping, costing/pricing, marketing, packaging and
  food processing. The lead farmers passed along their knowledge by working with a total of
  2,549 women among their groups.
  All farmers were taught about saving, putting aside finances for inputs for the following year,
  and investing in possible other forms of farming (ie.livestock). Some farmers expanded from
  horticulture into dairy production, using their profit5. By the end of the project, 92% of the
  women had become savers. Some lead farmers were selected to become sales agents, and
  were provided additional training on how to communicate with clients and input suppliers,
  and link to markets in larger centers; the sales agents then supported the women farmers to
  access 1D larger markets.
  Women farmers gained in income as a result of the program. Before the program, the women
  were earning an average of $38/year from their horticultural activities. This income rose to
  an average of $323/year by the end. The lead farmers had an even more dramatic increase
  due to being in charge of larger demonstration plots that they were then able to sell from;
  their income went from an average of $101/year at the beginning to $866/year by the end. In
  addition, 100% of lead farmers increased their productive assets (including solar driers,
  storage, and composters), whUe 31% of member farmers Increased their productive asseu.
  Women also reported better soil productivity, better use of water, eating more vegetables,
  and having a more diverse diet in the household.

           Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve .
106    I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJI&e•
Formal and Urban Employment
There is very limited data available about the distribution of female labor in
fonnal employment. Overall, the NRVA figures from 2007/8 show that access
to employment for women in cities is lower than in rural settings; however,
access to paid and fonnal employment is likely higher in cities, where higher
numbers of women work as teachers, health workers, and public servants. Still,
these women remain a minority; while 79% of the male urban workforce is
employed, only 21% of the female workforce is employed.204 The graph below
summarizes the findings from research conducted in 2008 by MoLSAMD. The
survey was conducted in all the provincial capitals except Uruzgan, Wardak
and Daikundi (which were omitted largely for security reasons) and so offers a
fairly reliable indicator of female urban labor distribution. The graph shows
that women are primarily involved in low-income, low-civil influence roles
such as tailoring, cooking, and carpet weaving. Only 3.6% of urban women are
employed by the Government and only 7.1% are teachers.

                    Graph ZD: Percentap of Women Wortd111 in Each OCG.Ipetion
     25.5                          In Urban Areas Nationwide

            3-
__11111~--~1·         3.·
             .9----~-1- 6----~-8-.2------~7-.6------~7-.1------~3•..__
                                                                 .6


                   (Source: Ministl)l ofLabor, Social Affairs, Mart,yrs, and the Di.rablert 2008)

MoL SAMD's figures provide a useful overview of female employment in
different sectors in urban areas, but it is not clear how the survey differentiates
between women who are household wives, and women who are commercially
employed in cooking or domestic services, carpet weaving or embroidery - all
of which are often practiced by women in their own homes.

A much smaller study conducted by the Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit
(ARHU) in Kabul, Herat and Jalalabad in 2006, found that urban livelihoods in
general are characterized by infonnality. Most people in the study areas were
found to be employed through informal networks of friends and contacts. The

.,.NationGJ RWc and Vu1Mrobt1ity A<Hmnem. (Kabul: Centr•l Stltistics Ors•nization, 2IX17/8) 27.



                                                 Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                 Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CODtlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                         I 107
2013     1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt




 study asserts, without statistics, that many livelihoods were heavily dependent
 on women and children working for extremely low incomes. 2os

 Public Sector
 In terms of formal employment for women, public sector employment is
 typically considered more socially acceptable than the private sector. This is
 likely because the public sector is considered a more structured and official
 form of work. Women comprise approximately one fifth (21%) of government
 employees according to the CSO. The difference between the number of male
 and female employees varies significantly according to department. For
 example, only 1% of employees in the Ministry of Religious Affairs and Haj are
 women, whereas 54% of employees are women in the Ministry of Women's
 Affairs (MoWA).206
 The gender disparity within government jobs is even more pronounced when
 looking at the comparative ranks held by men and women in official positions.
 When expressed as percentages, only 5% of civil servants in Position 1 are
 women. Indeed, above Position 4, fewer than 1 in 10 women occupy the top
 positions in government.

    100%
     90%
       80"
       70%
       60%
       50%
       40"
       30%
       20%
       10"
       0%
               r$1           #'b         'I     ~'o       .,       ~        ...     "'      ~...    ..;#   Jf"   ..;#
                                ~~- ~ d-~-
                        0)


       ~·q
          /q<f' q/ / / /q/q/q.#'d"/~
          .#
             • women           • Men
                                                      (Soura: CSO 1390)



 ""•urban Livelihoods in Af&hanistan." (Kabul: Af&han Resean:h and Evaluation Unit, 20061 23.
 ""Afghanistan Statistical Yeatllook ZOJJ-ZOJ2. (Kabul: Centro IStatistics Orpnlzatlon, 20121 24.



             Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve -
108     I    Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~- ChaJieD&e•
  In the graph below, the public sector is broken down by ministries employing
  men and women. While some outcomes are predictable Oike MoWA having the
  highest number of women), some are less so. For example, the Ministry of
  Defense ranks higher than MoHH, in number of women employed. It is unclear
  whether this is a difference in the way employees have been counted, or
  whether there are other reasons for this disparity. Of notable concern is the
  low percentage of women working in such critical ministries as the Ministry of
  Justice (MoJ), the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD),
  and MAIL. In general, the IARCSC has set a target of having more than 30%
  women in the civil service. As can be seen in the graph below, at present only
  two ministries have reached this target, while the majority of ministries are
  less than halfway toward reaching it.

                     Ministry of Reli&ious Affairs and Haj
         Ministry of Asriculture, Irrigation and Livestock
                                Ministry of Interior Affairs
                                  Ministry of Public Work!
      Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development
                                       Ministry of Finance
                 Ministry of Transport and OVII Aviation
                                        Ministry of Justice
                    Ministry of Commerce and Industries
          Ministry of Frontiers, Ethnics and Tribes Affairs
                                         Ministry of Mines
                             Ministry of Water and Power
                  Ministry of Urban Development Affairs
           Ministry of Repatriation and Refupes Affairs                     12~
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology                        13%
                                Ministry of Foreign Affairs                   3%
                                      Ministry of Economy                    13%
                     Ministry of Information and Culture                     14%
                             Ministry of Higher Education                      15%
                             Ministry of National Defence                           20%
                                 Ministry of Public Health                            22%
                                    Ministry of Education                                26%
      Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and the •••                                        43%
                               Ministry of Women Affairs                                                            4%
                                                                   10!11>         20!11>   30!11>          50!11>


                                                        • Female




                                                   Women's RolelaAJIIumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                   Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                           I 109
 2013   1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



   The below graph (Graph 23) is broken down by male and female public sector
   employees in each province. Once again, provincial differences are notable.
   He rat province has the greatest proportion of female civil servants, comprising
   34% of government employees. In many regions there are virtually no female
   government employees - 2% in Khost and Paktia, 3% in Uruzgan and Kunar
   and 4% in Ghor and Paktika. Nimroz is an interesting case study. Despite being
   surrounded by conservative Pakistani Baluchistan in the south and Helmand
   Province in the east, Nimroz appears to have a comparatively egalitarian view
   on female employment in the Government- 31% of government employees
   are women. This may be due to the close proximity to Iran and the high
   proportion of Mghans who lived in Iran during the Taliban rule.

   The next graph (Graph 24), demonstrates a weak correlation between levels of
   female education and the number of female employees in the Government In
   Khost Province, for example, while almost a quarter of students are female
   (24%), only 2% of government employees are women. In Laghman, the
   difference is even more striking- 44% of students are female, but only 5% of
   government employees are women.

                           Graph Z3: Percentap of Male and Female Employees by Province
10006
                       "1 1'                                                              2 ~      l~     3 1"
                                           "1 "
                                         1 1                1 1~ "   1 "
                                                                                   "'%
 80%                                                                       l "
                                                                                                        3 "
 60%
        ~ 9 ~ 9 % 9~ 9 ~ 9 ~ 1  9
 40%                                   " 8 M.
        9 II'
                                                                                               7~ ~: 'f; il6
                                  " 8
 20%          9 " 9 " 9 ~ 9 ~ 9 ~ 19 " 8 " I s ~ 8% 8 "                    8 "   8 "   7 !J6

  0%




            Women's Role In AJilbmbtan'• Flltve ·
 110    I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued Cllalleqes
          •
          I
         •


                                   (Soum~: CSO 13!10, JfoB) 2~7


                                          The weak coJTelatfon shown above suggests
                                          that factors other than die avaUabllity of
                                          educated women determine the proportion
                                          of female clvll servants at a provincial level.
                                          These factors may Include security concerns,
                                          cultural values, mobility constraints, non
                                          women-friendly environments within the
                                          workplace, a lack of chfldcare options, and
                                          early maniage rates, among other Issues.
                                          These Issues are discussed further under the
                                          below sub-heading •Other Employment
                                          Issues Affecting Women·.
                                          AB has been highlighted in bod! the health
                                          and education chapters (Chapters 2 and 3),
                                          and above related to agricultural extension
                                          workers, it is critical that women be
                                          employed in social service delivery sectors,
                                          in order to expand access to these services

"'~-Y-201t..211.12.(1(1bll:c.m.I-Orpnla1lar\,2!CII:ij2JI.90!6iii-Ma_.ont
ofl-onSystol!\•ofU!lO, Portlool c.r .. llar-(l.l'4llllltallld~- Mardi2Cl!.
2013   1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



 for women and girls. Due to regional variances in security and accessibility,
 urban areas and more secure provinces tend to have significantly higher
 numbers of women working in social service delivery sectors (and the public
 sector in general). These are also the areas that have more access to higher
 levels of education for women, including professional training at TTCs,
 midwifery or nursing schools, TVET opportunities, etc. (for more information
 on TVET and vocational training, see p.90-2). This becomes a self-reinforcing
 cycle, in which provinces and areas with better female education opportunities
 have more women in service delivery, which allows more women and girls to
 access services, which in turn makes it more likely that they too will be able to
 continue into higher education and or training, and so on. The downstream
 effect on women of not having enough female health workers, teachers, legal
 professionals, agronomists, etc. has been discussed in the foregoing chapters,
 on p. 51 and p. 76 respectively, above under the sub-heading ·Rural
 Employment", and in the following chapter onp.148.This is a challenge that
 must be addressed through means of affirmative action and targeted efforts, in
 order to break this negative cycle.

 Private Enterprise
 Although agriculture and the public sector account for a large part of the
 workforce, non-agricultural private enterprise contributes to employing
 Afghanistan's workforce as well. Women tend to be severely underrepresented
 in private enterprise due to more acute barriers to their participation, since
 work in private enterprise sectors often depends on activities and networks of
 relationships that take place outside the home. As in many countries, as
 women increasingly enter the workforce, they are more likely to enter through
 social service or public sector jobs than they are in private enterprise. Key
 obstacles to women's success in private enterprise include, a lack of financial
 decision-making power, limited mobility, the necessity to conduct regular and
 time-consuming household chores and provide childcare, limited access to
 market-related knowledge, and more limited personal networks than men. As
 mentioned above, there is less acceptability related to women working in the
 private sector, as compared to the public sector.
 While some of these issues may be salient in all forms of women's employment,
 the latter two issues (limited knowledge and personal networks), are
 particularly critical for private enterprise. Most business transactions take
 place between men, so women often have very little understanding of the

           Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve.
112    I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued CllalleDae•
wider market, including demand dynamics and pricing norms.zos In addition,
one of the conditions for accessing the job market in Mghanistan is to have a
strong network of personal contacts, whether through a large family structure
or outside relationships. In an environment where only a small minority of
women participate in formal employment, women are unlikely to have large
networks of personal or professional contacts; if a woman does work in the
formal sector, there will not be many other women around her who do, and
forging professional contacts with men is socially difficult In addition, a lack of
mobility makes it hard for women to expand their network of relationships to
potential business contacts outside of their immediate family groups. Despite
this, a recent perception-based study conducted by Building Markets surveyed
small and medium enterprise owners across all 34 provinces, and found that
98% of people say that the proportion of women in the private sector has
increased significantly since 2001, and 93% say there are more women
working in the private sector now than there were 2 years ago.zo9 While the
data does not exist to statistically verify these perceptions, they represent a
growing awareness of women in private enterprise. In addition, the recent
Business Bottleneck Survey, conducted in Kabul and Balk provinces, found that
81% of respondents believed that more women should run a company, where
only 12% believed that only men should run businesses.210
In order to assess the number of private non-agricultural enterprises in
Mghanistan, a survey was conducted in 2009, among 2,334 commercial
establishments.211 According to the surveyed establishments, the following
trends existed among their staff:
                                           Table 11: WarUn' ProtiJeZI.Z
                       Paid                       37.6% Unpaid                                62.4%
                       Full-time                  87.8% Not full-time                         12.2%
                       Male                       79.5% Female                                20.5%
                       MaDallerlal                27.3% Non-            al                    72.7%
                       Nationals                  99.9% Foreigners                            0.1%



"'"Undernandllll Gender In Alri<U~ural Value Cllalno: lhe <asu of srape/ralslns, almonds, ond saffron In Aflhonlstan".
[Woshlnston, D.C.: Wo~d Bank, 2011] 53.
Jill   Buildinc Markets and United Stnes At:encyfor lntematiDilil Development study on women in the private sector
(forthcomln& summer 2013].
"" "Business Bottlenedc survey.• (Kabul: Aflhanlstan Chamber of commerce and Industries, 2013) 29.
    MJrrtesr.ted Business Enterprise Survey.• (Kabul: Centrilll Stiltistics Orpniutio~ 2009) 21.
111

"'Ibid, xU.



                                                    Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlsbm's Flltare ·
                                                    Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                                     I   113
2013    1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



  The study estimated that nationwide, there were around 402,000 private
  establishments employing 1.2 million people. In several private sub-sectors,
  women comprised over half of the labor force; in manufacturing they make up
  57%, and in private education, 56%. However, both of these sectors are among
  the most poorly paid sub-sectors, as compared to private enterprise sectors
  like transport, storage, and real estate, in which there are virtually no
  women.m The graph below demonstrates the leading private enterprise
  sectors operating in Mghanistan, and highlights the areas where women tend
  to be employed. While the proportion of manufacturing sector employees who
  are women is significant, unfortunately, the manufacturing sector only
  accounts for 5% of nationwide employment.214 This is a sector that has been
  shown to increase women's employment in other countries, and if scaled up,
  could be a high potential sector for women in Mghanistan.

                               Graph ZS: Gender Dbtrlbutlon In Each Sector




                          Health and
                                      Education
                                  Manufacturing
                                     Social Work        ~~~~~3~~~~3~3
                                          Others




                                                        ~~~i~~~~i~~~~
                         Mining and Quarrying                                                             3
               Information and Communication                                                              3
                          Transport andReal Estate
                                          Storage                                                         3
                       Electricity, Gas and Water                                                         2
                              Construction                                                                1
            Accommodation and Food Services                                                               1
                                  Trade and Repair

                         • Male      • Female           0        20        40        60        80       100

             (Source: Central Swl:istics Orgonisol:ion lntegro.t.d Business"
                                                                           Enterprise         Survey, 2009)

  Research conducted in 2007 among 1,019 adults on behalf of the Microfinance
  Investment Support Facility for Mghanistan (MISFA),215 found that many
  women did not have authority to make financial decisions alone, even

  "'Ibid.
  n& "'Olallenses and Opportunities for lndusivl! Growth in AfBhanistan"' (forthcornina). (Washincton, D.C.: Wortd Bank. 2Q13)
  13.
  us G"'oley, M. and Chatuntedi, M. "Miaofinan.:e in Af&hanistan: A baseline and initial impact study for MISFA.• IKabul:
  MISFA,2007) 43.




  ..
11.-
        I   Womell'sRoleiDAJibmbtan'sFiltve·
            Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued ChalleDto•
regarding their own money. This supports the findings from the NRVA, which
found that even among women who generate income themselves, only 20%
decide how to spend their money alone.zt6 However, many women also report
having some control over financial decision-making. Some described scenarios
of joint decision-making in the household, in which they were participants.217
The concept of wholly independent financial decision-making in a household is
complex, and findings on this and similar indicators may often be more
influenced by the perception of respondents or interviewers, rather than a
direct reflection of reality.

               Box 10: International Centre for Women's Ec:onomic Empowerment

 The International Centre for Women's Economic Empowerment opened in the Spring of
 2013 at the American University for Afghanistan, the first of its kind in Afghanistan. Its
 mandate indudes advocating for legal reforms and work environment policies that will
 better support women in business; carrying out research, facilitating dialogue, and
 disseminating infonnation around women's contribution to the economy; and offering
 training to women entrepreneurs on business planning and market analysis.

Access to Finance
One barrier to women's participation in private enterprise and/or financial
decision-making is access to finance. Since many women work solely in unpaid
employment (whether in the form of household tasks, in agriculture, or in
some other form of unpaid labor contribution), they often do not have
financing available to them in order to make decisions about the household,
develop business-related skills, and possibly invest in their own income
generation ventures. For example, only 3% of Afghan women have a bank
account (compared to 9% of men). This compares to an average of 26% of
women in South Asia as a whole.218
The Government of Mghanistan, the World Bank, and other agencies in
Mghanistan have sought to address this issue through several models designed
to enhance access to finance. To date, there are more than 400,000


""National Risk and VulnorabilityAiso!Wrlf!tlt. (Kabul: c..ntral Statistics Orpnimion. 2007/8)107.
Zl7 Greeley, M. and Chawrved~ M. "Microftnonceln AfBI>anlstan: A baseline and lnltlallmpactsllld'( for MISFA. • (K.obul:
MISFA,2007) 43.
"" "World Bank Afilhanistlln Country Dashboard." Aa:05sod DS lune 2D13.
http·l/datrtpplcs wor1dbank orslfJnancJa!Jnduslpn/oountry/afHhanrstan



                                                   Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare ·
                                                   Taldq Stack DfAclrlevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                    I 115
microfinance clients in Afghanistan. of which 38% are women.219 For example,
MISF.A. estabUshed In 2003, exists to promote and fund mlcroftnance
lnlt!atl.ves. At present, MISFA has 195,649 active borrowers natl.onwtde, 58.9%
of which are women.22o Research conducted among 400 MISFA clients In four
provinces • Kabul. Nangarhar, Balkh and Herat • shows that the program has
been successful In enhancing household security and empowering women who
part!clpate.m Almost all female clients (99%) said that their level of self·
confidence had increased after taking a loan. Similarly, in 2012 AREU studied
57 women who had participated in MISFA microfinance programming in
Mazar+Sharif (Balkh Province), and found that access to microfinance loans
had enhanced women's decision-making responsibility in the household.m As
a MISPA partner, the First Microfinance Bank (FMFB) is also a key micro-loan
provider. As of December 2012, PMPB has 54,000 borrowers, with 16% of
them being women.




                                                         -IN
• A i l l h o - M i c n i f t - - . - 1 5 - 2 0 1 2 . b!!qc/Jwww•namrJdl
•"M-noelnmtmartSu~~torN!JN--U(Idne,·-o:zAinel.OU. ~ml!!!,pnr.!!/,
"'awey, M. M<!CIIatuMifl, M. 'M-t-lnAf,ahlolltll"' A      Qft<II-IIMJ&2 diJ<tifor IOI!B.• (r.bul: MISf.... 2CII1) l!J.U.
"""TTIolmpoctofMI_n,.~onw-•..-AO.SIIIdylll8alill""'-4n...•(ICibl.f:...,.,..n-rch.,dlwl.-n
Un~l.OUU.
Savings Groups and Enterprise Groups that provide financial training. micro-
loans, and help to establish women's cooperatives and women-run businesses
are facilitated by the World Bank-funded Mghanistan Rural Enterprise
Development Program (AREDP) of MRRD, along with similar models
implemented by a number of NGOs in Afghanistan. For many women, the
access to finance and financial literacy provided by these kinds of programs
helps them become more respected members of their households, interact
with other women, share information with each other, and have more
decision-making power. As noted above in the sub-section "Women and
Afghanistan's Economy", this can aid with many aspects of household well-
being. including children's education, nutrition, etc. as women often invest
more of their income in household needs than men.

Despite these positive results, some caution should be exercised related to
women in microfinance programming. Because the uptake among women and
reported effect on "empowerment" is often high in microfinance programs,
microfinance can at times be looked at as a means of fixing the majority of
women's problems. However, microfinance programs that lend to women have
been more successful at contributing to household well-being than they have
been at systematically helping to address women's social needs.223 In some
cases, women have appeared to simply hand loan money over to their
husbands or other male family members, who were allowed to fully administer
the loan.ZZ4 Simply bringing money into the household can increase women's
status and treatment at home; however, some programs have gone further in
promoting women's financial participation and decision-making. For this
reason, it is important to distinguish microfinance programming that succeeds
in actively involving women, increasing their knowledge, and creating a
platform for them to interact with each other, from programming that simply
allows women to bring finances into their households to be managed and
decided upon by others.




:m . , . lmpilct of Mil:::rofinance Procrammes on Women's Lives: A Case Study in Killbul Province.• (Kabul: Afahiiln Reseiim::h
ond Evaluation Unit, 2011) 26.
"'Ibid, 27-8.



                                                     Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlsbm's Flltare -
                                                     Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                        I 117
2013    1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



 Other Employment Issues Affecting Women
 Female-headed Households
 Unfortunately, with social strictures regarding female mobility, along with a
 lack of structural support for women's employment, it is very difficult for many
 women to survive independently in Mghanistan. This creates a hardship for
 female-headed households (FHHs), and also dictates that many women will
 remain within households that may not be safe for them, knowing that they
 will struggle to earn a livelihood if they leave. For women who do find
 themselves as heads of their households (most often as widows), they are
 likely to be in a highly vulnerable position in terms of income, security, social
 protection, and availability and access to food. Some sources have estimated
 that there are at least 700,000 war widows in Mghanistan.zzs Estimates from
 the NRVA and CSO have put FHHs at between 2 - 3.3% of the overall
 population, although this is difficult to measure due to the cultural hesitancy to
 admit to being a FHH. This figure is notably lower than other conflict-affected
 countries, and most likely reflects under-reporting. It is common for household
 survey respondents to cite a male relative or a younger son as a household
 head, rather than label their household as female-headed, even if he does not
 primarily support the family.
 Mobility
 As has been seen repeatedly throughout this report, restrictions on mobility
 hamper women's access and limit their opportunities in Afghanistan. This is a
 key factor in women's employment across sectors, and impacts their ability to
 get and keep a job. In a survey of public sector employees, 37% of women
 reported having difficulty commuting to and from the office.226 In many cases,
 specific policies, provisions, or initiatives are required, in order to provide
 extra support to women to overcome mobility challenges.
 Many organizations seeking to employ more women develop policies and
 approaches to address common barriers women face in formal employment.
 For organizations or agencies delivering services at local levels, recruiting
 women for job placements in their home community or district is a key

 "'Roundtable COnforoneo on COmparative Analysis of Family Law In tho COntext of Islam. (Kabul: Afahon Independent
 Human Alshts Commission, 2006) 10.
 "''Report on the Survey of Women and Men In Dedslon-mak11111-• (Kabul: Central Statistics Orpnlzatlon, 2009148.



            Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
118     I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued ChaJieD&e•
strategy for increasing and retaining women among their staff. This strategy
can also often facilitate the work itself, as these women may be able to interact
with local communities more freely because they are from the same area.
Another strategy often used is the adoption of a Mahram policy (where women
staff members are supported to bring a family member to work or on work-
related travel as a caretaker).227 In some cases, couples are hired if both
husband and wife are qualified for roles within the same organization (or
brother and sister teams), such that the female employee has an employed
relative already in the office with her. Still other options include the provision
of transportation shuttles, on site accommodation (for example, in remote
health facilities), security measures, and policies that mandate that women
travel with one or more other female staff members.
Women-friendly Workplaces
Anecdotally, some women complain about workplace environments that are
not sufficiently woman-friendly. Being in a small minority in most workplaces,
many women feel intimidated by the male-dominated environment they work
in. The prevailing opinion among some male staff members is that a "proper"
woman remains at home and only interacts with male family members;
therefore a woman's interactions with male colleagues can be challenging. A
study in 2009 on women in government decision-making positions found that
one third of the women interviewed cited insecurity, discrimination, lack of
support, and intimidation as issues in the workplace.22B Many workplaces in
Afghanistan lack any policy provisions or human resource support to improve
these issues, and these challenges remain poorly understood.
Childcare
Women and even some ministries have noted that a lack of childcare options
creates a significant barrier for women. In the past (during the PDPA regime in
the late 1970s - 80s), many ministries and government offices provided
childcare for employees. However, now private or employer-provided
childcare is not common; there are a total of 347 kindergartens and nurseries
registered in Afghanistan, 211 of which are located at the workplace. These are
primarily available in Afghanistan's major urban centers.229 A lack of childcare

"'"Gondor Equal tty: Polldos and Procrammos•. (Kabul: Food Sacurlty and A{jrlculturo Clustar, 13).
211
    •Report on the Survey of Women and Men In Declsion-makfna:.• (Kabul: Central Statistics Orpnlllltion, 2009) 17.
"' Ah/hanl5tlrnStt1ttstlaJ/ y...,_ 2011-2012. [Kabul: central Statistics 01111nlzatlon, 2012)90.



                                                   Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                                   Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                      I 119
2013    1 Cbaptm" ... Word ud lmplvymeDt



 options makes the hours of a public servant or self-employed business-owner
 more challenging for women who are still typically expected to take the
 majority of the responsibility for childcare in the home. Some ministries in
 Kabul have begun to offer childcare options, but this is unlikely in the
 provincial level departments. A lack of childcare options is a barrier to
 women's employment in all sectors which are not home-based.
 Policy Implications
 Despite being highly active in various forms of employment, women are far
 less likely to be in paid employment, and are under-represented even in
 sectors that are most critical for women's involvement (i.e. health work,
 education, justice, and public sector government positions). The following are
 key recommendations for increasing support to women's employment:
       1. Women in Agriculture - Support agricultural value chains that allow
          for greater participation of women and support the expansion of
          models proven to include women in more diverse stages of the value
          chain such that their knowledge and roles can expand.
       2. Education for Social Sector Employment - Women's participation in
          health, education, justice, other social services, and in the civil service is
          critical. Develop policies and systems to encourage their higher
          education to qualify for these roles, and incentives for women to work
          in these sectors across the country.
       3. Skills Development - Link vocational training or other support to
          women's skills development directly to markets, based on sound
          analysis. Avoid stereotypical trainings that may not lead to genuine
          income generation opportunities. Ensure that women can be included
          in emerging sectors (such as rcn. in which gender norms are less
          established.
       4. Childcare, Mobility, and Woman-friendly Workplaces - The public
          sector should lead the way in developing models of access to affordable
          childcare, safe transportation options, and positive working
          environments for women, to help attract women to formal employment
          and retain positions once they have taken up work
       S. Access to Finance - Support microfinance programs that facilitate
          access to finance at local levels. Be sure to deliberately incorporate
          elements of women's savings groups, women's cooperatives, training to
          women in literacy, numeracy, and other skills, or programming that
          requires the active participation of women and their interaction with
          each other in other ways.
            Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
120     I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats IUid ~ued Cllalleqes
                                                                       Chaptm 5' Lepl JUabtooud Voice       I   2013




          Chapter 5: Legal Rights and Voice




The 2005 Gender Country Assessment outlined legal framework reforms
which had been recently gained by a new constitution and the signing of
international treaties (as outlined in the Introduction to this report, p.23). It
then outlined the handling of cases such as marriage, divorce, and inheritance,
as they are coded under Afghan law. Similarly, the report discussed the
prominence and values of traditional justice mechanisms, and their impact on
women's lives.230 Today, these issues still affect women in broadly similar
ways and the challenges discussed persist; however, new dynamics have
entered the dialogue about women's rights and access to justice. While
comprehensive data collection is still a gap in this sector, and continues to
hamper the ability to fully understand the justice experience women have in
Afghanistan, a number of studies have filled out the field of knowledge
somewhat, and contributed to improved understanding of justice issues for
women.
In terms of political participation and voice in society, there have been some
positive advancement for women. The establishment of a democratic political
system in 2004 led to millions of women casting votes in successive rounds of
230
   Mlhan!Jtan: NatlonGI ReconstTuctlon ond P<Nerty Reduction- the f!Q/e o/ Women In Mlhfmlrn1n's Futu~. (Washlnaton,
D.C.: World Bonk. 2005)

                                               Women"• RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                               Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                            I    123
2013           Chapter 5 'LeplJUshlll and Voice



 elections since then, and hundreds competing as political candidates (including
 as presidential candidates). Due to strong quota systems put in place to ensure
 women's access to political office, Mghanistan is among the countries with the
 highest rates of women in electable political office in the world. Some women
 have also contested unreserved seats, and a few have won. Women's access to
 modern media and participation in the communications sector has also
 increased.




                                                                                             6.4%234
                                                                         57% of marriages involve an under 16-
          Estimation of Girls'            16% Under 15 Years
                                                                          year-old;m 17% of 15 - 19-year-olds
            Marriage Age                  52% Under 18 Years
       Pen:entage of Women In              180 or 0.3% of the
         the Mghan National                 force (2005)237                                  1,506238
            Police
                                                                          152 (staffed by 317 female o!Rcers)D9

                                                                               4,010 Oatest 6 month period
                                                                                      available)Z40

                                                                                  39% (2009-10 elections)

                                                                                   406 (2010)Z4Z (413)ZO
                                                             the
                                                                                       69 (28%) In 2010


 zu Afrlhonistan; NGtional RKtNJstruc:tion and Powrty R«Juc:tion -the RtW af W'DtMn in Afghanistan's Futm2. (Wilshingtan,
 D.C.: World Bank, 211051114-6.
 :;: ~en and Men In Afgllantsmn: Bmeltne St1Jrt5t~s on Gender. (Kabul: Ministry of Women's Affairs,     znnBI14.
 204
     1bld.
 "'"Fifth Report. Situation of Economic and Social Rla;hts In Afilhonlstan.• (Kabul: AIHRC, 2D11I 53.
 "'Amhanlstan Mortality Sut11ey. (Kabul: Ministry of Public Hea~h, 20101, 51.
 m "Growins Pains: Women in the Afiltlon Nillionol Police." (Kabul: APPRO and tile LaT FA, 20101 3.
 :m Fi.:ure obuined from Ministry of lnteriorJ June 2013.
 "'fl&u~ obtained from tho UNAMA Pollee Advisory Unit, June 2013.
 "'fl&ures from the Aflhan Independent Human Rla;hls commission, from March 212012 -21 october 20U.
 "'"Equal Rlshls, Unequal Opportunities: Women's Participation In Afilhanlstan's Pa~lamentory and P11111lndal council
 flrl'i:.ns." (Kabul: Afahan Research and Evaluation Unit, 201211L
 :MJ   -women and Afghanistan's 2010 Parliamentary Elections!' (Kabul: Free and Fair Elections Forum of Afghanisbln, 2011).

               Women's Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
124        I   Taldq Stack of AdllevemeDts and CAmdnued ChaJieD&e•
                                                       Chapter 5' Lepl RJabtooud Voice   I   2013


         House)

    Female Members of      22 (22%) In 2005
                                                      28 (27%) In 2011 (for the 2009
    Parliament (Upper
                                                                elections)
          Housel
  Female Members of the        3 (ZOOS)
                                                                  3 (2013)
          Cabinet
     Female Provincial     119 or 28% (2005)
                                                             117 or 28% (2009)
        Counsellors
   #of Female Provlndal      0 of 34 (2005)                    1 of 34 (2013)
         Governors
 #of Female Members of
   District Development                                    539 members (2013)
    Assemblies (DDAs)
    # of Female District        0 of398                       1 of398 (2013)
         Governors
    # of Female Mayors          0 of180                       1 of 180 (2013)
    Percentage Female
 Community Development                                          34% (2013)
 Council (CDC) Members

This chapter will examine both access to justice and issues of political and
social voice, in two sub-sections. The sub-section below will begin with access
to justice. Similar to the issue of female employment, the lack of
comprehensive data on justice issues for women makes it difficult to fully
understand the number of cases, to assess progress, or to evaluate the
disparity among regions and between rural and urban, secure and insecure
areas. The prevalence of violence against women is also difficult to measure
because of common under-reporting or misreporting of cases, based on
cultural taboos including the general acceptance of a man's right to discipline
his family, the shamefulness of reporting on cases taking place inside the
family (considered the private sphere), and the additional shamefulness for a
family of gaining publicity regarding the women in the household (even if the
crime is committed by a stranger). A forthcoming study (to be published in late
2013) commissioned by the World Bank and conducted by Samuel Hall
Consulting will sample approximately 4,000 women across 5 provinces,
providing further information on women's access to justice. However, the
figures below do provide some indication of the access issues women face.

Legal Rights
Since 2005, progress has been slow as related to women's legal rights. Due to
some legal reform, there is a more robust legal framework for protecting

                                  Womea"sRoleln~sFIItare-
                                  Taldq Staok DfAclllevemeDb and CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                         I 125
 women and prosecuting various acts of violence perpetrated against them -
 some of which have been criminalized for the first time in Afghanistan's
 history. This legal advancement has come in the form of the enactment of the
 Law on the Elimination of Violence Against Women {EVAW Law) in August
 2009, through presidential decree, which criminalised child marriage, forced
 marriage, forcing self-immolation, and rape?" among 18 other crimes.
 However, at the time of writing. the EVAW Law had been recently brought
 before Parliament for debate, and some strong objections had been raised
 against some of its articles. The Law was then passed to committee for further
 examination and possible amendment recommendations, with an unclear
 pending outcome. Another law, the Family Law, has been drafted {but not yet
 presented to Parliament or the President), which if passed, would further code
 issues of custody, marriage, and divorce, which were not covered in the EVAW
 Law. Thirdly, the draft amended Land Management Law proposes to recognize
 the nikah khat (marriage document noting the mahr received by a bride) as
 valid proof of land ownership if land was part of the bride price negotiated.
 This law, if passed, would strengthen a woman's claim to land ownership.
 These and other pieces of legislation, including the 2 008 Anti-Trafficking Law,
 have strengthened or could further strengthen in future the legal framework of
 rights and protections for women. However, despite these advancements
 toward strengthening women's status under the law, in practice, women's
 access to justice remains extremely limited.

 Crimes Against Women
 Typical crimes against women or involving women in Afghanistan are cases of
 violence (including rape, immolation, beating. Mhonor killing",24S or some other
 kind of abuse), zina or adultery (or alleged adultery), forced marriage
 (including the practices of ba'ad or ba'adal, giving a woman to settle a dispute,
 or exchanging girls between families), and underage marriage. Other legal
 cases related to women are often related to marriage, bride price, divorce,
 child custody, and inheritance. For the six month period from 21 March- 21
 October 2012, data obtained by UNAMA on reported cases in 22 provinces
 showed that the highest number of reported cases were rape (220 cases),
 followed by uhome escapeu (119),246 honor killing (95), forced self-immolation


 "'•A LonsWay to Go: lmplemOfltotlon of the Ellmlnallon ofVIolenceA~~olnst Women Law In Afllhanlstan.• {Kabul:
 UNAMA/OHCHR, 2011] iv.
 "'Honor killing 15 the p"'ctlce of killing o woman S<l5pec:ted of mo"'l crimes. The killing 1$ u5ually performed by the men In a
 womiiln'sfilmlly~ and It Is believed to preserve die honor .and name of the family.
 "'Ibid.

             Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
126      I   Taldq Stock of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalle:qes
                                                                            Chaptm 5: Lepl JUabtooud Voice         I    2013



(85) or suicide, and other forms of murder. A few cases were reported of
underage marriage, forced marriage, ba'ad, and forced prostitution. The case of
Hhome escape" is an area of legal confusion; while running away is not illegal
under the law, women and girls doing so are often arrested. Allegedly, this is
because there is the assumption of intent to commit another crime (i.e.
adultery); girls may be charged on grounds of Mpre-emptive zinaH or some such
intent-related crime, which are not actually criminalized under any legal code
in Afghanistan.247 In general women experience very high levels of violence in
Mghanistan. In 2008, a Global Rights report based on a survey of 4,700
households, estimated that 87% of Mghan women had experienced some form
of abuse, and 62% of women had experienced some sort of violence at
home. 248

Accessing Justice
As is the case for accessing health and education services and employment
opportunities, one of the key barriers to women's access to justice services
across Mghanistan is their limited mobility. Poor physical access to formal
courts and prosecutors' offices is one of the main reasons why people resort to
traditional and informal justice systems, especially in rural areas. The lack of
physical access to formal courts or justice-related offices is particularly
problematic for women, who often must be accompanied by a mahram, or male
family member when they travel. Travelling with a male family member is
particularly problematic if a woman would like to report a case of violence
occurring in the home.
The vast majority of Mghan women report having little contact with state
institutions, the justice system or civil society organizations. It is difficult to
confirm whether this is because these institutions are too far from them to be
accessible, or whether many women are simply unaware that they exist. The
Asia Foundation Survey of the Mghan People 2011 found that 77% of people
say that there is no organization, institution or authority to which women can
go to have their problems solved in their area.249 While this perception is high
nationwide, regional variations demonstrate that women feel they have
somewhat more access to organizations that can help them seek justice in
eastern and western provinces than in the Southwest or Central regions.


"'"I Had to Run Away.• (Kabul: Human Ril!hts Wotdl Aflhanisliln, 2012) 34.
"'"Uvl"lwllil \llolence: A Notional Report on Domestic Abuoeln Aflhonlstan.• (Kabul: Global Rlshts • Partnef5 for Juotlce,
2008)21-3.
"'ASurY<yaftheAfrlhan f'rDpk20JJ. (Woshinston, D.C.: The Asia Foundation, 2011) 155.

                                                  Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlsbm's Flltare ·
                                                  Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                   I 127
 However, given that these responses are perception-based, women may also
 have higher expectations and greater awareness in some regions than others.



    100                                        74
          --~~--~~--~~----~----------~~--~~----~ .--
     80   +-,.r---~L-----~--------~4----,.---~~--~~--
      60 +---.---~----~~----~----~~--------~.r--~                          ..--
      40 +,~~~~.-~~.---..-----~----~----~~--~~--
      20 ~~~~. .~~~~~=-~-- ~-- ~--~~~~~~             ..     ..
       0 ~--Em~-----r.-~-,~--~~--~~----~----~~~~




 Of the overall 19% who did agree such organizations existed, 2 3% identified
 the provincial level Directorate of Women's Affairs (DoWA) as the organization
 that women could go to, 18% a women's shura, and 12% a village/elder's
 shura. Human Right's Offices (13%) and District Governor's offices were also
 mentioned (12%), whereas state courts were identified by only 5% of
 respondents as a potential institution where women can go to resolve their
 problems. There were also significant discrepancies between urban and rural
 areas. DoWAs, Human Rights Offices, women's shuras, and state courts are all
 mentioned in greater proportions in urban areas. Rural respondents are much
 more likely to report crimes to village/elder's shuras (26%), than those living
 in urban areas (14%),250 demonstrating that urban women feel they have a
 wider range of justice options than rural women, largely due to physical access.
 Though there are now between 250 - 300 lawyers providing legal aid in the
 country (compared to nearly zero ten years ago), this figure is still far lower
 than what is needed given the isolation and difficult travel still prevalent in
 most of the country. For a further discussion, see the below sub-section
 ("Female Legal Professionals"). Moreover, female professionals remain a small
 minority within the legal system.
 One of the key access challenges that women face is the responsiveness and
 capacity of the ANP in their area. Reporting to the police is often the first step
 in engaging in a judicial process. The ability of the ANP to deal with sexual

 "'Ibid, 33.
             Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve.
128      I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                           Chaptm 5' Lepl JUabtooud Voice   I   2013



violence or gender-based violence (or the perception that they are able to),
along with the physical proximity of police stations to communities, strongly
impacts the likelihood of a case of violence against women being reported. To
give women greater access to police services, the Mol created Family Response
Units (FRUs), located at some police stations. Mainly composed of female staff,
they are mandated to address a wide set of criminal and civil family-related
matters. In practice however, FRUs do not appear to have Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) for investigating and referring cases, are often relegated to
a counselling role (rather than a police function), and tend to take a mediation
approach that is intended to return women back to their families, rather than
documenting the cases and referring them to the legal system. This may be due
to the realization that women have few options once they have pressed
charges against a family member or exposed sensitive cases to wider
knowledge; even if they win their case, they are unlikely to be taken back by
their family, have few options for living independently, and may in fact be in
danger of reprisals. At any rate, mediation approaches are often used in cases
of violence against women, rather than formal legal processing. In addition,
some female ANP officers have reported difficult working environments within
the ANP, which main restrain their ability to respond to female victims.
                                            Box 11: Police Training

  A collection of key actors in Mghanistan are involved in police training, some with the
  explicit intent of sensitizing and preparing the ANP for dealing with gender·based
  violence. In 2011, UNFPA published a comprehensive manual on training police on
  Violence Against Women (VAW) for the Ministry of Interior-run Police Academy. The
  manual, entitled •police Taking Action On Violence Against Women•, covers key
  definitions and legal codification around crimes against women, types and frequency of
  cases seen in Afghanistan, Islam's principles around VAW, and specific skills required of
  pollee offlcers like the Ident1ftcat1on and reporting of cases, how to conduct effective and
  sensitive investigations, and how to ensure the protection of victims. The manual walks
  police officers through real cases from Mghanistan, and teaches them the proper steps to
  responding to these cases.

Awareness, Mistrust, and Stigma
As can be seen in relation to physical access, it is difficult to ascertain when
women do not access justice services because they are not available or reliable,
or when they do not access justice because of a lack of awareness, social
stigma, or fear of consequences. The low level of female literacy (12%)251
exacerbates difficulties in accessing information about existing legal rights, and
local authorities themselves often confl.ate traditional values with legal
""National Risk and VU/nombilityAsu5SIMIIt. (ICIIbul: Central Statistics Orpnization, 2007/8)65.

                                                  Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                                  Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDts aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                            I 129
 provisions. There is also a significant degree of stigma attached to bringing
 domestic conflict into the public sphere, and few options for women after they
 do so. As a result, climes against women remain under-reported.zsz According
 to a baseline study performed by the United Nations Fund for Population
 Affairs (UNFPA) in three provinces (Kabul, Nangarhar, and Bamyan), a
 majority of female respondents said that the only appropriate or accessible
 place where women victims of violence can discuss what has happened and
 receive help is at the local health facility. Other locations (including police
 stations, formal justice institutions, DoWAs, and other government offices)
 were too difficult to reach, or visiting them elicited too much suspicion and
 gossip from the community or family. A health facility was also the easiest
 place to request a mahram to travel to with a woman, making it more probable
 that she could access the facility without arousing suspicion. From this survey,
 it is clear that social stigma plays a significant role in women's access to justice.

      Box lZ: Integatlng Justice and Health In a Response to VIolence Aplnst Women
   In 2013, UNPPA began partnering with WHO, UN Women, MOPH and other organizations
   to pilot the establishment of one-stop assistance centers for victims of gender-based
   violence in health facilities, as part of the Health for all Afghans National Priority Program.
   This Initiative Is based on a 2011 study on gender-based violence In 3 provinces
   (Nangarhar, Bamyan, and Kabul), that demonstrated that most women believe that a health
   facility is the most acceptable and accessible place to go for help as a victim of violence.
   However, the study also found that health facilities do not have standard operating
   procedures for dealing with these cases, and are often Isolated from the justice system,
   without a clear referral mechanism for female victims of violence. The pilot aims to
   establish these standard procedures and a referral system, train health professionals to
   properly respond to victims of violence, and integrate psychosocial and legal counseling
   services into the centers within health facilities, such that women victims simultaneously
   receive legal advice, mental health support, and medical treatment.


 Compounding social stigma is the reality that many Mghans do not trust the
 formal legal system, due to the pervasive practice of bribery and corruption in
 the settling of cases. In fact, 40% of people disagree or disagree strongly that
 the state courts are fair and trusted.253 Findings of a 2010 study by the United
 Nations Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC) show that 52% of Mghan adults
 paid at least one bribe to a public official durtng the previous 12 months. The
 prevalence of bribery is higher in rural areas than in towns (respectively 56%

 m.A LonsWay to Go: Implementation of the Elimination of VIolence Asalnst Women Law In Afilhanlstan.• (ICabul:
 Ill"~;;;',~.;~~ =~~rtan: Bribery as Aeportll!d by the Victims.• (Kabul: UN Office on Druss and crime, 2010) 9.
            Womell'oRoleiDAJibmbtan'oF'Iltve·
130     I   Taldq Stock of AdllevemODts ud ~- ChalleJI&e•
                                                                           Chaptm 5' Lepl JUabtooud Voice   I   2013



and 46%), but remains high in both cases. In urban areas, 39% of women paid
bribes, mostly to civil setvants. Bribes are requested at all levels of the legal
system, with police officers the most likely to request bribes, followed by
municipal and provincial officers, judges, and prosecutors.ZS4 There are many
anecdotal stories of police officers being bribed to release men who have
committed "honor" crimes or domestic violence, without being brought to the
legal system, and still further cases where prosecutors or judges have been
bribed in the same vein.
Despite this negative trend, levels of trust in the government justice system are
higher as of 2011 than in 2006; 55% of respondents in the Sutvey of the
Afghan People had a great deal or a fair amount of confidence in the
government justice system, compared to only 38% in 2006. However, no
gender disaggregated data is available for further analysis of this metrtc,zss so
it is currently not possible to determine whether the judiciary is being viewed
more favorably by women.

Multiple Legal Frameworks
One of the complicating factors for women's legal status in Afghanistan is that
the Mghan legal system combines different, overlapping and sometimes
conflicting sources of law: the Constitution, international treaties, a civil and
penal code (including some family law), Islamic jurisprudence (Shari'a), and
customary laws at the local level. In some areas, there are also forms of justice
implemented by insurgent groups, which while part of the informal justice
system, are not necessarily customary or part of traditional practices (as they
often represent a more extreme approach to punishment). Issues related to
women and crimes against them are often captured by a variety of these
frameworks within the legal system, and it is not always clear how to
disentangle relevant legal principles that may be contradictory.
Broadly speaking, differing tendencies characterize the formal and informal
justice systems in Mghanistan, although regional and ethnic variations make
generalizations difficult One of the broad differences between the formal and
informal justice systems is the underlying dichotomy between ensuring
communal wellbeing and protecting individual rights. Generally, traditional
dispute resolution systems within the informal justice sector have prioritised


254
    A Surwyofthe Afrlhtm People 20.1.1. (Wa•hlngton, D.C.: lhe Asia Foundation, 2011) 69•
...,Ibid.

                                                  Women's Role Ia Ali~Jumlstan's Flltare -
                                                  Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued CballeDJe•
                                                                                                            I 131
 community hannony over individual rights. 2 56 By comparison, the formal civil
 code more often seeks to protect the rights of the individual, following
 international standards. Said another way, informal justice mechanisms often
 aim for restorative justice (where the community, household, or family
 remains intact), where the formal system more often utilizes retributive
 justice, which focuses on punishing the individual. These approaches are not
 always compatible, and interpretation of these systems can cause confusion.
 This is especially problematic for women, as many of the crimes against them
 take place inside the family or household, and at least within the community.
 Traditional justice mechanisms are likely to prioriti2e maintaining their
 existing social relations, even if it is family members who are committing
 crimes against them. As a result, legally enshrined women's rights may be
 compromised.
 Within formal law, one of the most notable refonns has been the August 2009
 passing of the EVAW Law, as a part of the existing penal code. The EVAW Law
 condemns child marriage; forced marriage; the buying and selling of women
 for the purpose, or under the pretext,. of marriage; •ba 'ad' (giving away girls as
 payment to settle a dispute); immolation; forced self-immolation; and 16 other
 acts of violence, including rape and beating. Many of these practices were
 discussed in depth in the 2005 Gender Country Assessmentzs1 It also specifies
 punishments for perpetrators of the above criminalized acts. In the case of
 some of these acts of violence, the EVAW Law represents the first time they
 have been criminalized in Afghanistan. The EVAW law, however, was never
 passed through parliamentary vote; it bypassed Parliament and was enacted
 directly through presidential decree. While in Afghan law, presidential decree
 has the full force of law, some believe that bypassing Parliament weakened
 respect for the EVAW Law. As noted above under the sub-heading "Legal
 Rights", this law was undergoing parliamentary review at the time of writing,
 with the possibility of amendments.

 Where judges base their verdicts on the EVAW Law, justice for the victims is
 more likely than when other pre-existing parts of the criminal code are used,
 according to a report by the UN Assistance Mission for Afghanistan
 (UNAMA).2ss However, the case of the implementation of the EVAW Law is a
 good example of difficulties faced by the legal system regarding the application
 1515
      MJnformal Dispute Resolution in Afahilnistan ... (Wiishincton, D.C.: United Stites Institute of Peace, 2010) 3.
 "' Afrlh<lnls!tln: National RII<OII5!tlt<!to and Pawf!y lleduc!lon - !lw /IDle o{Wonte~~ In A/riiKinls!tln's FU!Ure. [Washington,
 D.C.: World Bank. 2005) 76-90.
 "'"'Still A Lone way to Go: Implementation of tile Elimination of VIolence AplnstWomen Law In Af811anlstan." (Kabul:
 UNAMA/OHCHR, 2012) 3.
             Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Flltve ·
132      I   Taldq Stack of Adllevemeats ud ~- Cllalleqes
                                                                                   Chaptm 5: Lepl JUabtooud Voice           I    2013



of legislative dispositions in relation to women's rights. While comprehensive
official statistics on violence against women are not available, statistics
gathered by the Mghan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) from
March 2010 to March 2011 can offer a snapshot of formal judiciary process in
cases covered by the EVAW Law. Of the registered 2,299 incidents that could
be classified as acts of violence against women under EVAW, prosecutors
opened only 594 cases (26%); indictments were filed in 155 (7%), and in only
101 cases (4%) did the courts base their judgments on the EVAW Law, despite
the EVAW Law having the legal status to supersede any other law that it might
appear to contradict In addition, there are only EVAW departments set up in
10 of Afghanistan's 34 provinces, leading to a situation where cases that fall
under the EVAW Law are unlikely to be recognized as such in provinces
without EVAW departments. Additionally, no standardized registration of
cases from the police, DoWA, the prosecutors, or the courts, exists, and there is
no adequate follow up on cases, as they are referred from one legal institution
to another.2 59 In keeping with this track record, in 2012 Human Rights
Watch260 reported that pursuing crimes that fall under the EVAW Law has been
weak and inconsistent.
One of the most serious areas where the EVAW Law is neglected or misapplied
is in cases of rape. Women who are raped are often sentenced to prison for zina
(sex outside of marriage),261 a crime coded under Article 426-8 of the 1976
penal code. Zina is understood to mean sex that occurs outside of marriage, but
is not further defined in the penal code. A report of rape is often treated as an
admission of zina, and the victim is then charged. In addition, accusations of
zina are made toward women who have run away, or attempted to avoid a
forced marriage, etc. Individuals accused of committing rape often submit a
counter-allegation of zina, trumping the rape charge. As a result, allegations of
rape may never be investigated,262 and are easily manipulated. In 2011-12, 281
cases of zina were recorded.263
While criminalizing rape, the EVAW Law does not define rape or the concept of
consent, and does not discuss circumstances in which meaningful consent
could not be possible (therefore negating the possibility of consent). The EVAW
Law therefore leaves ambiguity around the definition of rape. While adultery
•-still A Lone Wil'f toGo: lmplementiltion of the Elimination ofV~alenceAcilinst Women law in Afghanistln.• (ICiibul:
UNAMA/OHOIR, 2012) 29.
"'•1 Had to Run Away.• (~bul: Human RJshts Watch Aflhonlstln, 2012) 86.
311
      .Tri1ditional Dispute Resolution ilnd Afl;hilnistiln"s Women.• Peilce Brief 117. (Wilshincton, D.C.: United Stilteslnstitute of
Peo<e,2011)2.
""•1 Had to Run Away.• (~bul: Human RJshts Watch Aflhonlstan, 2012) 37.
"'Afg/JDnistrm Stati5ti<al Yearboolc 2011-2012. (~bul: CentroI Smtistics Orpnization,        2012) 98.
                                                         Women's RolelaAli~Jumlstan's Flltare-
                                                         Taldq Stack DfAclllevemeDb aad CDntlllued Claalleqes
                                                                                                                            I     lll
 remains a crime under the criminal code, the lack of a definition of rape creates
 significant confusion, making it very difficult to apply the EVAW Law to punish
 perpetrators, and creating a strong deterrent for reporting rape. An estimated
 half of the female inmates in Mghan jails are convicted of zina, or moral crimes,
 many being victims of rape. 264 Victims of rape who have been convicted of zina
 have in some cases then been released on the condition that they marry their
 rapist,z6s an extra-judiciary settlement that has unfortunately been supported
 by the formal system in some cases. Finally, another criticism of the EVAW Law
 is that victims have the opportunity to withdraw their case at any time, and the
 state does not have a duty to investigate if a complaint is withdrawn. While the
 most serious crimes were intended to be exceptions to this rule, it is often
 applied to all crimes.266 These trends in rape and sexual assault laws
 demonstrate that severe violence against women continues to be of grave
 concern in Afghanistan, and strong improvements in legal redress have not yet
 been achieved.
 High levels of violence against women are common in a society that suffers
 under high levels of general violence, crime, and impunity. In environments like
 this, often the most wlnerable members of society are victimized
 opportunistically, as there is little chance of punishment. This is a significant
 contributing factor to the high level of violence against women.
 In addition to violence against women, other common cases involving women
 (often related to marriage, divorce, inheritance, and custody), are challenging
 under the current legal system. For example, the age of marriage is a point of
 contention. It is defined in article 71, subsection 1, MLegal capacity for a
 marriage is accepted for boys when they have completed 18 years old and for
 girls when they have completed 16 years old•, and Article 2 of the Juvenile Code
 defines the age of childhood under 18 for both boys and girls. Despite this, the
 AIHRC estimates that approximately 57% of marriages include at least one
 party below the age of 16 (in contravention to both articles of the civil code).267
 However, since most marriages are not officially recorded, no precise figures
 are available.

 2M  An import:ilnt, iilnd under-researched~ areil to explore in sreaterdebil in the future is the femille prison populiltion. The
 literature does not yield any current Information about the proportion of prisoner! who are female, nor their crtmes. In
 Dea!mber 2006, tile number of w<~men in prison was reported to be 250.
 2Golil.awrence, Q.ulll. ~orAf&han Women, Rape Law Offen; Uttle Prot:ec:tian." (National Public Radio, December 2, 2011).
 http:IJwww.nor.!!!B/201!/12/DZ/143057341/foHOfs!lan-women-raoe-law-offers-llttle-protectlon.
 •-still A Lone Wil'( to Go: lmplementiltion of the Elimination ofV~alenceAcilinst Women law in Aflhanistln.• (ICiibul:
 UNAMA/OHOIR, 2012) 12.
 """S~uatlon of Economic and SOCial RIBhts In Aflhanlstan- Fifth Report.• (Kabul: Aqhon Independent Human Rlshts
 Commission, 2011) 53.

  ..
13.,
         I   Women'• Role In AJibmbtan'• Fu.tve ·
             Taldq Stac:kof Adllevemeats ud ~- ChalleJI&e•
                     Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice   2013




121




Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges     135
2013             Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 formal legal system often does,269 where other local councils have pardoned,
 sanctioned and even required violent and illegal acts toward women. What is
 clear is that traditional forms of justice are overwhelmingly more accessible to
 people and that they are respected. Regarded as quicker, cheaper and fairer
 than state-administered courts by many, they enjoy a high degree of legitimacy
 among men and women, and play a central role in local governance.21o
 According to a report published by the United States Institute of Peace (USIP)
 in December 2011,211 at least 80% of all disputes in Afghanistan are still
 resolved through Traditional Dispute Resolution (TDR) mechanisms. In terms
 of accessibility, 87% of people in the Survey of the Mghan People say that
 shurasfjirgas are accessible to them, and 73% say that they are effective at
 delivering justice, compared to only 58% who think that state justice is
 effective.27Z
 Despite a variation in rulings, the continued reliance on TDR mechanisms with
 regards to women's rights is often one of the biggest barriers to better and
 more equal representation in the legal system. Local and customary practices
 observed by traditional justice mechanisms are often in conflict with
 constitutional standards and Islamic law, and are sometimes forbidden by the
 Afghan civil and criminal codes.2n However, as mentioned above, the aim in
 resolving cases is often to maintain the stability of communal relations and
 household units, rather than to punish perpetrators or provide individual
 justice. In the interest of stability, informal justice systems may reinforce
 unequal power dynamics.274 For women, who often do not have significant
 power, and for whom the majority of cases are closely connected to family
 members, this may mean that their ability to access justice may be forfeited in
 favor of keeping them within their existing social relationships, no matter the
 positive or negative impact on the individual. The reliance on traditional
 justice mechanisms also makes monitoring and data collection extremely
 challenging regarding women's access to justice, since the majority of their
 cases are still adjudicated by local councils with no formal records of cases or
 decisions.

 21111
         Smith, Deborah ilnd Jay Lamey. •A Holistic Justice System for Af&hiilnistan.• (IC3bul: AfBhiln Reseiilrr::h and Evaluiiltion Unit.
 2009).
 : ~neider1 I. •Recent Developments in Afl;hinis.tiln Ft~mity l.iw.• (ASIEN1 2007)106-118.
    Traditional DI5PUie Reoohrtlon and AfBhonlotan'o Women.• Pear:e Brlef117. (Woohllljlton, D.C.: United Statoolnotltute of
 P..ce. 2011)1.
 m A Survey of tho Afrllran l'eapk 2011. (Washington, D.C.: The Asia Faundotion, 2011)152.
 "'Afshan Civil Code, ArUcle 82.
 :m Anwilrfl Hanpmil, Cheshmak Farhoumilnd-srms and Krista Nerland. •Assesslns Gendere:d Access to Justice In
 Afl,ilaniotan.• [Kabul: The Narth-Soutilln•titute, 2009)20.

                 Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
136              Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                               Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice   2013




, p.118




          Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
          Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges     137
2013        Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 Charkhi prison, 82% said that their lawyer also had not been present during
 their trial. 280
                                      Do:.: 13: Supporting Victims ofVAW

   Medica Afghanistan, among other NGOs, provides legal aid to women, taking on
   approximately 170 criminal cases/year and 180 civil cases/year. Since 2003, Medica bas
   dealt with nearly 10,000 cases of women survivors of violence, whether through provision
   of counseling or legal aid. In addition.. they provide training to police, prison staff, legal
   professionals, and government employees, to better equip them to deal with cases
   involving women's issues.

 The figures below are reported in a document from 2008 by MoWA.2B1 There
 are no more recent publicly available figures to provide an accurate picture of
 the true number of female legal workers. The most recent available data
 reflects that:
       •    Only 73 out of the 1,547 sitting judges in Afghanistan (4.7%) are female
            (with no women on the Executive Council of the Supreme Court);ZBZ
       •    35 (6.4%) out of the 546 prosecutors are women; and
       •    Women represent 6.1% (76) of the 1,241 attorneys.2B3

 Unfortunately, the lack of female legal professionals means that many women
 accused of crimes or victims of violence feel unable to disclose potentially
 mitigating circumstances to male lawyers, out of shame or due to cultural
 taboos related to conversations between women and men. Women who suffer
 from or witness sexual abuse often do not want to share critical information
 with male lawyers even if it could help their case in court. With female police
 officers still a small minority of the ANP, and those often not reaching rural
 areas, the likelihood of women being able to report crimes frankly, and for
 them to be referred to the formal legal system, is hampered by a lack of women
 in key positions.

 Women and Voice
 The establishment of a democratic political system in 2004 has led to millions
 of women casting votes in successive rounds of elections from 2004 - 2010,

 "'Ibid, p. 42.
 :w_~omen iilnd Men in Afxhanistiiln: Baseline Statistics on Gender... IKabul: Ministry of Women's Affilli~, 2008) 14.
 "'"Afilhanlstan Case Study: Meanlnl!ful Partldpatlon and Empowerment for Women In Po•t-<Onflh:tGovernonc:e and
 Peac:e-buildine: Lessons L.eamed." (Kabul: CARE lntemational, 2010). 4.
 "'-women and Men In Afilhanloton: l!eoellne Stotlotlco on Gender."(Kabul: Mlnl5tlyof Women'• Affoll$, 2008) 14.

            Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
138         Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                             Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice           2013



and hundreds competing as political candidates (including as presidential
candidates). Due to strong quota systems put in place to ensure women's
access to political office (instituted in 2004), Afghanistan is among the
countries with the highest rates of women in electable political positions in the
world. Some women have also gained enough votes to win seats without the
help of quotas. In addition, a few women have been awarded appointed
political offices, although the quota system in effect for elected offices has been
much more successful at including women, as compared to appointed offices
where no quota system is in place. There is one exception, in the Upper House
of Parliament (Meshrano Jirga), where a 50% quota for women exists for the
President-appointed portion (one-third) of the seats.
In addition to political offices and voting. women are gaining a voice and
participating in public life through increasing access to and participation in
media, and as civil society activists, involved in advocacy efforts and promoting
government accountability.

Affirmative Action Measures
A number of affirmative action policies have been established in Mghanistan's
governance system, in order to ensure that more women are in government
positions. Due to these measures, Afghanistan ranks among the world's top 20
countries for the number of women in Parliament (27% during the 2005-2010
legislative session, and 28% during the current session). The Wolesi Jirga (or
Lower House) has a 27% reservation (arrived at by assuming an average of 2
seats for women per province, for a total of 68 of 249 seats as per Chapter 5,
Article 83 of the Constitution). The Meshrano Jirga (or Upper House) has a
quota of approximately 17% (50% of the one-third President-appointed seats),
or 17 of 102 seats.2B4 There are an additional 3 seats reserved for women
among the 10 Kuchi seats reserved in the Lower House. There is also a 25%
quota for women at Provincial Council (PC) level, or 124 seats.
Different from statutory quotas in some other countries, the Mghan system of
reserved seats is a constitutional provision to allocate actual seats to women
legislators, rather than regulating the specific proportion of male and female
candidates by all parties seeking parliamentary representation.285 The quota
system has been essential for women because women face significant

* Fleschenber& Andrew. "Afthanlsbln's Parliament In the Maldn1: Gendered understandlnp and practices of polltlcs In •
tronsltlonal country.• (Kabul; Heln~ch Boll stllhll'llo 2009122.
31
   Norris. P. •openinc the Door: Women Leade~ ilnd Constitution Buildinc in Iraq ilnd Afghilnistln.• (Cillmbridp: HilrYilrd
Unlvenlty, JFK School of Government. 2006}13.

                                                    Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                    Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                 139
2013       Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 challenges running for office, and many women who have been elected would
 not have been able to secure the votes necessazy to win their seat outright. The
 number of women gaining enough votes to win a seat outright has also
 declined from one election to the next since 2004,286 reinforcing the essential
 nature of the quota system.
 Quotas also now exist for District Coordination Councils (DCCs) and
 Community Development Councils (CDCs), local development and governance
 bodies elected by communities, but not yet part of a formal decentralized
 government. For DCCs (formerly called District Development Assemblies or
 other titles, depending on the program funding them), the quota is 25%, while
 for CDCs, it is 50%. However, given the less formal nature of these bodies (not
 officially local government structures), the quotas have often been flexibly
 applied, where some communities have preferred not to include women and
 this perspective has been accommodated. As these structures move toward
 formalization into tiers of government as mandated in the Constitution, it is
 important that these quotas are formalized in order to help women enter local
 governance at lower levels and work their way through the system based on
 gaining local governance experience.
 Despite its success in getting women into elected office, many believe that the
 system of reserved seats was misinterpreted and misapplied in both the
 2004/05 and the 2009/10 parliamentary and PC elections cycles. Many
 believed that the quotas should be used as insurance of a minimum number of
 women in elected office, acknowledging the considerable barriers to women
 winning against male competitors for open seats. However, if women did
 receive more votes than men, they should be allocated open seats, meaning
 that there could be more than the reserved quota of women in elected bodies.
 But the law was not clear on how the quota should be applied. As a result, the
 quota ended up being filled by the female candidates with the highest number
 of votes, regardless of whether they could have won seats outright against
 male candidates.287 Rather than the quota distinguishing aopenn seats from
 reserved seats for women, it has been applied as dividing •men'sn seats from
 •women•s• seats, as if seats were also reserved for men.zsa In the 2005
 parliamentary elections, a fairly high proportion of women (30%) won their
 seats outright by gaining the highest number of votes among all candidates,

 w*'Equal Allhts, Unequal Opportunltles.: Women's Partldpltion rn Afahanlstan's Parliamentary and Provlnclal Coundl
 Elections." (Kabul: Af&hon Reseorch ond Evaluation Unit, 2012) 9.
 aJibid.
 "'Heatll, Jennifer. •Land of the Unconquer~ble". (University of California Press, 2011) 122.

           Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
140        Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                     Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and VoiceTable of Contents        2013



regardless of the reserved seat system.2B9 They were included in the 68
reserved seats, while male candidates who received fewer votes were allocated
seats among the unreserved portion. In this scenario, the quota system was
perversely reversed, such that men actually benefited from the quotas, taking
up seats when they did not receive the highest numbers of votes. This
application methodology needs to be revisited to ensure that the quota system
does not in the future actually cap the number of women taking up political
office.

National Governance Structure
As of the 2009 PC elections, there are 27% women in the Meshrano Jirga (28
seats), well above the quota (though it took until 2 011 to confirm the seats). As
mentioned above, the President nominates one-third of the seats in the Upper
House (34 seats), 50% of which must be women; constitutionally, the other
two-thirds of the Upper House should be elected among Provincial Councillors
and District Councillors (at one-third each), with each PC nominating 1
member to the Parliament (for a total of 34), and the District Councils of each
province nominating 1 member (for another total of 34). However, without
official District Councils to date, two-thirds of the Upper House seats come
from the Provincial Councillors (therefore, 2 per council rather than 1 per
council).
While the 2004 Constitution guarantees women at least 2 seats per province in
the Woiesi Jirga (for a total of 68 seats), in practice this has been organized as a
proportionate distribution across provinces based on population size. For
example, in sparsely populated provinces like Nimroz, 1 of 2 seats (50%) is
reserved for a woman, while in densely-populated Kabul, 9 of the provinces 33
seats (27%) are reserved. As of the 2010 parliamentazy elections, there are
28% women in the Lower House, one seat above the quota.

In addition, there are 3 appointed female members of the current Cabinet,
including the Minister of Public Health, Minister of Women's Affairs, and the
Minister of Social Affairs, Martyrs, and the Disabled.

Provincial Governance Structure
The number of seats that make up each PC is determined based on population,
ranging between 9 and 29 seats across the country. According to the
,.Wilder, Andrew. "A House DMded? Analyzl"'the 2005 Afshan Electlon.•[Kabul: Afsh•n Research ond Evaluation Unit.
2005) 1.

                                               Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                               Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges            141
2013   Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 Constitution, 25% of PC seats must be resetved for women. However, the
 Electoral Law of 2009 confirmed that the quota figure would be 124 out of the
 420 PC seats nationwide, approximately 25% per province, but nearly 30% of
 the total. In the 2009 PC elections (which occurred simultaneously with the
 presidential election), 117 seats were allocated to women, leaving 7 vacant
 While the PCs are important as they represent the lowest level of formally
 elected representatives, their mandate is as yet unclear, and has been
 primarily consultative. In some governance systems, elected bodies at
 subnational levels have budgetary oversight and approval responsibilities,
 along with other strong decision-making roles in their constituency. However,
 in the Afghan system, power is weighted toward appointed political offices
 rather than elected bodies. At subnationallevels, governors at both provincial
 and district levels typically have more influence than PC members, a structural
 issue that weakens citizen representation and often leaves the PCs without
 clear roles to perform.

 Voting System and Political Agenda-setting
 Afghanistan's election uses a Single Non-transferrable Vote (SNTV) system. In
 this system, citizens vote for candidates directly at all levels rather than any
 form of indirect voting, and the candidates with the highest number of votes
 are allocated the available seats for their constituency. A majority of votes is
 not required to win a seat, and votes for an individual candidate do not
 contribute toward votes for a party or national leader. SNTV systems are rare
 around the world, but this method was chosen for Afghanistan partly because
 of the simplicity of vote-tallying when every vote is direct Another reason this
 system was chosen was because political parties are seen as exacerbating
 ethnic tensions and as having been historically problematic due to external
 support and allegiances (i.e. to the former Soviet Union).
 In an SNTV system, there is less incentive to work closely with a political party,
 since each candidate must win as an independent and majority percentages of
 votes are not needed to win a seat. These factors encourage candidates to focus
 on very local interests and employ identity politics, to garner enough votes to
 surpass other candidates. This system tends to keep politicians fractured and
 independent, since broad support (typically garnered through parties and
 coalitions) is not needed. Given the social structure of Afghanistan, the system
 puts women at a disadvantage for contesting open seats, as their social
 connections, public persona.. and personal wealth are likely to be more limited

       Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
142    Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                                Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice            2013



than those of male candidates.
In addition to the individualistic nature of SNTV, the system also creates a
disincentive for individual candidates and parties to develop clear policy
platforms, engage in issues-based politics, and create thematic coalitions
between parties, since votes are often secured based on personal connections
and patronage relationships. Even though political parties exist and play a role
in elections in Mghanistan (promoting candidates and working to garner
support), candidates must rely more on personal name-recognition, and less
on the policy agenda of the party with which they associate. This in some way
limits the likelihood of a strong women's rights agenda developing with the
backing of a party or coalition of parties, as members tend to pursue identity-
based politics, voting along ethnic or other lines in Parliament

Women in the 2004-5 and 2009-10 Election Cycles
In the 2004-5 elections, there was 1 female presidential candidate, and 335
female parliamentary candidates ran for election, of a total of 2,709
candidates,z9o while 247 female PC candidates ran out of a total of 3,027
candidates. Despite the high number of candidates, 5 PC reserved seats were
still left vacant, with a total of 119 women elected. Women won a surprising
number of seats outright, regardless of the reservations provided; in total 19
female parliamentary candidates and 29 female PC candidates won seats by
getting more direct votes than their male counterparts. While many of these
women were in the Central or Western regions, at least one woman in each
region won her seat outright. Although these seats were allocated within the
quota rather than in addition to it, in Kabul more women won parliamentary
seats than the quota had reserved, which actually expanded the number of
women over and above the quota. Some felt the surprisingly strong showing of
women could be partly explained as a form of voter protest against the high
number of male candidates who were known to be involved in wartime
violence and/or known to hold illicit businesses.29t
In the 2004-05 election, women voters made up a record-high proportion of
the total, topping 41% of voters. Unfortunately, election observers reported
cases where they saw very few women voting at polling stations in some
locales yet ballot boxes from female polling stations still coming back full from

,..Guide to PGrlhlm•ntary Elec1Jo115. (Kabul: Af11h1n Research and Ev•luatlon Unlt, 2005110.
111
   Wilder, Andrew. •A House Divided? Analyzirq: dle 2005 A.fJ:hiln Election:IICilbul: Afl:hiln Re5eilrdl ilnd EYillu.tion Unit,
2005114.

                                                      Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                      Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                       143
2013       Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 those areas. For example, in insecure and socially conservative Paktika
 province, 60% of registered voters were allegedly women, although polling
 station observers did not see high numbers of women voting. Paktika's similar
 neighboring province, Zabul, registered only 3.7% female voters.Z9Z Cases like
 this imply that women's votes were manipulated, but the extent to which this
 happened is unknown. Despite this, the 2004-5 election cycle was hailed as a
 success internationally, and although there were some claims of fraud, it
 appears that women still voted in high numbers.
 In comparison to the 2004-5 elections, the 2009 presidential and PC elections
 and the 2010 parliamentary elections were mired with difficulties. Overall
 voter turn-out has been on the decline, from 7.3 million people in the
 presidential elections of 2004, down to 4.2 million in the 2010 parliamentary
 elections. In keeping with the trend, female voters have declined incrementally
 since 2004, falling to 39% of all voters in the 2009 and 2010 elections.
 However, it is difficult to say how accurate the voter turn-out figures are. In the
 2009-10 election cycle, men registering and voting for women was recorded at
 higher levels than in 2004-05, especially in the South and East, where the voter
 registration levels for women reached rather unlikely numbers.293 In some
 provinces, female voter registration reached 50-60% of all registration,
 implausible or impossible figures, especially because the highest numbers
 were often recorded in provinces which are most restrictive for women. While
 the extent of the fraud is difficult to determine, it is clear that the voter
 registration of women was highly manipulated. This is particularly easy to do
 since women were not mandated to have photos on the ID used for voter
 registration. 294

 Two of the presidential candidates in 2009 were women. In the 2010
 parliamentary elections, female candidates increased by 33% over the
 previous parliamentary elections, with 406 candidates (15.7%). However, only
 12 were elected outright without the assistance of quotas, a decrease of 7 as
 compared to 2005.295 Female parliamentarians increased slightly from the
 previous legislative session, to a total of 69 (or 28%). For the PCs in 2009,
 there were 328 candidates (of a total of 3,193), also a slight increase over the


 ""Ibid, 33.
 :m "'Islamic Republic of Afchanistan Final Report, Presidentiill and Provinciill Council Elections.• (Kabul: European Union
 Election Observation Mission, 2009)37.
 "'Ibid, 22.
 "'"Women and Af&hanlstan'o 2010 Porllamentory Electlono.• (K<obul: Fnoe and Fair Electlono Forum of Alilhanlotan, 2011)3.

           Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
144        Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                                 Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice              2013



2004 PC elections,296 with 117 elected. However, despite the overall increase
in candidates, the proportion of women candidates decreased in 14 of the 34
provinces,297 mainly for security reasons and pressure to withdraw.298

Challenges for Female Candidates and Voters
In the past two election cycles, and particularly for the 2009-10 elections,
significant challenges have emerged for female candidates and female voters.
Women candidates have consistently reported harassment. intimidation,
security threats, attacks, and lack of protection on the campaign trail. Due to
intimidation and threats, the Mol proposed to provide female candidates with
bodyguards, following pressure from the Independent Election Commission's
(IEC) gender unit and international actors. This measure, however, was poorly
implemented, and many candidates did not receive the promised protection.
Women candidates also typically had fewer resources to spend on polling
observers, and counting of votes took place at the local level (instead of at
provincial centers), where female candidates had very sparse resources to use
on monitoring.299 Female candidates were therefore likely disproportionately
affected by fraud.3oo
Female voters suffered from a lack of female polling station attendants. Men
ended up staffing approximately one fourth of positions at women's polling
stations, and 650 women's polling sites did not open at all.301 Polling stations
were also located too far from home, or were not set up in a "woman-friendly"
way, such that women had to pass lines of male voters to reach their voting
section. A!;, mentioned, women's IDs were used for "proxy voting", where men
voted more than once by voting on behalf of women. In many ways, the gap
between women's legal rights and their practical ability to realize those rights
was exploited for fraud, with men registering and voting on behalf of women,
stuffing ballot boxes for ghost women's polling stations, etc.3D2 Women also
struggle with a lack of access to information, and more limited social

.. •lslilmic Republic of AfBhilnistan Final Report. PnPSidentiill ilnd Provinciill Council Electioru;.' (Kabul: European Union
Election Observation Mission, 2009) 37.
"'The proportion d..,...sed In Kabul, Kaplsa, Parwan, Balkll, Baehlan, Kunduz, Takhar and Ghor. Both the proportion and
the number of women mndins for election di!CilYsed in Bamyan.. Lachman~ ICilndahilr. Ghii1Zni, Badakhshiln ilnd Herat.
,. "lslomlc Republic of Af&llonl•tan Flnol Report, Presidential and Provincial Council Elections.• (Kabul: European Union
Election Observation Mission, 2009) 37.
"'"Equal Rlshts, Unequal Opportunllleo: Women'• Participation In Afilhonl5tlln'• Po~lamentary ond Pn:wlnclal Council
Elections.• (Kabul: Afshan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2012111.
""Ibid, 16.
 11
" 1bld,15.
"""lslomlc Republic of Af&llonlstan Flnol Report, Presldentlalond Provincial Council Elections.• (Kabul: European Union
Election Observation Mission, 2009) 5.

                                                      Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                      Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                      145
2013      Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 interactions and networks, creating a barrier to educated independent voting.
 Some women complained that their husbands refused to talk to them about
 politics at home, so they were unable to learn about the candidates.303
 Even for women who vote, attitudes prevail that men should be able to
 influence the decision-making process of women at the polls. The Asia
 Foundation Survey of the Afghan People 2011 found that close to half of the
 respondents (49%) believe that men should somehow be involved in women's
 voting decision-making process, through direct advice or consultation.304 Other
 studies have noted other decision-making processes around voting. In many
 cases, communities reach consensus and choose to vote together, but women
 are typically not involved in the consensus-making discussions. There have
 also been cases where women reported that their mother-in-law organized the
 women in their family/household to vote for a particular candidate.
                                Do][ 14: Leadership and Advocacy Training

   The International Foundation for Electoral Systems (!PES) has been working to strengthen
   electoral systems and citizen participation in Afghanistan since 2002, through voter
   outreach and women's advocacy training, among other initiatives. Voter outreach has
   included TV and radio programming. publlc service announcements, blllboards, and other
   media aimed at increasing women's participation in elections. Advocacy training has
   targeted women of influence across 14 locations in 6 provinces, to support them to better
   reach out to others with information on their right to vote, legislative processes, and
   women's rights agendas In polltics, among other Issues. The training Is a 6-month
   program, and includes advocacy meetings with government officials, outreach to
   communities, and publicized radio and TV roundtable discussions. In the 4 years IFES has
   been working with women advocates, it has trained 1,800 women, and in 2012, trainees
   reached out to 252,427 others. In selected provincial centers, IFES has implemented joint
   advocacy programs, introducing women's rights advocacy to both women and men, in
   recognition of the social capital held by many men in Afghanistan and their central role in
   Influencing others to embrace women's rtghts. Many former trainees are now members of
   parliament, provincial council members, and other government officials, along with civil
   society advocates.

 Another influencing factor in the latest elections was the 2010 amendment of
 the Electoral Law, in ways that are potentially damaging for women. Where
 previously a reserved seat was left vacant if there was no female candidate, the
 law was amended to allow men to fill Hwomen's seats" left vacant at both
 parliamentary and PC level. This opens up the possibility of women being
 intimidated out of their seats. There is also a new requirement that all

 "'"Equal Rl&ht5, Unequal Opportunltleo: Women's Partldpotlon In Af&hanlstan's Parliamentary and Provincial Coundl
 Elections.• (Kabul: Afa;han Research and Evaluation Unit, 2012) 55.
 100
     ASurY<yaftheAfrlhan f'rDpk20JJ. (WoshinBton, D.C.: TheAsio Found•tion, 20111163.
          Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
146       Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                            Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice           2013



government employees that wish to run for office must resign from their
positions permanently (therefore, not receiving their positions back if they are
not successful in the elections). This rule includes teachers. Since the civil
service and teaching are significant areas of employment for women, they may
be hesitant to risk resigning in order to run for office.3os Finally, the law
increased the cost of registering as a candidate by three-fold, a financial barrier
that is likely to disproportionately affect women.

District Governance
At district level, MRRD's National Area-Based Development Program (NABDP)
has established DDAs in 388 districts of the country {96% of districts). DDAs
are intended to oversee the development process in their district, but are not
formal government bodies with formal elections. Despite informal status, DDAs
have in many districts been effective drivers of development processes. MRRD
aims to increase women's participation in decision-making in these councils,
and quota systems have been adopted in the establishment of DDAs (ideally
30%). To date, 3,040 women are DDA members.
One of the key challenges at district level is the recurring problem of mobility,
where rural women are required to travel significant distances to participate
in district level meetings. Female provincial councillors are often from more
urban areas and so manage to perform their duties from urban settings, while
community level councillors are able to participate in their home communities.
The district level, however, presents a particular challenge for women
(delegated from village councils in rural areas) to actively participate in
district level discussions, meetings, and decision-making. Another issue is that
of MofficialH participation (where women are selected and registered), as
compared to Mactive" participation (where women attend meetings regularly,
participate in discussions and decisions, and have access to and knowledge of
the majority of the DDA's activities and information). This latter challenge is
difficult to measure, but anecdotal evidence suggests that there is a significant
gap between official and active participation in some districts.
DDAs are likely to undergo a structural change, transitioning to DCCs (along
with other pre-existing councils at district level). The mandates of DCCs will
expand, moving closer to the constitutionally-mandated District Councils,


..:15~qual Rlshts. Unequal Opportunltle:s: Women's Partldpatlon rn Afahiilnlstan's Parliamentary and Provincial coundl
Elections.• (Kabul: AfKhon Reseorch ond Evoluotion Unit, 2012) 9.
                                                   Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                   Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                 147
2013    Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 which will be officially part of the government. DCCs have a quota of 25%
 women.




 The district governors are appointed by the central government, and to date,
 there is one woman (of 364 district governors) holding this post, in Jawzjan
 province. Since there is a reasonably high number of women who run for
 elected office at subnationallevels, it is difficult to justify why there is only 1
 appointed female district governor. This is an issue to which the central
 Government needs to give more attention and commitment;. perhaps
 considering establishing a quota for female district governors. However. now
 that district governors are required to pass a standardized test, some
 longstanding power-holders have been unseated. a process that could make
 space for more women 1n the future.

 Community Governance
 At community level, MRRD oversees the NSP, a program approaching national
 coverage which establishes CDCs and channels development funds through
 them to commun!tles. IJke the DDAs, the CDCs are locally elected/selected and
 are responsible to prioritize, select, and oversee development proJects. There
 are now more than 30,000 CDCs In Afghanistan. covering more than 70% of
        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
148     Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                             Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice           2013



villages.306 CDCs have gradually taken on increasing responsibilities in many
communities, expanding to further governance roles, and merging with or
repladng pre-existing traditional coundls in some areas. Through an ongoing
randomized impact assessment, MRRD is monitoring 387 NSP communities
across the country through qualitative focus groups and quantitative data
collection over time. The first report from this assessment notes that 75% of
male community members and 88% of female community members consider
the CDC to be the main dedsion-making body for governance and
development307

According to MRRD, the partidpation of women in CDCs has gradually
increased since the program's inception in 2003. As of 2013, 34% of CDC
members (343,843) are women (117,536), and on average, women comprise
around 27% of membership per CDC. Disaggregated by district, the proportion
of female CDC members ranges from 0% to 53%. Provinces with CDCs which
have more than 50% female members include, Badakhshan, Bamyan,
Nangarhar, Balkh, Kabul, Daikundi, and Faryab. Provinces with CDCs which
have 0% female members include Kandahar, Paktia, Kunar, Khost and Uruzgan.
Given the informal nature of CDCs as governance bodies, there have been wide
variations in election practice and CDC structure. In a detailed paper on the
subject in 2008, 8 types of election practices were identified, resulting in 4
types of CDCs, typically distinguished by gendered practices.3oe Types of
elections included separate direct-voting elections for candidates (one election
for women and one for men); clustered elections, where groups of households
nominate a representative candidate (sometimes one male, one female); joint
elections with quotas for women which mirror the provincial and national
processes; and elections without any women involved at all (either as
candidates or as voters). Sometimes men voted only for men and women only
for women, where other times both men and women cast votes for male and
female candidates. In other cases, each voter cast 1 vote for 1 candidate,
regardless of gender. The result of these varied election practices is a variety of
CDC structures that differ in how they include women.




30
  '-Gender in Development: L.ocal Self Govemilnce Institutions ilnd the Pilrticipation of Women in Af&hilnistiln (A Pilot
Study).•(Kabul: Mlnlstrv of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, 2012).
"""Post·lmplementatlon Monltorlns Quarterly Report.• (Kabul: Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, 2012) 15.
JOI Nixon, Hamish. -st.Jbnlll:ional State-buildina: in Afghanistan:'"ll<abul: Aflhan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2008) 40-1.


                                                    Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                    Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                 149
2013       Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 The NSP has increasingly standardized these processes and structures, and
 also now has a requirement that SO% of CDC members will be women (a new
 quota established in 2012); these can sit in a mixed council or in separate
 committees. However, districts that are classified by NSP as "high risk" are not
 subject to these rules, and this now constitutes 33% of the country. In the
 future, as village-level government is formalized, it is important that quota
 systems are not seen as optional, but are standardized for each community.
 According to a number of studies on the impact of NSP, communities (both
 men and women) partldpatlng In NSP are more likely to perceive women as
 having a role to play In community decision-making. It also appears that
 partfclpaUon In NSP brings women greater mobfllty and greater Interaction
 with each other (the strengthening of sodal networks).309 In general, NSP
 appears to have had the effect of creating space for women In community
 decision-making and leadership, normallztng a process of consultaUon that
 may not have been present before.:uo

 ..llo!81t\.AIIot'ew, OW!IIIill'<lltl~ and Ruben Enlbllcpoy. "Empowelf~Wllmen: h!def>Ceft'om • Reid l:lipement In
 A(ahanln.wt.• (KibiA: World Bank, 2012) 16.
 '"'"DoetWoMeft't Panlt:Tpatfot> In tile HlltlcNI Solld1rtty Prceramn.e Malee • Dlffl!renoe kllhel' ~.Net? Ac-Study In
 &alllh Prcmnoe.• (ltallul: Afllhln lluardland Ewlulftlon !kilt, 2012).
           Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
150        Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                            Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice      2013



While the program has struggled with the same issue discussed above in
relation to DDAs (the discrepancy between official and active participation of
women), it has been somewhat easier to facilitate more active participation
due to the decreased challenges of mobility at community level. NSP meetings
take place in home communities, and NSP projects are implemented locally.
However, the majority of CDCs still have separate men's and women's
meetings, creating a challenge for the sharing of information and the
normalized participation of women. In some cases, it appears that there is
limited cooperation between the male and female committees, and that they
exist along parallel tracks. Some women CDC members have even noted that
they have never been told the amount of funds that was allocated to the
community.m The vast majority of CDCs select a male Treasurer, so funding
decisions and ownership are almost always more with men than with women.
Mobility constraints related to the procurement of project materials and
contracting of services for projects affect women's participation as well.

Women in the Peace Process
Women participated in Mghanistan's two foundational Loya Jirgas (in 2002
and 2003), aimed at establishing the post-Taliban political system and
proposing a Constitution. In 2002,12% of the delegates were women, and this
figure rose to 20% in 2003. However, various high level events and bodies
have had a varied track record on including women. For example, the London
Conference in 2010 took place without any official Mghan female delegates,
while the Peace Jirga in Kabul the same year saw women's representation
reach 21%. Currently 9 of the 70 members of the High Peace Council are
women (12%). Women's groups are advocating for 30%, which would be a
total of 21.312 While women have been included in various conferences both in
and outside of Mghanistan, many women are concerned that political
settlements will be reached in private negotiations between the predominantly
male parties to the conflict. and that key ·red linesH on women's rights and
access to services will be compromised. Some fear that the space to be heard
and to implement pro-women policies will be used as a bargaining chip in a
potential power-sharing deaJ.m



Jtllbid, 17.
'" Nlj55en, Stefanle "The Peoce Proce55 and AfJihonlotan's Women.• (Kabul: Civil-Military Fusion Cent-., 2012) 3.
111
    Fleschenbe:rs, Andrew. "Afshansltilln's Transltlon In the M.akln1: Perceptions ;nd Polley Stratqlesof Women
Pilrliamentillrians:" IHeiric:h Boll Stiftunc, 2008) 16.
                                                   Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                   Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges            151
2013           Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




 Security for Female Public Figures
 A list of high profile female public figures have been attacked or assassinated,
 including Safia Amajan, head of the Kandahar DoWA in 2006, Malalai Kakar,
 the most senior police officer in Kandahar in 2008, Zakia Zaki and Sanga Amaj,
 journalists killed in 2007, the assassination of Kandahar Provincial Council
 Member, Sitara Achakzai, in 2008, the Head of the Department of Women's
 Affairs in Nangarhar, in 2012, and Shaima Rezayee, journalist and tv
 moderator in 2005. In the latest round of elections in 2009-10, some women
 were not able to campaign at all, given the security environment in their
 constituency.m As noted in other chapters, security continues to limit
 women's participation and access, both in general, and as particular targets for
 those who oppose their participation in various aspects of public life.

 Women and Communication Technology
 In Afghanistan, access to media sources for information has increased
 significantly. Both men and women listen to the radio about the same amount,
 where 89% of the rural population and 85% of the urban population report
 having a radio. In urban areas, 89% of people have television, which usurps
 radio as a primary information source; however, in rural areas, this percentage
 drops to 26%.315 More than 70% of Afghans have mobile phones, and mobile
 phone coverage has increased 100% since 2005. Male and female cell phone
 users are close to equal (38% and 33% respectively), and 40% of all users are
 between the ages of 15-24 years old.316 Overall, approximately 80% of women
 have some access to a mobile phone (whether personal or shared).317 Of those
 who owned their own mobile phone, 67% had obtained it in the last 2 years,
 and of those who obtained a mobile phone in the last 1 year, 64% were under
 the age of 25.31 8 However, there continues to be a significant difference
 between rural and urban areas; only 26% of all users are in rural areas.
 Internet access is still limited, at only 2%.319




 '"•Islamic Republic of Afsllanlstan Final Report. Presidential and Provincial council Elections.• (Kabul: European Union
 Election ObservMion Mission, 2009) 5.
 !1.!1 Fl'ilenkel,   Er.~n, Emrys Schoemilker ilnd Sheldon Himelfillrb. •AfBhanistiln Media Assessment: Opporb.Jnities ilnd
 Cllallonps for Pl!acH>uildinc.• (Washincton.. D.C.: Unitad St3taslnstituta of Paaca, 2010) 15-16.
 !Uilbld,18.
 '" •connectlnt~to Opportunity: A Survey of Afshan Women's Access to Mobile Phone TechnoiOfY.• (Washlncton.. D.C.:
 ~ID, 2012) 6.
    Ibid.
 "'Ibid, p.19.
               Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
152            Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                     Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice   2013


Policy Implications
As can be seen from the foregoing chapter, women's access to justice has not
significantly improved since 2005. A serious coordinated donor and
Government partnership is needed in order to make a notable improvement on
such a protracted issue. Women have seen some gains in political participation
and social voice although challenges persist, and gains are at risk of receding.
Recommendations for improving women's access to justice, political and social
voice include:
   1. ConUnued Legal Reform- Pass the EVAW Law through Parliament,
      the newly drafted Family Law and the amended Land Reform Law,
      expanding legal reforms that provide greater rights for women.
   2. Female Legal Professionals and the ANP - Invest in female legal
      professionals of various kinds. Invest in significant reform within the
      ANP and further empower FRUs to address gendel'-based violence cases
      as criminal cases.
   3. Greater Awareness of the EVAW Law and Other Progressive
      Jurisprudence - Since an estimated 80% of cases are still adjudicated
      by traditional justice mechanisms, and awareness within the formal
      legal system is at times low, support is needed to gain a greater
      awareness of the prevailing legal systems and provisions that better
      protect women.
   4. Data Collection - Develop a central database to record all relevant
      cases of crimes that are codified under the EVAW Law (to be expanded
      to capture laws codified under future legislation), such that cases can be
      systematically followed up, and the processing and outcomes of cases
      can be analyzed.
   5. Support to a Legal Social Safety Net - Support shelters and their
      expansion to new provinces, along with greater availability of legal aid.
      Help shelters develop training. skills development, and other strategies
      that can help women safely and sustainably leave shelters.
   6. Expand and Reform Quotas - Reform the quota system to clarify
      women's reserved seats vs. openly-contested seats, allowing women to
      take up seats beyond the allocated quota if they win their seats outright.
      In addition, as District and Village Councils become more formalized in
      future, ensure the establishment of a formal quota system at those
      levels.
   7. Support Party Platforms that could Embrace Women's Issues
      Collectively and Support Female Candidates - Provide support to

                                Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges     153
2013    Chapter 5 : Legal Rights and Voice




          both female and male reformist candidates and elected representatives
          to develop coalition positions around women's rights and development
          issues.
       B. Consider Further Afftrmat1ve Action Measures Beyond Quotas -
          Implement measures to help women with logistical barriers to
          participation in public life, including transportation support,. personal
          security, and access to information, among other support.
       9. Establish a Target for Women in Appointed Positions - The
          Government should set minimum targets for appointing women to
          governor and mayoral appointed positions.




        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
154     Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
Chapter 6: Conclusion
                                      Chapter 6 : Conclusion   2013




Chapter 6: Conclusion




       Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
       Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges   157
2013   Chapter 6 : Conclusion



 Women's rights, development, and participation in society have been central to
 the agenda of international involvement in Mghanistan, and the Government of
 Mghanistan has undergone significant reforms and expansion of services that
 have targeted and benefited women and girls. .A3 this report has demonstrated,
 these efforts have in some cases achieved quite dramatic results in a short
 period of time. Strong results for women and girls can be seen in Health
 (Chapter 2), Education (Chapter 3), and Public Voice (second portion of
 Chapter 5). At the same time, the report has also highlighted areas where
 significant improvement has been lacking. and a systematic approach to
 addressing some issues is still missing. This can be seen in the section on Legal
 Rights (first portion of Chapter 5), and in the chapter on Work and
 Employment (Chapter 4).
 In addition, given the current political timeline in Mghanistan, with
 progressive withdrawal of international security forces, and a future decline in
 aid, gains made in services and participation for women could be at risk
 Drawing on the report's sectoral analyses, the below overall observations can
 be made regarding critical factors for sustaining gains and pushing forward to
 narrow gaps between women and men in Afghanistan.

 Challenges to Sustain Achievements Post-2014 and
 Recommendations
 A Political Settlement Must Advance Gains for Women. In the key
 interviews undertaken to prepare this report, various development,
 humanitarian, and advocacy actors expressed concerns about the potential for
 women's place in society being used as a bargaining chip in a political
 settlement Strongest concerns were expressed about the education and justice
 systems, and the contested space they represent A political settlement is
 closely linked to security, which has been highlighted above as a major
 deterrent to women's access and participation. However, if greater stability is
 gained but rights are compromised to gain it, women may not be able to
 benefit from a more secure environment. In addition. concerns were expressed
 that whatever the political arrangements and commitments, the capacity to
 implement provisions for women and maintain the Rule of Law may
 deteriorate.
 Security Underpins Development and Participation for Women Across
 Sectors. In Afghanistan. lack of security remains one of the key barriers to
 women's access to services and attainment of societal participation. As the
 foregoing chapters have demonstrated, security concerns affect women's and
       Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
158    Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                                          Chapter 6 : Conclusion           2013


girls' access to health and education, their mobility, their comfort in public
places and in the workplace, their physical safety, their ability to participate in
public life, and their psychological well-being. An analysis of the NRVA
2007/DB regarding the linkage between service delivery and security suggests
that the opportunity cost for girls, for whom the risk of violence-related harm
is perceived as higher, increases disproportionately with conflict, leading
households to invest relatively more in boysfmen. For example, girls'
education rates correlate strongly with security concerns, as do child health
outcomes,322 where areas with the strongest security problems consistently
generate the worst results against these indicators. Good security overall
proved to be a significant predictor of children's educational and health
outcomes, positively correlated to literacy rates, school enrollment, and
provision of vital health services (i.e. vaccinations and vitamin A
supplementation). Specifically girls' educational attainments were
disproportionately worse in highly insecure areas.323 Partly because of the
variation in security around the country, there are strong regional variances in
access to services. The above analysis is based on the NRVA 2007/08;
however, since then the security situation in some previously-secure areas has
further deteriorated.

Within Declining Aid, More Internal Resources Must Be Allocated to
Women's Needs. Another challenge to sustaining achievements to date and
expanding them further will be to secure government funding to commit to
programming that benefits women. The sustainability and expansion of
services developed to date is critical, and external resources are set to
gradually decline at a time when programs need to be built upon and scaled up.
The programs in place at the moment have not yet reached their intended
commitments, particularly to women and girls, and must continue to expand
further to do so (for example, there are still education and health facilities with
no female staff, still high numbers of out-of-school children, and still extensive
work needed in the justice sector). Developing sustainable resources to
maintain the development effort and push forward in lacking areas will be a
key challenge for the years to come.

Female Human Resources are Critical for Women Across Sectors. As the
report notes across chapters, one of the recurring themes throughout is the

'" 'lnterac:llve Data VISUIIIIzatlon and Analysis on Wellbeing. Conflict and Access to Services" [Powerl'olnt presentation for
the inter-Ministry meetinc of the Povorty AnolyJis and Policy Committee meetinll· World Bank, October 10, 2012•
.m Ibid.


                                                    Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                                    Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges                   159
2013   Chapter 6 : Conclusion



 negative effect of a lack of qualified female professionals in key sectors. In
 health, women have a more difficult time accessing healthcare and medical
 information where there are no or not enough female midwives, nurses, and
 doctors; in education, girls are often not permitted to attend school, especially
 in the higher grades, if there is no female teacher to instruct them; as related to
 employment, women face challenges in the workplace or struggle to develop
 successful businesses because they must operate in an environment with few
 women and without a strong professional network; in the justice sector,
 women have difficulty reporting cases or receiving due process, without
 qualified women to report to and be assisted by. A lack of qualified female
 professionals across all sectors contributes to a negative cycle that prevents
 other women from accessing services and participating in public life. Further
 workforce planning and human resource development is critical across
 sectors, linking higher education systems to various other sectors for
 cooperative planning. Affirmative action measures are needed to recruit
 students into key fields from far-flung provinces, with the requirement that
 they must practice in their home province upon completion of their training.
 This is particularly critical for women. Other provisions, such as secure
 accommodation and competitive salary packages are also needed to
 incentivize professionals in resource-rich areas to serve in areas of most need.

 Targeted Action Is Needed to Address Geographic lnequaUty. As
 mentioned above, an issue related to human resources is the uneven
 distribution of qualified personnel in general, and in particular of female
 professionals, around the country. As various chapters in this report have
 highlighted, women are strongly represented in some sectors in Kabul and
 other urban areas, but are virtually absent from remote or highly insecure
 areas. This is a difficult cycle to break; in those regions girls are likely to have
 less access to education, and therefore are less likely to attain professional
 qualifications. It is equally challenging to incentivize professional women from
 other places (i.e. urban centers) to go to work in very remote or insecure areas
 to fill this gap. Afghanistan needs creative solutions for training female
 professionals from challenging areas, and strongly incentivizing professionals
 from other places to go to difficult areas as well.

 Engage the Religious Establishment tn Key Issues of Women's
 Partidpation. They are still the people which communities are most likely to
 look to for advice and guidance in many areas, and as such are a critical
 community to be engaged in these processes.

        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
160     Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                              Chapter 6 : Conclusion   2013



Women's Access to Justice Requires Concerted Effort, Given Slow
Progress. Although it has been treated in chapter 5 in particular, violence
against women is also a cross-cutting issue. High levels of violence against
women, along with social stigma, can cause physical and psychological impact,
which impedes women's ability to pursue other opportunities across sectors.
In this way, the issues explored in the first portion of Chapter 5 (HLegal
Rights") are critical to all other sections as well.




                               Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                               Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges   161
2013    References




 References
 PrintMedja
 Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce and Industries, 2013. "Business Bottleneck Survey."
 (Kabul).
 Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, 2.006. Comparative Ana{ysis ofFamily Law in
 the Context of Islam (Kabul).
 Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, 2006. Roundtable Conference on
 Comparative Analysis of Family Law in the Context oflslam. (Kabul).
 Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, 2.011. "Fifth Report Situation of Economic
 and Soctal Rights In Afghanistan." (Kabul).
 Afghan Management and Marketing Consultants and the Microfinance Investment Support
 Facility for Afghanistan. "Gender Mainstreaming in Afghanistan's Microfinance Sector: An
 Impact Assessment· (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2005. "Who Owns the Farms? Rural Women's Access to
 Land and Livestock." (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2.005. Guide to Parliamentary Elections. (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2006. "Urban Livelihoods in Afghanistan.• (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2009. Smith, Deborah and jay Lamey.·A Holistic justice
 System for Afghanistan." (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2011. The Impact of Microfinance Programmes on
 Women's Lives: A Case Study in Kabul Province." (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2012. "The Impact of Microfinance Programmes on
 Women's Lives: A Case Study in Balkh Province." (Kabul).
 Afghan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2012. "Equal Rights, Unequal Opportunities: Women's
 Participation in Afghanistan's Parliamentary and Provincial Council Elections." (Kabul).
 Anwari, Hangama, Cheshmak Farhoumand-Sims and Krista Nerland "Assessing Gendered
 Access to justice in Afghanistan." (Kabul: The North-South Institute, 2009).
 APPRO and the Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, 2010. "Growing Pains: Women in
 the Afghan National Pol!ce.• (Kabul).
 Ashraf\, Hedayatullah. 2009. "Gender dimension of agriculture and rural employment: special
 focus on Afghan rural women's access to agriculture and rural development sector.• Afghanistan
 National Development Strategy. (Kabul, Government of Afghanistan).
 ASIEN, 2007. Schneider, I. "Recent Developments In Afghanistan Family Law."
 Azarbaijani-Moghaddam, Sippi, 2009. "A Study of Gender Equity through the National
 Solidarity Program's Community Development Councils." (Kabul: DACAAR).
 Asia Foundation, The, 2012. Afghaniston in 2012: A Survey ofthe Afghan People. (Washington,
 D.C.).
 Heath, Andrew, Christia Fotini, and Ruben Enikolopov, 2012. "Empowering Women: Evidence
 from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan.• (Kabul: World Bank).
 Building Markets and United States Agency for International Development, 2013
 (forthcoming). Study on women in the private sector.
 CARE Internationa~ 2009. "Knowledge on Fire -Attacks on Education in Afghanistan: Risks
 and Measures for Successful Mitigation." (Kabul).



        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
162     Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                                References    2013



CARE International, 2010. • Afghanistan Case Study: Meaningful Participation and
Empowerment for Women in Post-conflict Governance and Peace-building: Lessons Learned."
(Kabul).
CARE International and UNICEF, 2013 (forthcoming). Study on attacks on schools.
Central Statistics Organization, 2007/B. National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. (Kabul).
Central Statistics Organization, 2009. "Integrated Business Enterprise Survey.• (Kabul).
Central Statistics Organization. 2009. "Repon on the Survey of Women and Men in Decision·
making.. (Kabul).
Central Statistics Organization. 2012. Afghanistlln Stalistical Yearbook 2011·2012. (Kabul).
Fleschenberg, Andrew, 2008. • Afghansitan's Transition in the Making: Perceptions and Policy
Strategies of Women Parliamentarians." (Heinrich Boll Stiftung).
Fleschenberg, Andrew, 2009. ·Afghanistan's Parliament in the Making: Gendered
understandings and practices of politics in a transitional country." (Kabul: Heinrich Boll
Stiftung).
Food Security and Agriculture Cluster, 2013. "Gender Equality: Policies and Programmes".
(Kabul).
Fraenkel, Bran, Emrys Schoemaker and Sheldon Himelfarb, 2010. •Afghanistan Media
Assessment: Opponunities and Challenges for Peace-building.· (Washington, D.C.: United
States Institute of Peace).
Free and Fair Elections Forum of Mghanistan, 2011. "Women and Afghanistan's 2010
Parliamentary Elections.• (Kabul).
Giustom, A, 2010. "Nation-Building is Not for All: The politics of education in Mghanistan".
(Kabul: Afghanistan Analysts Network).
Giustom, Antonio and Claudio Franco, 2011. "The Battle for the Schools: The Taleban and
State Education.• (Kabul: Mghan Analysts Network).
Global Rights · Partners for justice, 2008. "Uving with Violence: A National Repon on Domestic
Abuse In Mghanlstan." (Kabul).
Government of Mghanistan, 2004. Constitution ofAfghanistan. (Kabul).
Greeley, M. and Chaturvedi, M., 2007. "Microfinance in Mghanistan: A baseline and initial
impact study for MISFA" (Kabul: MISFA).
Heath, jennifer. "Land of the Unconquerable". (University ofCallfornla Press).
Human Rights Watch Afghanistan, 2012. "I Had to Run Away." (Kabul).
International Labor Organization, 2009. Key lndicaWT$ ofthe Lo.bor Mo.rket; Sixth Edition.
International Cooperation in Higher Education. 2011. ·A Master Programme in Educational
Research and Development In Mghanlstan 2008 - 2010: Experiences and Outcomes." (Kabul).
Khan, Ahmad, 2012. "Women & Gender in Mghanistan." (Kabul: Civil-Military Fusion Centre).
Lourdes, Beneria, 2003. Gender, Development and Globo.lizo.tion (New York and London:
Routledge).
Ministry of Education, 2010. National Educational Stratsgic Plan 2010-2014. (Kabul).
Ministry of Education, 2012. "Policies and Guidelines for Community· Based Education."
(Kabul).
Mln!stryofllducatlon. 2013. EMIS data (unpublished).
Ministry of Public Health, 2008. Annual Report 1387. (Kabul).
Ministry of Public Health, 2010. Afghanist:Jin Mort:JIIity Survey. (Kabul).
Ministry of Public Health, 2012. National Priority Progro.m: Heo.lth for All Afghans. (Kabul).
Ministry of Publlc Health, 2013. HMIS data (unpublished).


                                      Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                      Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges   163
2013     References




 Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, 2012. "Gender in Development: Local Self
 Governance Institutions and the Participation of Women in Afghanistan (A Pilot Study)."
 (Kabul).
 Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, 2012. "Post-Implementation Monitoring
 Quarterly Report" (Kabul).
 Ministry ofWomen's Affairs, 2008. Women and Men in AfghanistJJn: Baseline Statistics on
 Gender. (Kabul).
 Nijssen, Stefanie, 2012. "The Peace Process and Afghanistan's Women: (Kabul: Civil-Military
 Fusion Centre).
 Nixon. Hamish. "Subnational State-building in Afghanistan,• 2008. (Kabul: Afghan Research
 and Evaluation Unit).
 Norris, P., 2006. "Opening the Door: Women Leaders and Constitution Building in Iraq and
          Afghanistan.• (Cambridge: Harvard University, JFK School of Government).
 Oxfam, 2011. "High Stakes: Girls' Education in Afghanistan.• (Kabul).
 Oxford University Press and the World Bank, 2001. "Engendering Development: Through
 Gender Equality in Rights, Resources, and Voice." (New York).
 Samuel Hall Consulting. 2012. "Social Assessment of the National Horticulture and Livestock
 Project". (Kabul).
 Sayed. Ghulam Dastagir, 2011. "Mental Health in Afghanistan: Burden. Challenges and the Way
 Forward." (Kabul: World Bank).
 Todd C.S., et al., 2007. "HIV, Hepatitis C, and Hepatitis B Infections and Associated Risk
 Behavior in Injection Drug Users.• (Kabul).
 UNAMA/OHCHR. 2011. ·A Long Way to Go: Implementation oftbe Elimination of VIolence
 Against Women Law in Afghanistan." (Kabul).
 UNICEF, 2010/11. Afghanistan Multi-indicator Cluster Survey. (Kabul).
 United Nations Development Program, 2013. • Afghanistan..· Human Development Report 2013,
 The Rise ofthe South: Human Progress ofa Diverse World- Summary.
 UN Office on Drugs and Crime, 2007. •Afghanistan: Female Prisoners and Their Social
 Reintegation." (Kabul).
 UN Office on Drugs and Crime, 2010. "Corruption in Afghanistan: Bribery as Reported by the
 VIctims.• (Kabul).
 United States Agency for International Development, 2011. • Afghanistan Technical and
 Vocational Education Training (TVET) Providers Inventory.• (Kabul).
 USAID, 2012. "Connecting to Opportunity: A Survey of Afghan Women's Access to Mobile
 Phone Technology." (Washington, D.C.).
 United States Agency for International Development, 2012."Land Reform in Afghanistan
 Gender Assessment• (Kabul).
 Wilder, Andrew. "A House Divided? Analyzing the ZOOS Afghan Election."(Kabul: Afghan
 Research and Evaluation Unit).
 World Health Organization, 2006. The World Health Report 2006: Working togetherfor health.
 (Geneva).
 World Health Organization, 2012. World Health St:JJtistics.
 World Bank, 2005. AfghanistJJn: National Reconstruction and Poverty Reduction- the Role of
 Women in JlfghanistJJn's Future. (Washington. D.C.).
 World Bank. 2010. Building on Ear!Y Gains In Afghanlswn's Health, Nutrition, and Population
 Sect:JJr: Challenges and Options.


         Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
164      Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                               References    2013



World Bank, 2010. "Tracer Studies: Training of Chronically Poor Women in Badakhshan,
Bamyan, Sarnangan, Kandahar, and Khost, in NSDP." (Kabul).
World Bank, 2011. More and Better jobs In South Asia. (Washington, D.C.).
World Bank, 2011. "Understanding gender In Agricultural value chain: The cases of
grape/raisins, almonds, and saffron in Afghanistan". (Washington. D.C.).
World Bank, 2011. "Implications of World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
Development for the World Bank Group" (unpublished- attached for the September 24,2011
Development Committee Meeting).
World Bank, 2012. "Afghanistan Economic Update" (unpublished). (Kabul).
World Bank, 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equallt;y and Development
(Washington, D.C.).
World Bank, 2012. "Gender Equality in South Asia: Rising to the Challenge: WDR 2012
Companion- South Asia (unpublished).
World Bank, 2012. South Asia Social Development Unit, Dissemination Note No. 3.
World Bank, 2012. "Interactive Data Visualization and Analysis on Wellbeing, Conflict and
Access to Services" (Power Point presentation for the inter-Ministry meeting of the Poverty
Analysis and Polley Committee meeting).
World Bank, 2013. "Challenges and Opportunities for Inclusive Growth in Mghanistan"
(forthcoming). (Washington, D.C.). "Gender in Developing the Agriculture and Livestock
Sectors." Mghanistan Gender Mainstrearning Implementation Note Series, No. 2. (Washington,
D.C.).




                                     Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                     Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges   165
2013    References



 Online On order ofappearanc;e tn the text>

 "Pakistan," 28 April2013. http;//en,worldstatjnfo/Asia/Pakjstan/,
  "Iran.• 28 Aprtl2013. http·//en worldstat!nfo /As!allran.
 "Pakistan,• 28 April2013. http·//datatQpics wor)dbank,rn:JI:I&«:nder/count:zylpakjstan
  "Iran," 28 April2013. http;/ldatatopics.worldbank.org/gender/countzy/iran.-islamic-rep.
 "The Childbirth Injury, Obstetric Fistula; A Problem that Can Be Solved,• 28 April2013.
 htt;p·//count.ryofflce unfpa.o~!af&han!stan/2011/12128/4393/the chlldb!rth Injury obmtrt
 c fistula a problem that can be solved
 "Iran,• 28 April2013. htt;p;fldatatopics.worldbank.ore/pnder/couno:yfiran.-islamic-Tel!.
 "Tajikistan,· 28 Apri12013. http;//da!atopics.worlc!bank.o~/llen<ier/count:zyfllliUdstan
 HW/AIDS In Afghanistan. (Kabul, World Bank, 2011), found at
 htt;p·//siteresources wprldbank.or&IAFGHANISIANEXTNIRespurces/305984-
 1297184305854/HIVAIDSbriefAFFeb2011.pdf.
 • Afghanistan Abortion Law," 28 April 2013. http; 1/cyberJaw.haryard.edulpopulation.
 "Iran.• Accessed 25 May 2013. http·/fwww !ndexmundl cpm/facts/!ran/U!J!racy-rate
 "Tajikistan." Accessed 25 May 2013. btt;p·/fwww jndexmundj cpm/facts/tajikistanfljteracy-
 ~-
 "Pakistan." Accessed 25 May 2013. http;/fwww.jndexmundj.com/factslpakistanDiteracy·rate.
 "UN Mission in Afghanistan Condemns Attacks on Schools by Insurgents." Accessed 09 June
 2013.
 http; //www.un.org/i!PPs /newslstory.j!lijl?N ews!D=41984&Cr=~han&Cr1=#.UKCWR!csrn0.
 Esfandlarl, Haleb. "The Women's Movement"Accessed 28 Aprtl 2013.
 bttp·/liranprimer usip Q[ilresource lwomens-moyement
 "EnroUment of Women in Higher Education Increases." Accessed 15 June 2013.
 http;//articles.timesofindiaindiatimes.com/2012·09-04/news/33581042 1 higher·
 educat!on-total-enrolment-lakh-women
 Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock, Horticulture and Livestock Project Accessed
 14 April2013. http;/lmailgov.af/en/page/3254.
 "World Bank Afghanistan Country Dashboard." Accessed 05 June 2013.
 http·/ld,atatoplcs worldbank.o~lflnanc!aUnclusionfcount:rx/afiban!stan
 Afghanistan Microfinance Association. Accessed 15 December 2012. bttp·//www ama p~ af/
 "Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan Sector Update." Accessed 02 June
 1013. http; /Jwww.m.jsfa.ora.af/.
 Lawrence, Qulll. "For Afghan Women, Rape Law Offers Little Protection.• (National Public
 Radio, December 2, 2011). btt;p·/fwww npr p~/2011/12/021143057341/for-afghan­
 women-ra,pe·law-offers-litt!e-protection.




        Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
166     Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges
                                                                             Annex I    2013



Annex 1: Key Areas for Future Research/Data Collection
As this report has highlighted, some issues women face in Afghanistan are still
poorly understood and difficult to analyze due to a lack of data and other
information. The key areas in particular need of further work are:
    • women's mental health;
    • women's and girls' nutrition;
    • alleged poisoning and other attacks on girls' education facilities;
    • measuring women's work;
    • challenges women face in the private sector;
    • workforce planning models {to gain gender parity and geographical
       balance of trained professionals); and
    • women's experience with various levels of the justice system {formal
       and informal).




                                Women’s Role in Afghanistan’s Future -
                                Taking Stock of Achievements and Continued Challenges   167
The World Bank

1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433 U.S.A
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: https:// www.worldbank.org
E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
