  Report No: ACS8213



  Republic of India
  E-Tools in Construction Management:
  Dissemination of the Report
  {Minutes of Workshop held on March 06, 2014}


  {enter report date here}




  SASDT
  SOUTH ASIA




Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
INTRODUCTION OF E-TOOLS IN MANAGEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS – Dissemination Workshop
06 MARCH 2014, THE WORLD BANK

Background
The infrastructure sector has seen unprecedented changes in India with exponential growth due to
changing economic landscape and development in the country. Massive investments are required to be
made across a range of sectors like power, ports, roads, railways, health, education and aviation. The
complexity and scale of these infrastructure projects has increased significantly and a typical project
now takes anywhere from six to ten years to complete.

Against this backdrop, there is a renewed focus and attention on project management of construction/
infrastructure projects. The World Bank commissioned a study in early 2013 on introducing and
enhancing the use of IT based interventions/solutions in the management of construction projects and
programs to enhance efficiency, transparency and governance in delivery, thereby increasing their
success and impact potential. The study concluded with a guidance note which targets implementing
agencies and project managers with practical steps on adopting e-tools and how e-tools can contribute
to improve construction project management and delivery. Building on the study, it is acknowledged that
implementation of e-tools in infrastructure project can be promoted through address knowledge and
information gaps.

Objective
The World Bank and Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) organized a workshop in order to
disseminate the guidance note information among implementing agencies and to promote use of e-tools
in the management of public sector infrastructure projects in India.

About 70 senior management staff of implementing agencies from across India and sectors including
transport, urban development, housing, energy, rural development and water supply department
attended the workshop.

Key Messages
The first session involved a presentation on the background and context to the initiative. The
presentation was led by Rajesh Rohatgi from The World Bank. The presentation covered the rationale
for improved project management capacity in public sector infrastructure projects and the need for
readily available and consistent data and information given the changing nature of the construction
industry which is now seeing larger, complex projects with longer durations. The industry faces major
cost and time overruns and the reasons include poor quality supervision and manual record keeping.
This was followed by a presentation by Mr. Sanjay Saxena, Consultant to The World Bank on the
e-tools guidance note and the benefits of adopting ICT solutions in construction project management
and how one should go about implementing these reforms in an implementing agency. The main
messages from the keynote addresses are as follows;


Address by Nilaya Mitash, Joint Secretary, DEA
      Important to consider direct and indirect costs of projects. The latter is the opportunity cost of not implementing,
       the project in time. Such costs are huge
      Skill gap; There is a need to enhance skill base in the Indian construction industry. Even big contractors are not able
       to deliver on time and do not follow international project management standards. This is an opportunity to
       promote such standards and if this is implemented locally, there is a long term benefit where Indian Construction
       companies can become internationally competitive
      Project management issues are particularly pertinent in transport and energy sectors
      There is also a need to enhance transparency and openness with a view to bringing public systems into good light.
       Many public sector initiatives carry negative image due to lack of openness in sharing information and data.
       Message to the participants – adopt a proactive approach. It is important to diagnose the problems facing projects,
        engage with partners and adopt a proactive path to addressing them

   Address by Onno Ruhl, The World Bank Country Director
     World Bank and DEA has work closely to adopt E-Procurement and there is still a need to move beyond to adopt
       e-project management
     E-Tools are beneficial for project management. However it is important not to create parallel systems by adopting
       ICT path. Secondly it is important to start simple, pilot e-tools before scaling up and abolishing existing systems
   Address by Rajesh Bhushan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development
     Rural Connectivity in India project to develop 600,000kms
     Dynamic systems – To recognize that projects and systems are dynamic and to allow flexibility to evolve over time
     Disproportionate focus on data availability and not sufficient emphasis on data visualization and analysis
     Integration; It is important that systems integrate with overall structures and not continue to serve as standalone
       modules
           o Eg. POMAS submodules – quality monitoring /smart phone based application from the site however,
               state quality coordinator not in a position of visualize what the monitors are doing
     Important to engage field supervisors and get buy in at the junior level - ability of field supervisions eg assistant
       engineers to utilize system will require added attention
Main Discussion Points
Following a presentation of case studies and live demonstration of e-tools systems operational in the
construction project management field, the following key discussion points were covered among
participants;
       Gaining acceptability within the organization. Gaining acceptability at all levels is critical including from top
    management to junior level. Accessibility is challenging given the resistance to change and the failure of failure among
    staff. One of the success factors for the web-based project management system of Karnataka Police Housing
    Corporation was the acceptability of the system. One option to achieve this is to secure funding. When financial
    aspects are taken care of acceptability increases. To gain contractor acceptability, the RFI Application in Odisha Works
    Department showed that they were able to gauge contractor interest by demonstrating that the system was designed
    to benefit the contractors. Demonstration of success is also important. Lot of activities has become e-tool based but in
    construction, there is not sufficient evidence that e-tools benefit.
       Risk of information overload from new systems has to be managed in e-tools implementation.
       Legality of online information – in most places where online systems are in place, there is no conflict of online
    information and their acceptability by AG. For example in Orissa, online information from the RFI application is
    accepted. Furthermore IT Act 2000 ensures that all electronic documents are deemed legal in a court of law.
       Connectivity and server capacity – for most systems depending on scale, location of server is not important.
       Scalability – it is important to look at scalability of systems for the long term
       Capacity Constraints – turn over or transfer of staff affects capacity building initiatives. Training is critical for
    engineers as well as contractors if external engagement is necessary. Karnataka Police Housing Corporation
    emphasized the importance of training and retraining engineers given their lack of familiarity with ICT. Similarly to
    engage contractors time for training and use of the system, these terms have to be incorporated to their contracts.

Lessons and Recommendations
   E-Tools can transform construction management and operations. For example, following the web-based project
    management system, the Karnataka Police Housing Corporation increased its operations to INR 60 million to 2200
    million. Similarly in BBMP, revenue doubled once the ICST system was in place. Similarly efficiency gains are evident
    from the RFI Application in Odisha Works Department where 18 steps were reduced to 4-5 steps such as that in
    motion, transportation, waiting etc.
   Pilot first and then scale up; for example in the system was developed part by part based on requirements and
    fitting modules in as the process developed. A gradual process helped to gauge the unfamiliarity of developers working
    in the construction industry and engineers adopting IT systems. Similarly, the RFI Application in Odisha Works
    Department relates to Works only, it can be upgraded in the future to include other aspects such as disputes. At the
    same time it is important to keep in mind integration from day one.
   While acceptability important at all levels including at the level of junior engineers, the agenda of reform or change has
    to be driven and prioritized at the top management level. Unless this is established, the project management and
    supervision teams will not have time or the interest to devote to reforms as day to day routine work will keep them
    occupied. It is also critical that strong planning is done for an initiative of this nature and to get organized as much as
    possible. One lesson from Kerala Water Supply Projects is that e-tool integration is prioritized from the very early stage
    when project proposals are developed these aspects are incorporated.
   COTS vs Bespoke – no finality in selection of COTS or bespoke tools but it is important first look for COTS and if
    available adopt COTS. Depending on the context, the most common path could be a hybrid solution.
   Build In House vs Outsource – it is better to outsource especially if in-house capacity is not there. In-house capacity
    can be mobilized to maintain and upgrade.
   Procurement is a key success factor for e-tools implementation. If the terms of reference and specifications are solid,
    the procurement process can be smooth and the room for disputes or conflict with contractors is small. Procurement
    capacity can be strengthened by taking the following steps
           i. Identify taskforce – young engineer can be engaged to identify the gaps and to work with IT and procurement
              teams to develop a strong scope of work
          ii. Hire IT consultants and or use existing procurement information and standards followed such as that on The
              World Bank website
         iii. Contact the agencies demonstrating the systems at the workshop today

   Participants endorsed the draft guidance note and there were no comments
   Participants suggested that a continued Technical Assistance from the World Bank in terms of availability of a IT
    consultants would be very helpful to implementing agencies who would like to pilot e-Tools in their
    projects/organization.

   Participants suggested DEA to make use of IT based supervision system mandatory while posing new projects to
    multilateral organizations.


All presentations of the workshop                  and    the    guidance      note    can    be    accessed      at
http://tscpl.com/?page_id=3901
