Report No: ACS8094



Republic of Peru
PE Poverty & Social Inclusion NLTA II
ACHIEVEMENTS SUMMARY FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014




March 2014




LCSPP
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Standard Disclaimer:
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.
Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work
promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                             2
             PERU POVERTY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION II (P146773)

                       NON-LENDING TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

                      ACHIEVEMENTS SUMMARY FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014

                                           1. Task summary

This Non-Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) is responding to requests by the National Statistical
Institute of Peru (INEI) and the Ministry of Social Inclusion (MIDIS) to provide technical assistance to
increase the government’s capacity to design, monitor and evaluate social policies aiming at reducing
poverty and improving social inclusion. The activities during this fiscal year (FY14) were organized
around two broad goals: (i) validating and improving poverty measurement conducted by INEI; (ii)
strengthening evidence-based decision making in MIDIS.

1st component: Validating and improving poverty measurement conducted by INEI

This work builds on several years of close collaboration with INEI and the Peruvian Poverty Committee.
The objective of this technical support is to strengthen INEI’s capacity to produce high qua lity
information for policy making in an open and transparent way. During FY14, responding to a request by
MIDIS and INEI, the NLTA has been providing technical assistance and advice to INEI about poverty
mapping. The poverty maps are estimated using household survey and census data that can produce
poverty rates at high levels of disaggregation. The information from the poverty maps is used by some
government agencies, including the Ministry of Finance and MIDIS, to guide resource allocations to
poorer districts. Thus, poverty maps are extremely relevant from an operational as well as a political
economy aspect. It is of no surprise that there is high interest to understand and validate the
assumptions underlying the estimation of the maps, the quality of the current estimations, as well as
providing advice on how often to update the series. The activities done this year ranged from
completing the technical validation of the existing poverty maps, present a proposal to the Poverty
Committee about the best way to estimate the maps, and opening a broader discussion about
targeting in Peru. This activity has increased INEI’s capacity to independently estimate poverty maps in
the future. In addition, this work has been contributing to MIDIS’s effort to develop a new targeting
algorithm for its social programs. Overall, this NLTA has facilitated a more informed and deeper
exchange between the Ministry of Finance, MIDIS and INEI, in the context of the Poverty Committee,
about the costs and benefits of alternative targeting formulas for different resource allocations and
programs in Peru.

2nd component: Strengthening evidence-based decision making in MIDIS

This component of the NLTA has the overall goal of improving the performance and impact of MIDIS-
led programs and policies though better M&E systems. The NLTA activities are a key part of a larger


                                                   3
package of assistance provided by the Bank to MIDIS, which includes the TAL and DPL. The work has
been done in close coordination with the HD team that is leading the operations.

The NLTA’s main counterpart is the General Directorate for Monitoring and Evaluation (DGSE) which is
in charge of the M&E activities in MIDIS. During FY14, the NLTA has supported a series of activities with
the more concrete objective of promoting the effective use of M&E information in the policy cycle. As
part of this work the team has contributed to: (i) the production of a mobile app to facilitate the use
and increased the transparency of MIDIS information; (ii) develop an logic framework for the M&E
activities in MIDIS focusing on bridging the gap between the producers (M&E team) and the users (the
social programs) of the evidence; (iii) producing analytical products on poverty and social inclusion to
serve as an instrument to motivate and influence policies in MIDIS and in Peru. The work has helped
organizing the way the DGSE operates and relates to the vice-ministry of social programs. In addition,
the activities have contributed to consolidate the DGSE within MIDIS, thus contributing to the
sustainability and functionality of MIDIS M&E system.

                                                2. FY14 achievements

2.1 Validating and improving poverty measurement conducted by INEI

2.1.1 The request and context

Since 2007, the World Bank team has been actively leading and supporting the work of the Peruvian
National External Advisory Committee (AC) whose role has been to: (i) discuss and recommend
methodologies to improve poverty measurement; (ii) support the work of an inter-institutional
technical team that implements the recommendations (composed by INEI, World Bank and others);
and (iii) build sustainability and country ownership of the poverty measurement methods and results.1

The AC model has been very successful in providing the space for dialogue and consensus building, just
in-time technical advice to INEI, and a new concept for quality control. Under the work of this
committee, many technical issues related to poverty measurement have been solved and Peru has re-
started publishing annual poverty estimates using a comparable methodology across time.

In FY12, MIDIS requested an assessment of the quality of the poverty maps done by INEI. The poverty
maps are estimated using household survey and census data that can produce poverty rates at the



1 The AC is composed by experts on poverty issues from the public sector (Ministry of Economics and Finance and Central
Bank), local academia (Universidad Catolica, Universidad del Pacifico, GRADE, Universidad San Martin), the French IRD, the
IADB and the World Bank. In addition, to the technical support, a key objective of this inter-institutional approach has been
to help INEI create an environment of openness and transparency in order to help to improve its credibility and relationship
with clients.



                                                             4
district level. As mentioned above, there is high interest to understand and validate the assumptions
underlying the estimation of the maps, the quality of the current estimations, as well as providing
advice on how often to update the series.

Based on that, at the end of FY12 the World Bank team proposed and integrated the poverty map work
under the AC activities to ensure the highest level of quality and transparency. During FY13, a technical
team from INEI, local academia, the IADB, and the World Bank reviewed the estimation process of the
poverty maps and performed a series of validations that could inform about: (i) the best way to apply
the methodology in the case of Peru; and (ii) the methodological soundness of updating the poverty
map using the same population census from 2007. This work was documented in a methodological
note completed in FY13.

2.1.2 Achievements during FY14

Methodological evaluation of the existing poverty maps was presented and discussed in the Peruvian
Advisory Committee. The technical team held several meetings to discuss the results of the validations
and presented the findings to the AC members. In December 2013, the team presented a summary of
the results to the AC and the main lessons learned for the future estimation of poverty maps (See Box
1 for summary of lessons and Annex 1 with the main power-point presentations in Spanish). The AC
agreed that the next step would be to start the work on a new poverty map implementing the
methodological suggestions.

The team did a technical assessment of the viability of updating the poverty map using SISFOH. One
of the suggestions of the AC was to update the poverty map using data collected by the Household
Targeting System (SISFOH). Since the objectives and field protocols of the SISFOH are different from a
National Census, it was unclear whether this idea would work. Thus, the Bank team responded rapidly
to this concern by estimating a preliminary version of a poverty map for 3 departments using data from
the ENAHO 2012 and the SISFOH. The analysis indicated that it was feasible to estimate a new map
using SISFOH and that the suggestion to move in this direction was worthwhile. (See Annex 2 for a
power-point presentation).

The work on poverty maps has been extremely relevant for a broader discussion on targeting of
social programs. The information from poverty maps produced by INEI is currently being used by the
Ministry of Finance for the allocation of the Oil Canon in some departments of Peru. Additionally, the
Ministry of Finance uses the poverty maps as one of the criteria to make some specific budget
modifications to favor the poorest local governments (D.S. Nº009-2012-EF). Moreover, MIDIS uses the
poverty maps to target some specific social programs and as one criteria to identify their main target
population (the population in process of inclusion). In the past few months, MIDIS has been evaluating
a new algorithm to target its social programs and, after the presentation of the work on poverty maps,
it is considering adding an updated poverty map for geographical targeting. Overall, the exchanges
between the AC and MIDIS have improved understanding the data requirements, assumptions, and
limitations of different targeting formulas, including poverty maps. The team has been helping to
connect the discussions about poverty maps within the AC and MIDIS’ new algorithm.
                                                   5
Box 1. Main technical lessons from the validation of the poverty maps estimated by INEI

The poverty maps estimated in Peru for 2007 and 2009 follow the methodology developed by Elbers, Lanjouw
and Lanjouw (Econometrica, 2003).2 The poverty map methodology estimates a consumption model using
household survey data and then uses that model to impute consumption in the census data. This allows
estimating measures of poverty and inequality at low geographic levels using all the observations from the
census. In Peru, the poverty maps were estimated using the 2007 National Census and the 2007 and 2009
National Household Surveys (ENAHO). During FY13, a team from INEI, local academia, the IADB and the World
Bank conducted a series of analytical pieces to evaluate the quality of the poverty maps estimated in 2007 and
2009. Next, we summarize the main technical lessons learnt from the work.

Continuing to update the map using the 2007 census may not the best strategy. Given the large development
changes observed in Peru in the last years, the 2007 Census information is becoming less comparable with more
recent information collected by the National Survey (ENAHO). Updating the poverty map using data from SISFOH
which were collected more recently, may prove a better strategy.

The next poverty map should group small districts in population to estimate more reliable and stable district
level poverty rates. The experience estimating poverty maps recommends presenting estimations for
geographic areas with at least 1,000 households since the error of the estimation can be large for smaller areas.
In the case of Peru the map is being estimated at the district level, however, approximately half of the districts
have fewer than 1,000 households. This fact may also contribute to reducing the stability of the poverty rates
estimated across time.

The poverty maps should include a cluster level error in the consumption models. The estimation of the 2009
poverty map did not model a cluster level effect for 16 out of 25 consumption models. The validation showed
that excluding the cluster level effect was underestimating the standard errors of the poverty rates for some
areas.

Department level modelling seems appropriate. The current poverty maps estimate models at the department
level. One of the validations compared the results of estimating consumption models for larger geographic
regions but separating by urban and rural areas. The results indicate that the department level models perform
better.




2Elbers, C., J. Lanjouw, and P. Lanjouw (2003), “Micro-Level Estimation of Poverty and Inequality,” Econometrica
71:1, 355–364



                                                        6
2.1.3 Next steps and additional requests

The Bank team will continue supporting the poverty map work with INEI in the context of the AC.
During the next months, INEI is planning to conduct a survey to government agencies on the uses of
the poverty maps or similar instruments for targeting resources and/or guiding policies. The Bank team
will help analyze those data and disseminate the findings. This information will contribute to the
debate about the value of targeting and potential tools to do this in Peru. The team is planning to write
a note with the lessons learnt from Peru to share this experience with other countries and within the
Bank.

In addition, INEI has requested support to standardize existing microdata documentation systems to
improve the usability of the databases and information collected. Second, the team was asked to
strengthen INEI’s current Application Programming Interface (API) platform to improve accessibility
and user experience. This technology, similar to the one the World Bank uses under its Open Data
Access initiative, allows full flexibility by the user on how data and information are accessed and
visualized. The feasibility to do so using an easy, unique, interactive system in real time could introduce
large efficiency gains on how information is processed and flows from INEI to the rest of the GoP and
external users. Peru is one of few developing countries that are pursuing this agenda, and as such, this
work will also provide key lessons on how to adopt this technology in similar settings elsewhere.

Finally, the team will also provide technical guidance to INEI in its process of revising and improving the
coverage, quality and timeliness of its vital statistics. Moreover, the team will help conduct pilots and
analyses related to testing new household survey modules to measure food consumed outside of the
home. These activities will also aim to strengthen INEI’s statistical capacity and quality of poverty
measurement. A Trust Fund for statistical capacity has been secured to support part of this work since
FY12.




                                                    7
2.2 Operationalizing evidence-based decision making in MIDIS

This pillar of the NLTA is part of a comprehensive package of assistance provided to MIDIS by the
World Bank to support their information and monitoring and evaluation systems. During FY14,
responding to specific requests from MIDIS, the NLTA provided support in several areas ranging from
strengthening capacity on monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to analytical products to inform policy.

2.2.1 Producing a logic framework to evaluate MIDIS M&E activities

One common mistake of the M&E systems is to assume that the systems have an intrinsic value. In
reality, the information generated by the system is only valuable if it is broadly used. The typical
institutional arrangements for evaluation observed in LAC consist on generating evidence about the
impact of policies and programs, and share that evidence with the policy makers responsible for the
implementation of the policies and programs. Under this arrangement, the efforts of the evaluation
area are concentrated in generating evidence and putting that evidence on the hands of the decision-
makers. However, in many cases, the operative units do not have the technical capacity, the human
resources, the time, or the incentives to use the evidence in a concrete and practical way. Thus, the
results from the evaluations are not used as they should to improve the policies and programs.

The General Directorate for Monitoring and Evaluation (DGSE) of MIDIS has been trying to incorporate
a series of additional elements to improve the traditional approach. During FY14, the NTLA has
supported the DGSE to develop its logic framework. Under this new framework, the operations of the
DGSE have three goals: (i) producing evidence and monitoring performance of programs; (ii)
management of the evidence and early warning systems about performance; and (iii) use of the
evidence and information produced by the M&E system. The first goal corresponds to the traditional
approach observed in many countries. The innovation is adding the management and use of the
evidence and part of the activities of the DGSE. Importantly, the DGSE will be evaluated based of the
achievement of the three goals. This creates incentives for the unit to work with the programs and
policy-makers to develop an improvement plan that is clear, concrete, and valuable for increasing the
final impact of the programs. In addition, the DGSE will develop mechanisms to measure the impact of
the improvement plans that feedback the policy cycle.

During FY14, the logic framework to evaluate the DGSE M&E activities was completed. The Bank
team contributed to this activity by providing guidance in the development of the logical framework
with clear monitoring indicators. In addition, the Bank collaborated to develop the strategy for the
M&E of the indicators, defining roles and responsibilities for M&E and the sources of information
(Annex 3 includes the logic framework prepared by MIDIS with the support of the Bank).

2.2.2 Developing strategies for the use of the evidence produced by M&E systems

The DGSE new logic framework highlights the efforts of MIDIS to address the typical missing link in the
policy cycle of feeding M&E back into policy and program planning and decision-making. MIDIS seeks
to bridge this divide through the “management of evidence” (gestión de evidencia), where the
                                                  8
information produced through their M&E system (particularly with regards to evaluations) are
prepared in more digestible forms for program and policy decision-makers and the DGSE accompanies
the process to support their implementation. More specifically, a special sub-unit on management of
evidence in the DGSE intends to take the recommendations identified through the evaluations and
translate them into more feasible action items given the political, operational and financial contexts of
the programs. This would form the basis for an improvement plan defined jointly between the
programs and the DGSE, which would also identify necessary financial and technical resources to
support these improvements.

During FY14, the team started to work on the first pilot of the management of the evidence. The
team has been helping MIDIS to develop the standards and protocols for the management of evidence.
In particular, MIDIS intends to use planned evaluations to serve as a pilot for the application of the
management of the evidence. The objective of the pilots is to explore ways to operationalize this
activity and develop some guidelines on how to work with the programs. During FY14, the team
worked with MIDIS in preparing a pilot for Pension 65 using information from a recently produced
qualitative evaluation of the program. The team has provided guidance through the process to review
the results of the qualitative evaluation and identify action items for the improvement plans. The team
is currently working on preparing strategies to accompany the implementation and oversight of the
improvement plans, and measure the impact of the recommendations (Annex 4 includes material
prepared as part of this activity).

During FY14, the Bank team organized a workshop with the Behavioral Insights Team from U.K. to
inform the management of evidence. Incorporating behavioral insights into policy can be extremely
valuable in some cases where psychological biases cause people to make choices that seem contrary to
their best interests. For example, psychological factors, such as high levels of stress or lack of self-
efficacy and aspirations create barriers to taking full advantage of a wide range of social programs,
designed under the assumption that beneficiaries act rationally in the context of complete information.
Recent experimental evidence from Nicaragua suggests that boosting beneficiaries’ aspirations may
double the impacts of a productive grant on household incomes (Macours and Vakis, 2009).3 This idea
has gained significant traction in developed countries such as the U.K. where the Prime Minister Office
has a specially created a unit to work on this, the Behavioral Insights Team (BIT). That team has found
positive impacts of incorporating behavioral nudges into ongoing policies in the areas of taxes, health,
energy, etc. The DSGE from MIDIS expressed interest in exploring these ideas as part of the
management of evidence efforts. The DGSE believes that within some of MIDIS programs, such as the
CCT Juntos or Pension 65, behavioral biases could be important. During FY14, the Bank team invited
the senior policy advisor of the BIT from U.K. to a one-day workshop with MIDIS in Peru. This allowed
MIDIS to understand BIT’s work in the U.K. and discuss the relevance and challenges of pursuing
something similar in Peru.


3 Macours, Karen and Vakis, Renos, 2009. "Changing households' investments and aspirations through social
interactions: evidence from a randomized transfer program," Policy Research Working Paper Series 5137, The
World Bank.

                                                    9
During FY14, the Bank team facilitated the exchange ideas on the management of evidence. The
team from MIDIS was invited to co-host the IX Conference of the Monitoring & Evaluation Network of
Latin America and the Caribbean, which took place in Lima, Peru from December 2-4, 2013.4 MIDIS,
with the support of the Bank team, organized the second day of the conference centered on the Use of
Evidence. During that day invited speakers (from the U.S. Government Accountability Office, JPAL-LAC,
the U.K. BIT, and renowned M&E expert Michael Bamberger) presented the progress and challenges in
this area. In addition, MIDIS shared their experience so far in institutionalizing the management of
evidence with other government officials, practitioners, and academics from Peru and many countries
in LAC. As a result of MIDIS’ presentation in the conference, the World Bank Series Nuts & Bolts of
M&E Systems5 invited MIDIS to write a piece on this experience. The note will be completed in a couple
of months.

2.2.3 Offering tools to increase the use and transparency of information

Reliable and quality information is fundamental to the success of any M&E system. MIDIS faces unique
information challenges as it intends to provide M&E of policies and programs. This will involve the
strengthening and integration of existing databases and the technological solutions for their
communication and interfaces for different users, including policy makers, M&E technocrats, and
program operators. The issues related to information systems of policies and programs are largely
addressed through the TAL. As such, the NLTA has focused on areas requiring more immediate
attention, in particular, the development of apps for the dissemination of basic information and
specific technical requests.

During FY14, the beta version of the MIDIS mobile app was completed. The Bank team has provided
support for the development of a user-friendly, widely accessible app to readily provide basic
information on MIDIS programs, such as budgets, beneficiaries, and socio-economic data produced by
INEI. The main users of the app so far are MIDIS officials who want to access to the information while
they are in the field or in their daily activities. The expectation is that this app could be expanded with



4
 This regional conference has been supported by the World Bank (WB) and the Latin America and Caribbean
Community of Practice on Managing for Development Results (CoPLAC-GpRD) of the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) since 2005, together with a growing group of countries in the Latin American and
Caribbean region. The forum promotes the exchange of experiences, and tools and innovative approaches for
M&E at the national, sectoral and sub-national levels. The REDLACME is an instrument that facilitates the
regional dialogue around M&E issues among interested parties, such as academics, public servants, and
practitioners throughout Latin America and the Caribbean and beyond.
5
  The objective of the series is to increase knowledge about M&E systems through a regular series of papers
focusing on the design, implementation and use of M&E information by governments and civil society based on
best practice experiences.

                                                    10
the development of MIDIS information systems, particularly with the monitoring dashboards currently
under development in the DGSE.

The development of the app has helped MIDIS to organize the information to be presented and develop
a system to keep the information updated. Importantly, as part of the work, the team brought together
staff from INEI and MIDIS to develop the application in a coordinated fashion and exploit synergies.
Another successful result of this process is that MIDIS agreed with INEI to start uploading data directly
from INEI’s web service instead of loading the data manually. This will dramatically improve data
sharing between the two institutions and will make updating of the data far more efficient (Annex 5
includes a presentation describing the app in Spanish).

Overall, the app serves as a tool to increase transparency and accessibility of already existing
information. The next phase of this work is to develop a more interactive app where beneficiaries
could also receive information or provide feedback. In addition, within this work, MIDIS has expressed
interest in exploring the possibility in moving towards Open Data.


Box 2. The MIDIS mobile app


                                    The beta version in Android of the MIDIS mobile app presents
                                    information about MIDIS’ programs and INEI’s socio-economic
                                    indicators at different geographic levels and across time. The
                                    users are able to do specific data queries, and display indicators
                                    in tables, charts or maps. The application has been developed so
                                    that it can be used without Internet access and receive regular
                                    updates when connected to the Internet.

                                    The experience and lessons learnt from this process will be
                                    shared with other government agencies in an effort to promote
                                    the usability of the information collected by INEI and MIDIS and
                                    highlight innovative ways to share that information and receive
                                    feedback about government programs and policies.

                                    The app is available for download in Google Play.




                                                   11
2.2.4 Producing analytical and media products on poverty and social inclusion

One of MIDIS’ challenges is to ensure that its social inclusion policies are relevant and effective. For
that purpose, MIDIS requested support in both producing and sharing evidence on social inclusion
issues in Peru. As part of this NLTA, during FY14, the team worked on a series of analytical products on
poverty and social inclusion to inform MIDIS’ policy agenda and a media campaign on agency as part of
MIDIS’ gender strategy.

During FY14, the Bank team produced an updated poverty and shared prosperity note. In the context
of the new World Bank’s twin goals and in order for MIDIS to assess the progress and the pending
issues on social inclusion, it is important to have a clear understanding of the recent trends in poverty
and inequality in Peru. The recently published poverty series by INEI provides an opportunity to do so.
The objective of the poverty and shared prosperity note for Peru will be to describe the key trends in
poverty and shared prosperity and highlight some of the factors that could be driving the observed
patterns. In addition, the note highlights the key challenges ahead for Peru in terms of social inclusion.
The ultimate goal of the note is to serve as an instrument to motivate and influence the poverty
debate in Peru and help MIDIS prioritize its social inclusion policies. The Bank team has already
completed a first draft of the note and plans to finalize the note by May, 2014.

During FY14, the team produced a descriptive analysis of the spatial correlates of chronic poverty in
Peru. In the last few months, the team has been producing a note describing the factors associated
with the persistence of poverty in Peru using poverty maps. This analysis complements the poverty
note and will also support MIDIS’ agenda on social inclusion by showing the geographic areas that are
still lagging behind, highlighting the factors that may be driving the slow progress, and suggesting
potential policies that could help those areas to converge. This work is also part of the Regional Study
on Chronic Poverty leaded by LCSPP and will be completed by June, 2014 (Annex 6 includes a
preliminary power point presentation).

The production of a media campaign on agency as part of MIDIS gender strategy is underway.
“Pequenas historias para aprender a ser gigantes” is an information campaign designed jointly with
MIDIS to use behavioral economics insights to improve the effectiveness of its social programs,
through carefully crafted stories about actual beneficiaries of social programs in Peru. The campaign
promotes messages and policy lessons aimed at lifting psychological constraints on taking full
advantage of the programs. The campaign is aimed at several audiences: beneficiaries, broader
community, and policy makers. The campaign is generally focused on the message that small nudges,
within reach of each type of audience, may trigger big changes. For beneficiaries, greater aspirations
may help achieve their goals. For the community, greater acceptance of those infected with TB may
help lower TB transmission rates through facilitating treatment. For policy makers, small intelligent
tweaks in the policy programs may significantly increase their effectiveness.




                                                   12
There is substantive evidence that small nudges in development programs may trigger big impacts (see
Datta and Mullainathan, 2012).6 A recent study in Peru (Perova and Vakis, 2013)7, based on
quantitative and qualitative work with three social programs (CCT program Juntos, financial literacy
program Corredor Puno Cusco and socio-economic intervention to reduce TB) is consistent with this
evidence: lack of self-efficacy and belief in own ability to learn new skills interferes with take-up of
financial literacy programs. Depression is a strong contributing factor to a success of a TB treatment
program. Community ostracism imposes a heavy psychological tax on the beneficiaries of the flagship
Juntos program. In a way consistent with behavioral economics theory, these psychological constraints
may be reducing effectiveness of the social programs.

Building on this work, the information campaign illustrates these policy lessons with the stories of
concrete beneficiaries. The campaign aims to trigger behavioral changes through inspirational stories
of real people, relying on insights from behavioral economics. Importantly, information campaign is
developed to complement and work in tandem with current MIDIS programs (e.g. the CCT Juntos),
fostering behavioral changes that are likely to increase their effectiveness.

During FY14, the strategy and main messages for the media campaign on agency have been
finalized. The Bank team has been working on producing a message that communicates in an easy but
clear way the stories and the concepts. The Bank and MIDIS teams have been working very closely with
the artistic directors of the campaign to make sure they understand the concepts we want to
communicate. In FY14, the team completed the campaign strategy and did several field visits with the
artistic directors to prepare the work. The production of the scripts is currently underway. The
production of the campaign is being funded by LCSPP Gender Mainstreaming work.


2.2.5 Next steps

During the next months, the team plans to continue the support MIDIS in the activities described
above. A mission at the end of March with the new minister of MIDIS will discuss priorities and new
requests in the contexts of the overall package of Bank assistance.

In addition, the findings from the poverty note and the analysis on chronic poverty will be
disseminated to technical and policy oriented audiences within the Bank and in Peru to local
stakeholders (policymakers, government officials, academics, think-tanks, civil society, etc.). Some of
the analyses will be also disseminated as part of the Regional Study on Chronic Poverty which plans a
study tour, where team members would travel to selected countries in the region to present the study
and consult with stakeholders on their views about the questions being asked.

6
  Saugato Datta and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2012. "Behavioral Design: A New Approach to Development
Policy." CGD Policy Paper 016. Washington DC: Center for Global Development
7
  Elizaveta Perova and Renos Vakis, 2013. “Improving Gender and Development Outcomes through Agency:
Policy Lessons from three Peruvian Experiences.” Washington DC.

                                                  13
