Report No: ACS8929



Republic of India
Knowledge forum showcasing best practices in
sanitation
What works at scale?
Distilling the critical success factors for scaling up rural sanitation


27th May, 2014




TWISA
SOUTH ASIA
  Standard Disclaimer:


  This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
  interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank
  or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
  colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
  concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


  Copyright Statement:


  The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
  violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
  work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

  For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance
  Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

  All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
  1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




2|Page
                      What works at scale?
     Distilling the critical success factors for
             scaling up rural sanitation

                     Proceedings of the Knowledge Sharing Forum
                             February 2014, Jaipur India
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in collaboration with the World Bank Water
                               and Sanitation Program

                                    May 27, 2014




3|Page
Table of Contents

Contents
Table of Contents............................................................................................................................................................... 4

Executive summary .......................................................................................................................................................... 5

Introduction......................................................................................................................................................................... 7

KEY THEME 1: Demand creation and behavior change communication .................................................. 9
KEY THEME 2: Supply chain supports demand.................................................................................................12
    Convergence and financing...............................................................................................................................14
KEY THEME 3: Systematic implementation: What local governments do ...........................................15
    Example of a local program strategy for sanitation ...............................................................................16
    Capacity building ..................................................................................................................................................18
    Monitoring ...............................................................................................................................................................19
KEY THEME 4: Strong institutions provide an enabling environment ...................................................20
  Promotion of leadership at local levels .............................................................................................................20
  Institutional structure in support of the community ..................................................................................21

The challenge ahead .......................................................................................................................................................23

ANNEX 1: Summary of Participant Evaluations .................................................................................................24
ANNEX 2: Participants Knowledge Forum ...........................................................................................................26
ANNEX 2: Program of the Rural Sanitation Knowledge Sharing Forum ................................................32




4|Page
Executive summary
The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India, in collaboration with the Water and
Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank, assembled policy makers, scholars and practitioners from
12 Indian States and 6 countries in Asia and Africa in Jaipur, India, for the Knowledge Sharing Forum
entitled What works at scale? Distilling critical success factors for scaling up rural sanitation. Based on 34
presentations, breakout group discussions and final deliberations, the participants analyzed in detail
many issues, including robust implementation and sustained outcomes at scale, that are critical for
achieving success in sanitation programs.. International experience and good practice in India has shown
how success can be achieved. The key to a rapid transition in rural sanitation involves people committing
to learn from this experience and adapting it to the particular circumstances of all the 600-plus districts
in India.

The Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) – Clean India Campaign – focuses on a comprehensive program to
ensure the sustained use of safe sanitation facilities in rural areas, eliminating the practice of open
defecation and ensuring a clean environment. The NBA experience has shown that without the
motivation for safe sanitation, facilities will not be used with any degree of consistency. Demand creation
must therefore take precedence over physical implementation and new practices must be sustained after
construction. The focus is not on individual households but on groups of people at the habitation, village,
community (Panchayat) levels who can work together, supporting each other to achieve long term open
defecation-free status. Once the demand is created, a strong supply chain must be in place to ensure a
rapid response.

A consensus emerged at the Forum that achieving the desired results depends on strong commitment by
all the States and Districts to empower communities to take a leadership role in the transition to open
defecation-free and clean environment status. Two other strategic elements were identified at the Forum
for scaling up sanitation throughout the country: a strong enabling environment with clear and
systematic strategies and the creation of institutional structures dedicated solely to sanitation, especially
at the district and block levels. It was agreed, for example, that the enabling environment definitely
needed to include capacity building and effective and timely monitoring at all levels. It was also vital to
ensure convergence between different programs.

This report summarizes the Forum discussions under 4 thematic headings, summarized as follows:

Theme 1: Demand creation and behavior change communication
    Initial demand creation for safe sanitation must precede physical implementation, through
     activities such as triggering and participatory rural appraisal (PRA). Both triggering and PRA
     help community members to reflect on and understand their own sanitation situations, leading to
     a desire for change and commitment. Behavioral change communication focuses on the whole
     community rather than on individual households.
    The themes around which interpersonal communication takes place are different for men and
     women, young and old ('segmentation'). The messages may, for example, focus on dignity, safety,
     upward mobility, privacy (particularly for women) and costs (particularly for men).
    To support behavioral change communication, the National Sanitation, Hygiene, Advocacy and
     Communication Strategy (SHACS) is being rolled out to encourage States and districts to plan and
     execute their own strategies.
    IEC 1 combines optimal interpersonal communication and the media. Interpersonal
     communication is most effective for encouraging new behaviors and practices and must proceed
     on a continuing basis and not be restricted to a one-off activity.
    Initial demand after triggering must be maintained and transformed rapidly into safe sanitation
     facilities to be used and maintained on a consistent basis. This transformation can be achieved


1     Information, Education, Communication

5|Page
       through continuous interpersonal communication, dynamic local leadership, a strong supply
       chain, close monitoring, etc.
      Support for sustained new behaviors should continue after the construction phase. This may
       involve a greater focus on hygiene promotion and practices such as handwashing, disposal of
       young children´s feces and toilet maintenance.
      The National and State Award Programs are effective in boosting sanitation scaling up. These
       programs have been expanded in many States to target schools, habitations, Panchayats, blocks,
       districts and so on.

Theme 2: Supply chain to support demand
    The supply chain should provide easy access to affordable materials of adequate quality and good
     construction know-how and services.
    A wide range of technology and design options (not just a single model) should be available that
     reflect consumer demand. These options should be accessible to poorer families as well as to
     households wishing to improve their own facilities and move up the sanitation ladder.
    Greater efforts are needed to ensure access by rural Panchayats to materials and products from
     government-assisted schemes, private suppliers or rural sanitation marts.
    Convergence of the financial resources of MGNREGA and NBA has been successful in some
     districts. Behavioral change communication and demand creation for each program must
     however precede construction to ensure that facilities and services are used as intended.

Theme 3: Systematic implementation: what local governments do
    Systematic program implementation is the key to sustained behavior change. A 6-step roadmap
     for a sanitation campaign in a hamlet, village or Panchayat could consist of the following: (1)
     preparation and commitment by the Panchayat or VWSC and community institutions; (2)
     motivation through triggering or PRA activities; (3) immediate mobilization through all groups
     and follow-up through interpersonal communication; (4) provision of financial incentives,
     construction; (5) post-construction sustainability of household sanitation; (6) solid and liquid
     waste management.
    Large-scale mobilization within the community to include local government and most local
     groups, with the collaboration of trained field workers.
    High priority needs to be given to ensuring that capacity building continues at all levels. Many
     examples of skills upgrading have been identified (through training, workshops, field visits, on-
     the-job support and mentoring).
    Accurate monitoring is needed of toilet use and maintenance, construction quality, program
     implementation, and financial arrangements. Monitoring should aim to improve on-going
     programs whenever necessary. Many examples were described at the Forum of internal (i.e. from
     within the community) and external monitoring by outsiders unconnected to the local sanitation
     program.

Theme 4: Strong institutions and an enabling environment
    Committed leadership at all levels is the key to successful scaling up, together with empowering
     policies at State level with operational, financial and convergence guidelines.
    Efforts for community-led sanitation call for a professionally-qualified support system at the
     district and block levels, with teams solely responsible for progressing sanitation measures by
     supporting triggering, PRA, capacity-building, monitoring and “handholding” wherever required.
    Good program management is needed, with rapid and accurate monitoring, as well as oversight
     of financial transfers to households and community award systems.
    Monetary and non-monetary support for staff is also required since volunteers cannot be
     expected to work long-term for free on a committed and productive basis. Adequate wages/fees
     and individual output-based incentive systems (for achieving ODF) are needed for staff and field
     workers, as well as transportation facilities.


6|Page
Introduction
In February 2014, the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India, in collaboration
with the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank, brought together policy makers,
scholars and practitioners in Jaipur, India, for the Knowledge Sharing Forum entitled What works at
scale? Distilling critical success factors for scaling up rural sanitation2. The Forum participants reviewed
the conditions required for successful sanitation programs and strategies that could lead to sound
implementation of such programs and strategies in their own States and/or countries. Participants from
within India came from State and District sanitation programs, international organizations, NGOs and the
private sector. The Forum also benefited from international experience, with strategic inputs provided
by key resource people from Bangladesh, Cambodia, Indonesia, Tanzania, Thailand and Uganda. Prior to
the formal sessions, international participants were able to visit two districts in Rajasthan to observe
sanitation campaigns which had resulted in open defecation-free status.

The Forum was inaugurated by Mr. Shreemat Pandey, Principal Secretary of the Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj Department, Rajasthan. Mr Pandey commented that providing financial support toilet
construction had not been particularly successful in view of people´s lack of motivation and low
demand. The key challenge was how to bring about behavioral change.

An overview of progress in rural sanitation was presented by Mr. Sujoy Majumdar, Director (Sanitation)
in the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India. He was joined by Ms. Smita Misra,
Lead Water & Sanitation Specialist, World Bank, and Mr. Joep Verhagen, Senior Water and Sanitation
Specialist, WSP. In his overview of the Government’s Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan-NBA (Clean India
Campaign), Mr Majumdar emphasized that the greatest challenge is triggering and sustaining behavioral
change to put an end to open defecation and achieve total sanitation throughout India. He went on to
argue that one of the keys to success is to mobilize political will as a prelude to creating an enabling
environment in support of systematic program implementation. A second requirement is to have
manpower dedicated specifically to implementing sanitation initiatives. Recent Indian Government
initiatives in the NBA included more emphasis on communication and information, education,
communication (IEC) through the new Sanitation Advocacy and Hygiene Communication Strategy
(SHACS), and the intensive efforts currently being made by State and District planning authorities to
improve capacity building. Emphasis is also being given to monitoring, with more manpower input, and
will include monitoring of usage and sustainability of toilets through an upgraded Management
Information System. This would, he said, benefit in future from enhanced manpower input. Finally, the
Director noted that greater focus is needed on hygiene promotion and the supply chain, given that a
weak supply chain is likely to affect post-construction support and the maintenance of facilities.

Ms. Smita Misra described some of the lessons learned from 12 on-going/closed World Bank-supported
projects in eleven States. She observed that Panchayats/communities needed to play a central role in the
planning and implementation of sanitation works and reforms. Empowering communities and
improving institutional models means that a range of professional support services is needed. World
Bank-supported projects has contributed to scaling up, through the use of State Award Programs and
the monitoring of ODF employing innovative mobilizing techniques (participatory health
communication, 'healthy home' hygiene surveys, etc). Many local governments had been assisted in this
way and had gone on to win national and State awards. Joep Verhagen completed the overview by
stressing the importance of leadership by national and State governments and the need to ensure
ownership of sanitation reforms by local governments. Scaling up requires an enabling environment
characterized by supportive policies, capacity development, supply chain products and systematic
implementation.


2   Rural Sanitation Knowledge Sharing Forum. “What works at scale? Distilling the critical success factors for scaling up rural
    sanitation”. The forum was organized by the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) of the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
    and the WSP. 5-7 February 2014, Jaipur, India.

7|Page
The program of the Forum, over two and a half days, included 34 presentations which provided
substantial material for plenary and breakout group discussions. The latter provided ample opportunity
for reflecting on lessons learned and the challenges and main elements needed for successfully scaling
up rural sanitation programs. The key points arising from the presentations and discussions are
described below. Our report focuses especially on the strategies and specific implementation activities
vital to scaling up sanitation. See Annex 1 for a summary evaluation by Forum participants. The agenda is
at Annex 2.

Background
Between 1990 and 2010 South Asian countries witnessed over 100 million people emerging from
extreme poverty. Nevertheless, by 2010, 70% of the region´s rural population still lacked access to
improved sanitation.3 For India, the largest country in South Asia, the 2011 census revealed that only
31% of rural households had access to a latrine, compared to an international average of 47%. India
ranked 156th out of 189 countries in terms of rural sanitation coverage4. By 2012, the most recent year
for which international comparative data is available, it was estimated that 597 million Indians practice
open defecation. Substantial progress is however being made in exploring and implementing creative
solutions for broadening access to sanitation beyond straightforward hardware provision. The aim now
is to focus on safe sanitation behaviors.

In 2012 the Government of India revamped its rural sanitation program, renaming it 'Nirmal Bharat
Abhiyan' (NBA)- Clean India Campaign - a comprehensive program aimed at ensuring sanitation facilities
and a clean environment in rural areas by eliminating the practice of open defecation. The Nirmal Gram
Puraskar (Clean Village Prize), is also being implemented as a competitive incentive for communities to
eradicate open defecation and change their sanitation status. Current NBA sanitation reforms focus on:
    • An intensive community planning approach designed to create sustained open defecation-free
        communities;
    • Joint implementation of sanitation and water schemes;
    • Capacity building, communication and independent monitoring;
    • Convergence of programs to support sanitation initiatives;
    • Solid and liquid waste management in communities (SLWM).

Financial incentives for the provision of labor and materials have also been scaled up. These, depending
on the source of funding, amount to 9,100-10,000 Indian rupees (INR) (approx. US$149 - US$165) per
household toilet, financed through the NBA and State programs and under the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA). NBA program resources are also available for IEC, solid
and liquid waste management, administration, educational institutions, sanitation supply centers and
sanitary complexes. There is no shortage of resources. The main challenge is to implement effective and
sustainable sanitation throughout the country.

A consensus emerged during the Forum that infrastructure alone does not lead to sustained sanitation
practices. In other words, construction of a toilet does not necessarily mean it will be used if
motivation/demand is lacking. To shift from a construction or supply-driven focus to a demand-driven
approach implies that it can not be a 'business as usual' program.,

 Forum participants identified 4 key themes as priority areas for policy makers and other practitioners
aiming to achieve the desired outcomes: (1) demand and communication; (2) a supply chain for
sanitation; (3) systematic implementation, including monitoring and capacity building; and (4) an
institutional framework and enabling environment for undertaking local sanitation campaigns. The four

3   World Bank Poverty Data, Regional Dashboard. http://povertydata.worldbank.org/poverty/region/SAS.          Data for
    Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
4   Census of India 2011. Availability and type of latrine 2001-2011. http://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011census
    WHO & UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program (2014). Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitatoin: 2014 update.
    http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP_report_2014_webEng.pdf This monitoring program
    collects information through national household sampling surveys.

8|Page
themes are expanded below on the basis of the Forum presentations, plenary discussions and the views
emerging from the various breakout groups.


KEY THEME 1: Demand creation and behavior change communication
    Critical issues identified for scaling up:
         Demand creation for safe sanitation, through activities such as triggering or
             participatory rural appraisal, must be in place before physical implementation.
         Support for sustained new behaviors need to continue after construction.
         Behavioral change communication to focus on the whole community, in addition to
             individual households.
         IEC combines interpersonal communication and media in an optimal way on the basis of
             SHACS.
         Different motivational messages should target women, men, children, adolescents
             ('segmentation').


Participants at the Jaipur Forum agreed that demand creation and behavior change are key to successful
sanitation programming. Demand for sanitation implies that people wish to own, maintain and use a
facility (such as a toilet), to make use of a community service (such as solid waste disposal), or to
practice a particular behavior (such as handwashing with soap). Behavioral change means that people
will use and sustain the new sanitation and hygiene practices. Experience has shown that, in the absence
of motivation for safe sanitation, the facilities will not be consistently used. One study indicated that a
large proportion of the rural population is aware of the importance of using toilets, implying that the key
challenge is behavioral change to shift from awareness to practice.5 Demand creation thus cannot be
delayed until after construction of facilities. Safe sanitation motivation and demand must precede
physical implementation, and support must be provided for sustaining the new practices after
construction is completed.

Several methods, with elements in common, are used to increase demand and stimulate new sanitation
practices. The successful programs 6 presented at the Forum tended to focus not on individual
households, but rather on groups of people at the habitation, village, community (Panchayat) levels in
the quest for open defecation-free status. By mobilizing the community as a whole, these programs
benefit from the powerful group processes involved in modifying behaviors, as well as from the mutual
support mechanisms advocating sustained open defecation-free status.

In several Indian States group processes begin with triggering for collective behavioral change. In three
districts in Rajasthan, for example, district resource groups (mobilizers and trainers) undertake group
triggering activities in villages over periods of between 2 to 5 days. The resource groups are careful to
play down the availability of incentive payments and stress that subsidies are not forthcoming pending
construction. In short “We don’t talk about toilets or incentives. We talk about open defecation.”7




5    Presentation by Jithmathra Thathachari (A market-led, evidence-based approach to rural sanitation) at the Knowledge
     Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
6    See the case studies in the Forum’s program (Annex 2) from districts in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Harayana Himachal Pradesh,
     Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Uttarachand as well as Bangladesh, Cambodia,
     Indonesia, Thailand, Uganda and Vietnam.
7    Presentations by Arti Dogra (Banko Bikano: Community-led sanitation campaign in Bikaner): Rohit Gupta (Community-led
     sanitation campaign based on initiatives in Jhalawar and Churu): Anandhi (Institutional strengthening for rural sanitation-
     Bundi District) from the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.

9|Page
Triggering involves stimulating a collective sense of aversion or disgust about widespread open
defecation and its negative impacts on the entire community, before moving on to identifying positive
solutions. Community activities include defecation area 'transect walks', mapping of defecation areas,
identifying and experiencing pathways of fecal contamination, individual commitments and the
preparation of an action plan.8 Given that some people in the community continue to resist the concept
                   Per cent (%)




                                  Source: WSP (2013)




            Figure 1 : Comparing District scores for Behavioral Change Communication (BCC) in
            56 districts

of open defecation being shameful and disgusting it is vital for the resource groups to emphasize the
pride and dignity associated with living in an ODF community.

In Uttarakhand, using a somewhat different approach, trained facilitators work with community groups
by using participatory rural appraisal (PRA) tools. Personal, domestic hygiene and environmental
sanitation indicators are developed. PRA includes in-depth involvement with a large number of
community members with a view to obtaining appropriate data to reflect the community´s day-to-day
reality. This involves inter alia 'healthy home' surveys and confidential balloting. The PRA, as with the
triggering approach, focuses on community-wide discussion, hopefully leading to the preparation of an
action plan and target-setting.9 A WSP study in India (Figure 1) reveals that these successful approaches
concentrate on collective demand creation and behavior change by mobilizing a large segment of the
community to engage in a process of collective planning assisted by skilled facilitators.10

Successful sanitation programs embrace a number of themes or basic messages around which
interpersonal communication is built. The themes raised at the Forum included: attractiveness of the
village, women and children´s safety, respect, convenience, privacy, menstrual hygiene, in-law visits, fear

8  Kar, Kamal and Robert Chambers (2008) Handbook on community-led total sanitation. Plan & IDS, UK. 91 pp
   http://www.who.int/management/community/overall/HandbookCommunityLedTotalSanitation.pdf
9 Presentation by Sowjanya (Conjoint approach to water & sanitation in the State of Uttarakhand) from the Knowledge Sharing
   Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
10 Presentation by M. Kullappa (Sanitation interventions vis-à-vis scaling and sustainability) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in
   Jaipur and WSP (2013) Linking service delivery processes and outcomes in rural sanitation: findings from 56 districts in India.,
   New Delhi, page 30.

10 | P a g e
of attack by animals, economic benefits. In line with international research, and as indicated in a study
from Bihar (Figure 2), improved health was not however a primary motivation for behavioral change.11
One participant noted: “We know that health is important, but maybe not for reaching out to people.”
The NACO (National Aids Control Organization) media campaign for example focuses on delivering
messages that 'touch the heart', segmented according to the target audience – youth, women, men,
service providers, mainstream partners, tribal populations.



                                              Privacy            44%
                                         Convenience             42%
                               Safety from insect and…         34%
                              Security of women and…                 63%
                                                Avoid…       26%
                                Avoid humiliation by…     11%
                            To avoid OD during rains            40%
                              Toilet financed by Govt      16%
                                               Guests      17%
                                          Cleanliness       21%
                                     Improved health     8%
                                Avoid contaminating…     8%
                                  Better social status   8%
                                Children's insistence  3%
                            Community pressure and… 2%
                                  Lack of land for OD   4%
                               Don't remember why-… 2%
                                               Others  1%

                          Figure 2 : Motivations for constructing a toilet (N = 1275).

                          Source : Presentation MS Jawaid

After a community is motivated to cease open defecation, demand must be maintained and quickly
transformed into safe, consistently-used and maintained sanitation facilities. This transformation is
achieved through ongoing interpersonal communication, active local leadership, a strong supply chain
and monitoring as described in Theme 2.

Forum participants pointed out that communication throughout the entire sanitation cycle is crucial for
scaling up and sustaining outcomes. The communication strategy should combine social mobilization
and interpersonal communication with local and social media input. WSP research indicates that better-
performing districts have succeeded in combining interpersonal communication and the media optimally
and on a continuing basis (i.e., not just as a one-off activity).12

In support of these behavioral change approaches, the National Sanitation, Hygiene, Advocacy and
Communication Strategy (SHACS) is being introduced with a view to encouraging States and districts to
plan and deploy their own communication strategies. NBA and UNICEF assistance is available for
planning assistance. Eight states have developed strategies and several have launched their own
communication campaigns focused on sanitation and hygiene practices. At the national level, the Indian




11 See e.g. Curtis V, de Barra M, Aunger R. (2011). Disgust as an adaptive system for disease avoidance behavior . Philos Trans R
   Soc       Lond      B     Biol    Sci.     2011      Feb      12;366(1563):389-401.         doi:    10.1098/rstb.2010.0117.
   http://www.unicef.org/cholera/Chapter_7_communications/WATERAID_promoting_hygiene_practical_lessons.pdf
12 Kullappa/WSP (2014), ibid.



11 | P a g e
Government through the NBA has initiated a TV and radio campaign to reinforce the messages regarding
better sanitation behaviors. 13

Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM), which is an integral part of the NBA strategy, awareness
creation needs to be coupled to new practices just as for the household latrine effort. Presentations at the
Forum on experiences with SLWM programs in Karnataka and Kerala demonstrated that mass
mobilization and continuing IEC are needed for the public, for shop owners as well as elected
representatives. Personal practices include household-based separation of waste and composting,
participation in disposal and recycling systems, ensuring cleanliness of public areas and markets.14



KEY THEME 2: Supply chain supports demand
 Critical issues identified for scaling up:
      The supply chain should provide sufficient opportunity, affordability and adequate
          quality of products.
      Multiple technology and design options (not restricted to one model) should be available
          that reflect consumer demand.
      Greater focus is needed on ensuring access by rural area Panchayats to materials and
          products from private and government-assisted suppliers/RSMs.
      Household incentives should be preferably provided after the community has taken
          steps to become open defecation-free.


Forum participants acknowledged that supply chain products and services need to meet the generated
demand quickly, at affordable cost, and satisfy consumer preferences. These products and services may
include technical and construction know-how, skilled labor, construction materials, transport of the
same, access to credit, materials for upgrading and emptying pits. In its study on service delivery WSP
found that the highest-scoring districts vis-á-vis rural sanitation were those with:
     Multiple options (various technologies and designs) reflecting consumer preferences;
     Supply chain extending into difficult-to access areas.15

Multiple options: There has been a tendency to promote simple, single-technology models which fit
within the amount of subsidy available for construction. A study of 8 low-coverage districts in northern
India revealed that, despite the existence of demand, the supply chain did not provide sufficient access to
affordable, adequate quality products. Households tended to have either very cheap toilets that could be
paid for by the subsidy (INR 2000-3000 at the time) or very expensive toilets.16 Given the reinvigorated
sanitation program, this is now a good time to offer households different technical options in line with
people´s real preferences. The menu of options can include, for example, double-pit pour flush, shared
pits in crowded areas, off-set pits, 5-foot deep pits below the intake pipe, raised double-pit latrines, eco-
sanitation models, superstructures designed in varying materials, toilets with attached bathing areas, etc.

 One of the limitations of the TSC/NBA is the narrow range of technology options offered in a country with such
 immensely diverse geographic, hydrologic, climatic and socio-economic conditions (high water table, flood


13   Presentation by Arnold Cole (National sanitation, hygiene, advocacy and communication strategy – SHACS) at the Knowledge
     Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014. UNICEF reported that State-specific SHACS communication strategies have been developed
     in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
14   Presentation prepared by Abdu Muwonge (Next generation solid and liquid waste management in Kerala Jalanidhi
     Initiatives) and G. Manjula (Solid & liquid waste resource recovery project of Dakshina Kannada District, Karanataka) at the
     Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
15   Kullappa/WSP (2014), ibid.
16   Presentation by Jithmathra Thathachari (A market-led, evidence-based approach to rural sanitation) at the Knowledge
     Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.

12 | P a g e
 prone, rocky ground, desert/water scarce areas and extreme low temperatures).
                                                                                       12th Five Year Plan, page 304.


Quality of construction: A study from Bihar presented at the Forum found that poor execution is one
factor rendering toilets short-lived and unusable. Good quality construction is required to maintain
customer acceptance in the program. The study suggested that monitoring the quality of construction
and endorsing good providers and masons could help improve construction quality overall.17 Similarly,
experience in Kerala showed that good quality construction was needed to maintain consumer
confidence in the program. Households were kept informed about costs, construction, time frames for
mason’s work and the amount of materials needed to do the job, thus empowering the consumer to
monitor the work.18

Census data (2011) implied that a proportion of the latrines built over the past few years had not been
sustained (‘slippage’). In addition, many ‘half-double’ latrines have been built with a junction box but
only one shallow pit, about 3 feet in depth. In discussions at the Forum, it was noted that reviews and
studies are needed on the extent to which the second pit is being constructed by households, thus
ensuring that the double pit model functions as intended.19 In at least one state, this slippage is being
addressed with MGNREGA resources for upgrading.20 Upgrading can also refer to people moving up the
sanitation ladder, with consumers using their own resources to improve their latrines, for example, by
providing a bathing area with a soak pit and drainage, improved/pucca superstructure or by digging a
new pit.

Rural Sanitation Marts (RSMs) and Production Centers (PCs) are meant to be key hubs of the supply
chain, providing materials, services and guidance for constructing different types of toilets and other
sanitary facilities. Production Centers produce affordable sanitary materials at the local level.
Government assistance is available to both RSMs and PCs in the shape of interest-free loans from a
revolving loan service21.

The RSM/PC element of the supply chain operates differently in the various States. The study
commissioned by the Planning Commission, and a further study in 5 States by UNICEF, found that many
operational RSMs work as private enterprises offering a range of goods in addition to sanitary materials,
such as pipes, taps, and so on.. These studies also detected that many RSMs/PCs had gone out of business
and that rural access to the RSMs is highly variable (32% of households on average had access to an
RSM). In line with the Bihar experience reported at the Forum, the UNICEF study concluded: "As the
dynamics of demand can be quite complex in an RSM’s catchment area – ranging from villages in the
remote hinterland to ones in the block headquarters – a need exists to offer solutions that are differentiated
by demand. For example, in high-demand areas the private sector can take the lead, while in […] the
remaining areas a locally-specific mix can be offered combining extended government support and well-
structured private initiatives". 22


17   Shah, Arpit et al (2013) A markt-led, evidence based, approach to rural sanitation. Monitor Deloitte, Delhi.37 pp.
18   Kurup,     Balachandra       (1996)     The    community-managed        sanitation    program      in    Kerala.   SEUF/IRC.
     http://www.washdoc.info/docsearch/title/119918
19   Thathachari (2014), ibid. and Drinking Water and Sanitation (2012) Handbook on technical options for on-site sanitation.
     Gov. of India, Delhi. 45 p. For a double-pit model, this Government document suggests that circular pits have an internal
     dimension of 4 feet depth from the ground level with a diameter of 3 feet. External dimension for lined pits is 4 feet by 4
     feet.
20   Presentation by Ram Bilash Siha (Innovations, reforms an convergence in the sanitation sector Jharkhand) at the Knowledge
     Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
21   Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (2012) Guidelines of the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan, New Delhi, Government of India,
     pages 8-9.
22   (a) Planning Commission (2013) Evaluation study on Total Sanitation Campaign. New Delhi, Government of India, 186 pages;
     (b) UNICEF (2004) Rural sanitary marts and production centers- an evaluation. New Delhi. 8 pp. (c) Presentation by
     Jithmathra Thathachari (A market-led, evidence-based approach to rural sanitation) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in
     Jaipur, 2014.

13 | P a g e
 “While triggering is important, at the end of the day you need the hardware to be visible and easily available so
 that people know what to do, where to go. Checks and balances are needed all the way through the system so
 that everyone is on the same page about what the minimum standards are for a quality toilet – so that each
 constructed toilet can be verified.”
                                                                                        - Elias Chinamo, Tanzania

In Indonesia, sanitation entrepreneurs deliver a one-stop-shop sanitation solution for rural households
by supplying materials, skilled labor, on-site construction and transport services. They offer a variety of
goods and prices to rural households, including micro-credit. Sanitation entrepreneurs can get
accredited through a business association (APPSANI) that develops their financial and technical skills
through a business development training program in partnership with the government.23

According to the NBA guideline, incentive payments should be handed over to households as a mark of
achievement, once toilet construction by the household is completed 24. Examples presented at the
Forum from districts in Haryana and Meghalaya, etc., revealed that the most effective programs are those
that award the NBA incentive payments to households only after the community itself has taken steps to
become open defection-free.25 The State programs do not provide NBA incentives directly to contractors,
private suppliers or builders. The financial incentives deployment strategy is described in Theme 3.

Convergence and financing
Convergence
Financial support for household sanitation in India is available from two Ministries whose programs
operate differently. At present the situation is fluid. For example, the funds from the NBA incentives
program can be deposited in an individual household’s bank account or, as in the case of Bihar and
Jharkhand, transferred directly to the Panchayat. Meanwhile, funds under the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are frequently transferred to Panchayat or PRI officials
and to Employment Guarantee Assistants for direct payment of labor (and occasionally materials). Some
States and districts have been able to organize the timing of fund release, fund flow and operating
procedures so that the two programs converge. In some districts in Rajasthan, funds from these two
sources were reportedly applied in the community at separate times, with MGNREGA funds used for
labor and with households covering the cost of materials until the open defecation-free status of the
community was confirmed. Eventually the NBA funds (for materials) were released for depositing in
household bank accounts. Another, possibly less successful, approach in certain States has been for the
Panchayat to receive funds from both programs simultaneously, in the expectation that the local
government and MGNREGA technical assistant would deal appropriately with convergence.

To manage the complexities of fund flow, financial regulations need be as simple as possible. Some states
such as Rajasthan have simplified MGNREGA forms for utilization and completion certificates, pre-
construction estimates.26 Two districts in Rajasthan reported that the physical deployment of toilets
benefits from the availability of MGNREGA line workers at Panchayat and block levels (Employment
Guarantee Assistant, helper, technical assistant, block coordinator). Piloting has also helped to fine-tune
convergence processes.

From 2014, increased funding has become available from MGNREGA to construct toilets without the
need to converge with the NBA program. Learning lessons from earlier sanitation programs is vital. In
the event of using only MGNREGA funds for sanitation, the basic campaign structure should be retained

23   Presentation by Susanna Smets (Business development at scale: role of industry association to support sanitation in Indonesia)
     at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
24   Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (2012) Guidelines of the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan, New Delhi, Government of India,
     pages 8-9.
25   Presentation by Puran Singh Yadav (Creating demand at scale in Harayana) and Rohit Gupta/Arati Dogra (ibid)
26   See presentation by Rohit Gupta about Churu and Jhalawar districts ( Convergence with MGNREGA: Good practices in different
     States) http://www.hprural.nic.in/G.pdf

14 | P a g e
involving the creation of demand prior to construction in order to ensure sustained behavioral
outcomes.

Financing
If MNREGS support cannot be engaged at the time required in convergence with the NBA incentives, then
short-term financing may be needed. Financing is also relevant for households with additional demands
(for example, for a bathing area) and households wanting to construct a second pit to complete an
earlier-constructed toilet. The research in Bihar in the 3SI project found that 35% to 40% of the
households require full subsidy, 40%-45% could construct with part subsidy and credit and many want
high quality toilets, while 10%-20% could afford INR 7,000 to INR 10,000 for a toilet. 27

There are many experiences in making financial credit available for household sanitation. One program
reports that it organizes bank loans through self-help groups and repayments via the village level to the
bank, with guarantees as in the World Bank Livelihoods project. In Jharkhand revolving loans are
accessed. WaterAid is working with 21 organizations in India to facilitate credit provision for water and
sanitation.28 In Cambodia, microfinance institutions provide group loans for rural households with
repayments at village level, while disbursing the loans to suppliers that install toilets.29 There is
therefore a degree of innovation in accessing funds as a short-term measure, attending to the poor who
need different types of personal and financial support.


KEY THEME 3: Systematic implementation: What local governments do
 Critical issues identified for scaling up:
      Systematic program implementation is the key to sustained behavior change. A 6-step
          roadmap for a sanitation campaign in a hamlet, village or Panchayat could consist of the
          following: (1) preparation and planning by the Panchayat government/VWSC and
          community institutions; (2) motivation, planning and commitment of community
          (village, ward or Panchayat households through triggering and PRA activities; (3)
          immediate mobilization through all groups and follow-up through interpersonal
          communication; (4) credit and construction; (5) post-construction and sustainability of
          household sanitation; (6) solid and liquid waste management.
      High priority given to continuing capacity building through training, field visits, on-the-
          job support, etc.
      Accurate monitoring is needed of ODF, toilet use, maintenance, construction quality, with
          actions to improve situations as indicated by the monitoring process.
      When MGNREGA and/or NBA funds are used behavioral change communication and
          demand creation must take precedence over construction.

The Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) is meant to operate in campaign mode with a view to progressing the
program fairly rapidly. In Himachal Pradesh, for example, one large district was declared open
defecation-free within a few years. Some of the Gram Panchayats became open defecation free over a
period of 1-3 months.30 Regardless of speed of implementation, the most successful programs were
undertaken systematically in order to ensure that the activities were appropriately implemented and
behavior change sustained.




27   Jithmathra Thathachari (2014), ibid. The 3SI project is working in rural sanitation in 8 districts of Bihar.
28   Jithmathra Thathachari (2014), ibid.
29   Presentation by Susanna Smets (Lessons from partnerships with micro finance institutions for sanitation in Cambodia) at
     the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.

30   WSP (2014) Kangra District: A community-led campaign made 760 Gram Panchayats ODF in just three years in Pathway to
     success: compendium of best practices in rural sanitation in India . World Bank, New Delhi. pp 33-35.

15 | P a g e
Example of a local program strategy for sanitation
Figure 3 below illustrates steps in a systematic sanitation program in which construction is the fourth of
six steps (constructed on the basis of consolidated information arising from the Forum presentations)
and where the goal is improved sanitation behaviors as opposed to toilet construction. Obviously the
duration and details of each step vary significantly depending on local requirements and circumstances.

 Figure 3: Example of local implementation of a sanitation campaign

 1. Preparation: At the beginning of the campaign in a district, the more motivated communities are
    selected first. This selection may be based, for example, on demand from motivated PRIs, their
    willingness to take on administrative or supervisory tasks; the strength of water and sanitation
    committees; willingness to organize credit for the program; or the existence of groups (youth
    clubs, women's clubs, schools) that might be interested in collaborating. Once the first group of
    Panchayats has achieved ODF in a block, then implementation moves to the second group and,
    finally, the third group or more, working in stages to achieve block open defecation-free status.
    In community selection, it should be noted that the NBA guidelines emphasize the need for
    adequate water supply for household sanitation, with conjoint water and sanitation planning and
    implement.

     Preparation at the district/block level may include forming district teams, training personnel and
     support organizations, orientation and exchange visits for community leadership, organizing the
     dovetailing of the NBA funds with the MGNREGA and agreeing on rules and finance. Availability
     and transportation of materials and labor could be checked, in some cases by asking for
     competing bids by suppliers and checking the quality of their products (experience from many
     states, including Andhra Pradesh, Harayana, Rajasthan).

 2. Motivation: Triggering or PRA activities are carried out with as many people as possible in each
    village or habitation, and focus on helping people to reflect actively on their community and
    surroundings to stop open defecation. Trained facilitators from support groups, consultants or
    district resource groups spend 1 to 5 days in each Panchayat, depending on its size. Activities can
    begin with mapping a baseline with the community and end with commitment from the
    householders. The Panchayat/village plan is drafted and the Panchayat may commit to a date for
    open defecation-free status (ODF) such as in one or a few months. Incentives are not mentioned
    because the point is to encourage open defecation-free behaviors of the whole community. A
    community sanitation nodal worker and core management group are identified through the PRI
    or VWSC or from those who were most active and committed during the triggering. Some
    training of PRI and field workers with on-site support is provided by the support group
    (experiences from many including Jharkhand, Rajasthan, and Uttarakhand).

 3. Follow-up: While motivation for sanitation is high in the community, the triggering or PRA
    activities are rolled rapidly over into door-to-door communication and small group meetings
    assembled by the VWSC/PRI, motivators and volunteers. A large number of local government
    workers and volunteers are deployed in the campaign. Many districts report that women and
    students are encouraged to take the lead. Model latrines are sometimes built and information
    sessions or classes may be held with householders informing them about toilet design options,
    maintenance, time needed for construction and indicative costs. At this point, some of the
    sanitation programs work so that the community is ceasing the practice of open defecation,
    which can be checked by voluntary committees (Nigarani committee) which monitor the open
    defecation places in the morning and at sunset. Other sanitation programs proceed directly to
    the construction phase and, after that, monitor through community groups (experience from
    Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Rajasthan).


16 | P a g e
 4. Construction and credit: Successful districts report that toilets are constructed according to
    preferences of the family. No NBA (or only partial) incentives are paid at this point. Experience
    shows that all households contribute something, in money, materials or labour. Securing a
    household and community contribution for sanitation schemes leads to improved sustainability.
    To ensure the quality of construction external oversight through the district support group
    consultants/NGO may be needed. In some cases oversight includes encouraging cost control by
    masons by a third party or by householders themselves. Other community members may be
    involved, such as youth groups to help pit digging or guarding stored materials for group
    purchases of materials. Progress may be publicly posted in the Panchayat and reported to the
    district managers.

       While there is considerable variation in the release of NBA and MGNREGA funds, some successful
       districts, for example in Rajasthan, separate the funding. In this approach, MGNREGA labor is
       operationalized for those less able to pay, while the cost of materials is met by the household. It
       is reported that since communities expect to become ODF in a few months, poorer families can
       get credit, paying in installments for materials from vendors, accessing credit from the PRI or
       wealthier people. Programs in Bihar, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu and Cambodia and Indonesia
       reported a range of modalities for short-term credit (see Theme 2 The point is not to overlook
       poor households and to ensure a range of toilet models that are correctly constructed for
       sustainability and in line with user preference.

 5. Post-construction and sustainability of household sanitation: When the village declares itself
    open defecation-free (and before work starts on solid and liquid waste management), then
    successful districts arrange rapid third-party verification and provision of State rewards or
    payment of NBA funds for materials through Panchayat to household bank accounts. Districts
    release all or part of the incentive for solid and liquid waste management (INR 7 to 20 lakh or
    about US$11,500 to US$33,000), which serves as a community reward to the Panchayat, or
    Panchayats/villages may apply for funds under the State ODF award scheme (experience from
    Maharashtra, Rajasthan).

       Safe sanitation practices must be sustained. A sample, nationwide study in Bangladesh, for
       example, showed that open defecation decreased from 33% in 2003 to 4% in 2012.31 In one WSP
       study significant factors for sustainability were the use of funding for longterm usage/quality and
       a focus on sustainability by the district and Panchayat through periodic monitoring. Similarly, a
       study on sustainability three to nine years after the end of a sanitation intervention in Kerala
       showed that safe household behaviors continued for years after the end of the sanitation project
       where (a) the PRIs and support organizations had implemented intensively, (b) where
       householders had been trained through education classes in hygiene, technology and
       maintenance; and (c) where there was post-construction follow-up and monitoring32.

 6. Solid liquid waste management (SLWM): In rural India, 0.3 to 0.4 million metric tons of
    organic/recyclable solid waste are generated per day, including fecal sludge.33 With increasing
    prosperity the waste problem, predominantly organic and increasingly inorganic, has worsened.
    Resources for dealing with this situation have become available through the NBA sanitation
    program.


31   Presentation by Mo. Shamsul Kibria and Rokeya Ahmed (Community-wide approaches in delivering sanitation services
     through the domestic private sector in Bangladesh) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
32   WSP(2013) and Cairncross S et al. What causes sustainable changes in hygiene behavior? A cross-sectional study from Kerala,
     India. Soc Sci Med. 2005 Nov;61(10):2212-20. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15927330
33   Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation and the Asian Development Bank (2013) Guidelines for developing State policies on
     solid and liquid waste management in rural areas. Ecopsis, New Delhi.

17 | P a g e
          The effort to address solid and liquid waste management coherently is relatively new, presenting
          an opportunity to learn from the first successful programs. Both the State-wide Kerala campaign
          supported by the World Bank and Karnataka Dakshina Kannada District program provided these
          learning examples at the Forum34. Both combine solid and liquid waste infrastructure with a
          management system and a campaign for public/personal waste management. The goal of the
          Malinya Mukta Keralam (Waste-free Kerala) is to reduce, reuse, recycle and recover at least 80%
          of the waste generated in rural and peri-urban communities. The SWLM package could be as
          basic as having composting or a garbage pit at household and community, or as big as having bio-
          gas plants and community-based composting of waste. The principles of the Kerala State
          program include, as a first option, the segregation of solid waste (bio/non-bio degradable) and
          liquid waste (grey water and black water) at source with household based treatment and
          disposal. The second option is community-based collection, disposal and recycling systems. In
          Dakshina Kannada district in Karnataka, the SLWM project has developed commercial bio-
          manure (3 brands), a menstrual hygiene production center for menstruation pads, plastic waste
          collected for a recycling system through district collection vehicles, a cloth bag production
          center, monsoon and dry season waste treatment strategies including settling ponds, bio-reactor
          and sewerage treatment tanks. Grey waters from the treatment are used in gardens around the
          sanitation parks that make the waste units attractive and inviting. Challenges include educating
          the public and private vendors, improving waste transportation and affordable treatment/O&M.


Capacity building
In the States and districts which have systematically implemented processes, high priority has been
accorded to capacity building. This, can combine skills development with motivation to encourage
changes of attitudes. Capacity upgrading for front-line workers involves more than classroom lessons. In
Harayana, for example, capacity building took the form of:

      •     Initial field trips and training by teams from Maharashtra;
      •     Classroom training with field trips to learn about community-led approaches - an ongoing
            process that has benefited several hundred stakeholders including officials, motivators, natural
            leaders, trainers and volunteers;
      •     Classroom training supplemented by guided field visits focused on community mobilization and
            collective community behavior change with triggering tools;
      •     Frequent and continuous awareness-raising programs at district, block and village level for
            officials and PRIs;
      •     Follow-up workshops for district and block-level officials, schoolteachers, PRI members;
      •     Panchayat Sammelans at district/ block level for PRIs and grassroots workers;
      •     Training on NBA and MGNREGS convergence and administration. 35

A further example of how capacity building can be improved and enhanced involves the efforts by the
World Bank/WSP to strengthen training resource institutions in support of the NBA. In Indonesia,
sanitation training has for example been institutionalized in the curriculum of its 24 health polytechnic
schools that train workers for the country´s sanitation program.36




34   Presentation prepared by Abdu Muwonge (Next generation solid and liquid waste management in Kerala Jalanidhi
     Inititiatives) and G. Manjula (Solid & liquid waste resource recovery project of Dakshina Kannada District, Karanataka) at the
     Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
35   Presentation by Dr. Puran Singh (Creating Demand for Sanitation in Rural Haryana at Scale) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum
     in Jaipur, 2014.
36   Presentations by Smita Misra (World Bank support to the India rural water and sanitation program: key messages on
     sanitation) and Dr. Sumihardi (Strategic approach to institutionalize capacity building for rural sanitation in the Ministry of
     Health curriculum, Indonesia) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.

18 | P a g e
Discussions at the Forum revealed the need to build skills in interpersonal communication. While we
cannot expect all field workers and volunteers in the large Indian program to be expert communicators,
nevertheless it should be possible to get field workers to use more flexible interpersonal styles tailored
to specific audiences. Communication training need not be complicated. For example, field workers
could practice “new ways of talking” that replaces lecturing in favor of explaining, asking questions,
organizing activities, listening carefully, with a view to improving genuine two-way communication.

Monitoring
There was general agreement at the Forum about the significance of monitoring the quality of programs.
The WSP found that monitoring was strongly associated with successful outcomes, but actual
achievements in monitoring received a low score, the second lowest among the nine indicators in the
2013 study of 56 districts.37 Monitoring however can provide evidence needed for improving service
delivery while projects are in progress. In the household sanitation area, for example, monitoring may
focus on ongoing program activities and expenditure, open defecation practices, construction quality and
the use of maintained facilities, the availability of soap/water near the toilet for handwashing.
Monitoring can make an invaluable contribution if the data assembled is acted upon by committed
district and block leaders.

In some cases, monitoring is 'internal', carried out by people from the community itself. One example is
the village or Panchayat which tracks progress against the community baseline after triggering. A further
example is oversight by a 'vigilance committee' checking whether open defecation sites are being used
early in the morning and at sunset (Nigarani committee). The quality of construction can also be
monitored by VWSC or MGNREGA technical assistants.

Sanitation campaigns deploy third party monitors for external monitoring, using a variety of approaches.
Some districts use 'crossover visits' by senior personnel and elected representatives from another block
or district to check for the NGP or other State sanitation awards (e.g. in Maharashtra). This procedure
exposes third party monitors to the particular sanitation program as well as to alternative operating
methods. Madhya Pradesh has introduced peer review between villages which carries a strong
horizontal learning element. Jharkhand outsources its auditing to chartered accounting firms, while
Uttarakhand uses an on-line tracking system designed to ensure enhanced transparency. In Maharashtra,
assessment teams grade the Panchayats into groups according to their level of sanitation progress or
achievement. Implementing the State’s multi-level award system involves monitoring by teams
composed of teachers, media practitioners, NGO workers, and government officials from different
departments. Financial rewards are given to the village, block, district or school on the basis of the
assessments. Award winners are subsequently named as 'accredited resource centers'.38

Effective monitoring produces good quality data which can be used to improve a situation. On the basis
of this information, managers need to be in a position to take appropriate action to remedy problems,
such as suspending construction work pending improvement, replacing nodal officers, motivators,
consultants or support organizations, and repairing incorrectly-built toilets.

Effective monitoring also involves ensuring that effective and accurate data collection and measurement
tools are employed. An effective monitoring tool would be to check toilets regularly and visually to
ascertain whether they are maintained and in use by household members. A less effective tool is self-
reporting, that is, asking a person in the household if he/she uses a latrine, or simply asking the
community in general if they are ODF, without checking. In short, self-reporting tends to lead to overly-
optimistic responses.

Real-time results-based monitoring, as piloted by the government with WSP support, uses data tracking
through mobile phones that can be customized for households and education institutions. Monitoring is

37   WSP 2013, ibid.
38   Presentation by BK Sawai (Monitoring and reward scheme in Maharashtra) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.

19 | P a g e
done by independent data collectors who photograph the facility, monitor on the basis of a small number
of simple indicators and report GPS coordinates, together with the time of the visit. The data is
immediately registered on a central tracker from which it can be analyzed39.

At national level, the NBA is working to put continuous monitoring in place, including having teams of
professional monitors to visit the States. Experts at the Forum noted that the performance of a program
is often driven by what is monitored. At present, the national reporting/monitoring system for rural
sanitation focuses on short-term inputs and outputs achieved (construction targets) rather than
sustaining behavior change (toilet usage). This could well be an area to focus on in future.

KEY THEME 4: Strong institutions provide an enabling environment
 Critical issues identified for scaling up:
      Committed leadership at all levels is the key to successful scaling-up.
      Empowering policies are needed (operational, financial and convergence guidelines).
      Good program management with accurate and rapid monitoring and financial transfers
          to be available for households and community award systems.
      Adequate staff wages/honoraria and individual output-based incentive systems (for
          achieving ODF) together with transportation logistics.
      Community-led sanitation requires a professionally qualified support system at district
          and block levels consisting of with teams with the sole responsibility for progressing
          sanitation by supporting triggering/PRA, capacity building, monitoring and
          “handholding” as required.
      Large scale mobilization within the community, involving government and almost all
          local groups and including some trained workers among these.

Participants emphasized that committed leadership by government at all levels is the key to scaling up
the sanitation effort., One participant reported that in Harayana, the Chief Minister took a personal
interest by tracking progress and sending circulars to Panchayat leaders and State Legislative Assembly
Members in an effort to boost their participation in the sanitation campaign. Political commitment had
been central to achieving near-universal coverage in countries such as Bangladesh and Thailand where
governments have promoted a supportive enabling environment. It is clear that introducing a policy-led
enabling environment is a prelude to materializing sound local commitment. The Rajasthan government,
for example, has helped districts and local governments to scale up through:

         Operational guidelines that promote a community-led, intensive, 'saturation' approach.
         Simplified funding guidelines under NBA in convergence with other programs.
         Simplified administrative procedures and forms under the MGNREGA.
         Guidelines for strengthening institutional arrangements by hiring motivators and forming a
          district resource group to provide planning, training and support.

Promotion of leadership at local levels
Various channels for promoting local leadership in India´s sanitation campaigns were described during
the Forum. The national NGP awards are a key incentive for catalyzing district and community
leadership. In addition, States such as Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra run well-publicized award
programs for habitations, Panchayats, blocks and/or districts. These programs have helped to raise the
profile of sanitation, strengthen monitoring systems and improve governance.

Non-monetary awards (e.g. recognition by State and district personnel and exposure in the media) for
people involved in the sanitation area also helps to promote leadership. Experience in Kerala and
Bangladesh shows that well-run rural sanitation programs help community leaders get elected and

39   Presentation by Upneet Singh (Monitoring behavior at scale) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.

20 | P a g e
foster commitment40. Other approaches mentioned in the Forum breakout sessions included providing
incentives by promoting talented workers in the Panchayat to the block, district and State levels.

The shift from a construction or supply-driven approach in sanitation to a demand-driven approach
means that a concerted effort is needed to ensure sustained demand in low-coverage districts. Some
Forum participants stated that expecting voluntary, intensive involvement by motivators and community
workers did not produce sufficiently effective outcomes. Using NBA and State resources, some districts
had therefore decided to combine a fee (honorarium) or modest salary with rewards to workers for
achieving and sustaining ODF household sanitation status. In one district in Rajasthan (in 2013), for
example, motivators received a fee of INR 3,000-5,000 (US$ 50-$83) depending on the size of the village,
plus an award of INR 8000 (US$ 133) when ODF status was verified, and a further INR 6,000 (US$ 100)
when the community remained ODF for one year. In another district, trainers and support group
members received INR 350 (US$6) a day plus INR 500 (US$8) for night charges and a bonus for
achieving ODF status41. Some States are also considering increasing the remuneration (or output-based
incentives) of block level sanitation coordinators and Panchayat sanitation nodal officers.

Committed involvement by local elected representatives and workers also partly depends on a well-
managed program and rapid and accurate financial transfers. Timely access to credit, rapid verification
of open defecation-free status and timely payment of monetary incentives to household bank accounts
are the key to success.42

Institutional structure in support of the community
The sanitation campaign is designed to be community-led. In this respect Forum participants argued that
professional support is needed at local levels.43 Experience from Harayana, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
showed that in order to empower communities to lead the sanitation campaign effort with a demand-
driven strategy a range of services should be in place to provide strategic support to local government,
field workers, suppliers and masons in terms of strong capacity building, monitoring and “handholding”
as required. A consensus gradually emerged at the Forum that this support can best be provided by
district and block personnel (or NGOs at block level) with sole responsibility for progressing the
sanitation agenda (that is, focusing only on sanitation for the duration of the campaign).

District and block
The Forum concluded that strong district leadership is needed. Leadership could be in the shape of a
small Core Group working within the District Sanitation Mission or District Government (Zilla Parishad).
The track records of States such as Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan support this idea. Support teams at
the district or block level may be needed for training, triggering, management back-up and the supply
chain. Putting these teams together calls for some flexibility because, as one participant (a collector)
noted, his success was largely due to the ability to form "the kind of team I wanted". When putting their
teams together, districts may also invite participation by established local institutions, e.g. in Meghalaya
trusted NGOs engaged in community development programs turned out to be active local support
partners.

Community (Panchayat, village or habitation)
Local leadership structures vary considerably. However in many situations the VWSC manages the
program, under the leader of the Panchayat or village (sarpanch, pradhan, Panchayat secretary and/or



40   See e.g. Swaminathan Aiyar (2003: What Jalanidhi tells us about community driven development: A case study of Kerala’s rural
     drinking water and sanitation project, World Bank. (2013) and Investing in WASH (sanitation) services is a winning formula.
     http://www.washcost.info/page/563
41   Presentation by Anandhi (Institutional strengthening at district level in Bundi district, Rajasthan) and Arti Dogra (Banko
     Kikano: Community led sanitation campaign in Bikaner) at the Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur, 2014.
42   From various reports and discussions at the forum, including: Maharashtra and three presentations from Rajasthan.
43   Presentation by Smita Misra (World Bank support to Indian rural water and sanitation program: key messages on sanitation).

21 | P a g e
treasurer of VWSC). Participants also mentioned experiences with appointing a dynamic sanitation nodal
officer or technical assistant from the Panchayat to collaborate during the campaign period.44

It was clear from the discussions that a key challenge was to ensure the presence of sufficient numbers of
skilled front-line workers in the sanitation area. Social mobilization of almost all groups in the
community, coupled with behavioral change communication, addresses this issue. Case studies
presented at the Forum showed that a large number of people and groups could be mobilized in the
community to play a significant role in the campaigns:

              Natural leaders, traditional and religious leaders.
              Motivators who may be designated as swachhata doots or other.
              All village-level practitioners such as teachers, nursery leaders (anganwadi), health workers
               (supervisory staff at State/District level should be persuaded to encourage their
               subordinates to participate actively).
              Suppliers and masons
              Local groups: youth, women’s and self-help groups (SHGs), schoolchildren


Training under appropriate supervision and guidance is needed for active program players in the
community (see Theme 3).

NGOs and the private sector
In every State, support organizations, mainly non-profit but currently also from the private sector, are
engaged in sanitation programs. The private sector, traditionally involved in supplying materials and
construction expertise, now has a wider range of roles45. Both NGOs and the private sector have been
involved in one way or another in:

         the supply chain, construction materials, masons, technologies;
         capacity building, advocacy materials, the media and in some circumstances (e.g. in Jharkhand),
          running block resource centers;
         monitoring;
         micro-finance enabling instalment payments, providing credit;
         solid waste management;
         marketing locally and/or through the mass media.

Each of these activities raises the question of "who identifies NGOs and private sector groups?" In a
decentralized system the community or Panchayat government would, logically, be responsible for
identifying and hiring its own support organizations. However, at the beginning of the program (when
support groups should be involved), local governments might be unfamiliar with a demand-driven
approach and therefore not always able to identify effective support groups. Trained district or State-
level leaders and sanitation staff might be in a better position to select the most appropriate groups.

Some States have also employed small contractors who register themselves as NGOs mainly to win
construction contracts from local governments or VWSCs. These have not had a good record, paying little
or no attention to behavior change and failing to produce good quality building. As a result their services
are reportedly being discontinued46.




44   Rajiv Gupta and B. Kurup, ibid.
45   Jithamithra Thathachari, Bihar. Ibid.
46   Presentation by MS Jawaid (Moving from contracting mode to community empowerment- An Experience from Bihar) at the
     Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur.

22 | P a g e
The challenge ahead
Towards the end of the Forum, participants consolidated views regarding next steps. These effectively
amounted to 'conclusions and recommendations'. In general, participants agreed that support to the
district was a critical factor to assure success in rural sanitation, involving:

       Commitment and political leadership at the highest level;
       Advocacy to improve political will within the district;
       Good skills for driving behavioral change communication and social marketing for ODF;
       Uncomplicated strategies, clear guidelines and freedom to implement, including State-specific
        guidelines for achieving open defecation-free status and behavioral change communication,
        together with straightforward simple operational and financial guidelines.
       State support and investment for staff recruitment and capacity building.

Forum participants identified a number of factors that were needed for scaling up from 'islands of
success' in certain districts to broader State-wide sanitation success. Keys to this transition were
considered to be:

       Support, commitment and coordination by government staff and elected representatives;
       Social marketing (with decentralized fund flow) and enhanced supply chain management;
       Review, support ('hand-holding') and recognition of districts´ key role;
       Learning from experience and applying lessons learned;
       Dedicated teams to implement the program.

Gaps exist in the body of knowledge needed for scaling up to Nirmal Bharat by 2022. These include:

       Monitoring for outcomes.
       How behavior change works.
       Incentives for sustainability.
       Ensuring coverage of the poor.
       Moving sanitation up the political agenda.

The key question is not whether India will be a country where 1.2 billion people possess and use safe,
sustainable toilets posing no danger to themselves or their environment. It is a question of when this will
happen. This Knowledge Sharing Forum in Jaipur focused on the issue by examining the critical factors
involved in scaling up rural sanitation. The Forum concluded that achieving the desired results depends
on the commitment of all the States to empowering communities to take the lead in moving over to open
defecation-free status. This implies a shift in the approach from a supply-driven model focused on the
construction of toilet facilities to a demand-driven strategy that results in safe and continuing sanitation
and hygiene practices by all. The financial resources for this exist. Achieving the stated goal however
calls for strong political leadership and a systematic implementation strategy involving inter alia the
provision of sufficient staff resources to support local communities. Key elements include demand
creation, a strong supply chain, capacity building, effective monitoring and an institutional structure
exclusively dedicated to the sanitation campaign. International experience and examples of good practice
in India have shown how this can be done. The key to a rapid transition is the commitment to learning
from this experience and adapting it to the special circumstances found in each of India´s 600-plus
districts.




23 | P a g e
ANNEX 1: Summary of Participant Evaluations

At the conclusion of the Knowledge Sharing Forum, 34 participants filled out an evaluation form focused
on the extent to which the event achieved its goals, the conduct of the sessions and the prospective
efficacy of outcomes. 50% of the respondents represented the State and local governments.3 participants
represented the Central Government and 8 were from international organizations. 3 Indian NGOs, 1
private sector and 2 'other countries' also commented.

The evaluation consisted of two parts: (i) rating scales for specific statements in which the participant
was invited to respond “strongly agree”, “agree”, “disagree” or “strongly disagree” ; and (ii) three open
questions related to the applicability of the issues raised at the Forum to the participant’s work.

All participants 'strongly agreed' or 'agreed' that the goals and objectives of the Forum were clear (16 and
18 responses respectively). Similarly, all strongly agreed or agreed that the lessons from the Forum
would be applicable to the participant’s work (10 and 24).

Regarding the procedures of the Forum, 16 and 14 out of 34 strongly agreed or agreed respectively that
there had been sufficient opportunity for interactive participation. Four disagreed. Of these, three work
in State and District governments. One apparently would have preferred to discuss certain programmed
topics in more detail.

On the item “I got most of my questions answered during the Forum”, 9 (26%) strongly agreed and 19
(56%) agreed, while 5 (15%) disagreed and 1 person failed to answer. These scores are not surprising
since the aim of the event was to a certain extent 'exploratory'. In other words, participants were called
upon to share information about how to scale up (i.e., how to make the transition from the current state
of 'islands of success' in sanitation programming towards sustained and universal open defecation-free
status in India). Given the exploratory nature of the workshop it is clear that not all questions could be
answered by participants from all over India. It might be useful to retain this question in an evaluation
form for a future meeting (one or two years hence?) to ascertain whether the response profile changes.

The second lowest scoring response related to the issue: “The presenters were knowledgeable about the
topic they presented.” No participants disagreed with the statement. 26 (76%) "agreed" and only 8 (24%)
“strongly agreed”. The former category was spread among all groups of participants (state/local
government, central government, international and development partners, NGOs). Overall, the
respondents appeared to be fairly satisfied with the presenters´ knowledge. Participants who said they
failed to get most of their questions answered, naturally tended to be 'less satisfied' with the presenters.

In terms of the venue in Jaipur, participants agreed that the facilities were a good choice for the Forum
(20 'strongly agreed', 14 'agreed') and that the IT equipment and other resources worked well (19 and
14 respectively). Most expressed satisfaction with all aspects of the event, logistics and the handling of
enquiries (17 and 16 respectively, with one person disagreeing). The last item on the venue and
administration was: “The quality of information received prior to the Forum was highly informative .” 12
strongly agreed (35%), 17 (50%) agreed and 5 (15%) disagreed. In the latter group, three of the five
respondents were members of NGOs.

Participants were asked to identify the element of the Forum that was most applicable to their work. It
was interesting to observe that the responses were spread among many topics and presentations. This
probably was a sign that the Forum program had something to offer to most people. The items which
were mentioned most frequently (i.e. by three or four participants) were: behavioral change and demand
creation, successful case studies (from Thailand, Indonesia, Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh),
monitoring, convergence and the 'solid and liquid waste management' session.



24 | P a g e
In response to the question about what elements were least applicable to their work, only 8 of the 34
participants noted a specific item. The remaining 26 stated that each element was relevant or useful.
Interestingly, the two participants from 'other' governments expressed surprise at the high level of
subsidies provided by the Indian government. Only two of the 34 presentations were judged to be 'less
applicable'.

Finally, in response to the important question 'how the participant plans to apply what he or she learned
at the Forum', there was a wide range of responses, many quite specific. These included:

       Re-working demand creation and IEC strategies in our program.
       Training community motivators.
       Application to a project proposal currently being prepared for the World Bank.
       Application of new monitoring mechanisms.
       Advocacy for better technically equipped professional teams of workers
       Organization of a similar Forum in LAC and in State workshops in Meghalaya State.
       Further study of the solid and liquid waste management strategies adopted by Kerala and
        Karnataka.
       Application on a trial basis of the Rajasthan experience.

Several participants also noted that they intend to focus on increased advocacy to encourage
commitment to the sanitation effort at State, district and local levels.

In conclusion, the participant evaluations were on the whole positive and provide some insights into
ways in which the issues discussed at the Forum may be of practical use to participants in their home
environments.
                      Participant evaluation: compiliation of responses
                                                              Strongly              Strongly
                                                               agree Agree Disagree disagree
The goals and objectives of the Forum were clearly defined       16    18
There was sufficient opportunity for interactive                 16    14      4
participation
The learnings of the Forum will be applicable to my work         10    24
I got most of my questions answered during the Forum              9    19      5
The resource material provided was helpful                       12    20      1
The facilitators encouraged active participation                 13    19      2
The presenters were knowledgeable about the topic they            8    26
presented
The          onprovided a conducive setting for the Forum
     facilities                                                  20    14
The IT equipment and other resources worked well                 19    14      1
The quality of information received prior to the Forum was       12    17      5
highly informative
I was satisfied with all aspects of process, logistics, and      17    16      1
handling of Inquiries




25 | P a g e
ANNEX 2: Participants Knowledge Forum
                                                International Government
                                                            Ministry of Local
                                     Joint Secretary
               Muhammad                                     Government, Rural
 1    Mr.                            (WS), Government
               Shamsul Kibria                               Development and
                                     of Bangladesh
                                                            Cooperatives
                                                            Communication
               Sumihardi, SKM M.                            Forum of Indonesian
 2    Dr.                            Chair
               Kes                                          Environmental health
                                                            School
                                                            Government of
 3    Mr.      Umar Masereka                                                        maserakaumar@gmail.com
                                                            Uganda
                                     Liaison Officer,
                                                            Ministry of Rural
 4    Mr.      Van Sarith            Department of                                  vansarith@gmail.com
                                                            Development
                                     Rural Health Care,
                                     Government of India and State Governments
                                                            Ministry of Drinking
               Sujoy Mojumdar
 5    Mr.                            Director (RWS)         Water and Sanitation,   sujoy.m@nic.in
               (IFS)
                                                            Government of India
                                                            Rural Development &
                                                            Panchayati Raj
                Shreemat Pandey
 6    Mr.                            Principal Secretary    Department,             shreemat.pandey@nic.in
               (IAS)
                                                            Government of
                                                            Rajasthan
                                     Secretary and
                                                            Rural Development &
                                     Commissioner
                                                            Panchayati Raj
                                     WSS Circle                                     rajpr_commissioner@rediffmail.c
 7    Ms.      Aparna Arora (IAS)                           Department,
                                     Chandigarh-cum-                                om
                                                            Government of
                                     State Co-ordinator
                                                            Rajasthan
                                     (NBA)
               Thiru C.                                     Rural Development
 8    Mr.      Samayamoorthy         Joint Secretary        and Panchayat Raj
               (IAS)                                        Department
                                     District Collector
                                                            Government of
 9    Ms.      Anandhi A. (IAS)      and District                                   rajbun@nic.in
                                                            Rajasthan
                                     Magistrate
                                                            Government of
 10   Ms.      Arati Dogra (IAS)     District Collector                             rajbik@nic.in
                                                            Rajasthan
                                     Addl. District
                                     Magistrate, Nadia
               Dipanjan                                     Government of West
 11   Mr.                            & Addl. Executive                              dipanjan2207@gmail.com
               Bhattacharjja (IAS)                          Bengal
                                     Officer, Nadia Zilla
                                     Parishad
                                     Deputy                 Government of
 12   Mr.      Pravin Bakshi (IAS)                                                  pravinbakshi@hotmail.com
                                     Commissioner           Meghalaya
                                                            Government of
 13   Mr.      Rohit Gupta (IAS)     District Collector                             dm-chu-rj@nic.in
                                                            Rajasthan
                                                            Rural Water Supply &
                                                            Sanitation
 14   Mr.      A. Ramulu Naik        Project Director       Department,             pd_swsm_pr@ap.gov.in
                                                            Government of Andhra
                                                            Pradesh
                                     District Project
 15   Mr.      Arun Chauhan                                 Zilla Parishad          comm62@gmail.com
                                     Coordinator

                                                            Communication &
               L. Swamikanta
 16   Mr.                            Director               Capacity Development    ccdumanipur@gmail.com
               Singh
                                                            Unit, Government of


26 | P a g e
                                                          Manipur



                                                          Development and
                                                          Panchayats
                                   State Project
 17   Mr.      Puran Singh Yadav                          Department,              psyadav59@rediffmail.com
                                   Coordinator (NBA)
                                                          Government of
                                                          Haryana
                                   Chief Engineer-        Department of Water
 18   Mr.      A.K. Soni           cum-Program            Supply and Sanitation,   pdspmc@gmail.com
                                   Director               Government of Punjab
                                                          Public Health
                                                          Engineering
                                   State Coordinator
 19   Mr.      A.N. Singh                                 Department,
                                   (Sanitation)
                                                          Government of
                                                          Arunachal Pradesh
                                   Deputy
                                                          State Water and
 20   Mr.      Ajit Tiwari         Commissioner
                                                          Sanitation Mission
                                   (NBA)
                                                          Water and Sanitation
                                   State Coordinator,     Support Organisation,
 21   Mr.      B.K. Sawai                                                          bksawai9@gmail.com
                                   NBA                    Government of
                                                          Maharashtra
 22   Mr.      Birendra Singh      Consultant             CCDU

 23   Mr.      Brajesh Samara      PRO                    Govt. of Rajasthan       brajeshsamara@gmail.com

                                   State Co-ordinator     Project Management
 24   Mr.      D.R. Joshi                                                          dr.joshiac@gmail.com
                                   (NBA)                  Unit
                                   Assistant Director -
                                                          Ministry of Health and
 25   Mr.      Elias Chinamo       Environmental
                                                          Social Welfare
                                   Health
                                                          Department of Rural
                                                          Development and
               G. Nagarathana      IEC State
 26   Ms.                                                 Panchayathraj,
               Bhat                Consultant (NBA)
                                                          Government of
                                                          Karnataka
                                                          Department of Water
                                   Superintending
 27   Mr.      G.K. Gupta                                 Supply and Sanitation,   circlechd@yahoo.co.in
                                   Engineer-cum-DPD
                                                          Government of Punjab
                                                          Panchayati Raj & Rural
                                                          Development
                                   State Co-ordinator
 28   Mr.      Ganesh Choudhary                           Department,              gchoudhary4@gmail.com
                                   (NBA)
                                                          Government of West
                                                          Bengal
 29   Mr.      Gourav Sharma       LDC                    CCDU
                                   State Programme        State Water and
 30   Ms.      Hymavathi Varman
                                   Officer (NBA)          Sanitation Mission
                                                          Public Health
                                                          Engineering
 31   Mr.      K. Ibochou Singh    Assistant Engineer     Department,
                                                          Government of
                                                          Manipur
                                                          Rural Water Supply &
                                                          Sanitation
 32   Mr.      K. Ravi Babu        Project Director       Department,              pdccdu@rediffmail.com
                                                          Government of Andhra
                                                          Pradesh




27 | P a g e
                                                        Drinking Water &
                                                        Sanitation
                                  State coordinator
 33   Mr.      Kallol Saha                              Department,             kallosh74@gmail.com
                                  Hydrology
                                                        Government of
                                                        Jharkhand
                                  District Project
 34   Mr.      Krishan Murari                           Zilla Parishad          krishn1975@gmail.com
                                  Coordinator

                                                        Bihar State Water and
 35   Mr.      M.S. Jawaid        Director (PMU)        Sanitation Mission,     dir_pmu@yahoo.co.in
                                                        Government of Bihar
                                  State Co-ordinator
                                  (NBA) & Chief
                                                        Water and Sanitation
               Madan Mohan        Engineer-II, Rural
 36   Mr.                                               Support Organisation,
               Biswal             Water Supply &
                                                        Government of Orissa
                                  Sanitation &
                                  Director

 37   Mr.      Mahavir Singh      ACEO                  Zilla Parishad          mahavirras@gmail.com

               Mahender Singh     District Project                              shekhawatmahendra65@gmail.co
 38   Mr.                                               Zilla Parishad
               Sekhawat           Coordinator                                   m
                                                        Zilla Parishad,
               Manjula G.                               Dakshina Kannada,
 39   Ms.                         NBA Coordinator
               Guddepilu                                Government of
                                                        Karnataka
                                                        Finance and Accounts,
 40   Mr.      Mohan Vijay
                                                        CCDU
               Neeranuch          Sr. Policy and Plan   Ministry of Public
 41   Ms.
               Arphacharus        Analyst               Health

                                  District Project
 42   Mr.      Nizamuddin                               Zilla Parishad          786nizam92@gmail.com
                                  Coordinator
                                                        Government of
 43   Mr.      P.D. Sowjanya
                                                        Uttarakhand
               Pariyada                                 Ministry of Public
 44   Ms.                         Director
               Chokewinyoo                              Health
 45   Mr.      Pawan Murtikar                           ETV News
                                                        Public Health
                                  State Coordinator     Engineering
 46   Mr.      Pratul Choudhury
                                  (NBA)                 Department,
                                                        Government of Assam

 47   Mr.      R.K. Bansal        Director              CCDU, Bikaner           tscrajasthan@gmail.com

                                  Addl. Chief
                                  Engineer (PHE)        Government of
 48   Mr.      R.K. Pandey
                                  and State Co-         Meghalaya
                                  ordinator (NBA)
 49   Mr.      Rajesh Bhardwaj    ACE                   Govt. of Rajasthan
                                                        National AIDS Control
 50   Dr.      Rajesh Rana        Accounts Director
                                                        Organisation
                                                        Drinking Water &
                                                        Sanitation
                                  Superintendent
 51   Mr.      Ram Bilash Sinha                         Department,             se.ranchi33@gmail.com
                                  Engineer
                                                        Government of
                                                        Jharkhand
 52   Mr.      Ram Niwas          CEO                   Zilla Parishad
                                  Executive Engineer    Head Office,
 53   Mr.      Ratesh Garg
                                  (Monitoring)          Government of Punjab


28 | P a g e
 54   Mr.      Saeed Ahmed         CEO                  Zilla Parishad          saeed.ahmed.785@hotmail.com

                                                        Bihar State Water and
               Sanjay Kumar        Consultant -
 55   Mr.                                               Sanitation Mission,
               Sinha               Capacity Building
                                                        Government of Bihar
                                                        Public Works (DWS),
               Sankar Chandra      Addl. Chief
 56   Mr.                                               Government of           acedwstripura@gmail.com
               Das                 Engineer
                                                        Tripura
                                                        Rural Management &
                                   Deputy Secretary     Development
 57   Mr.      Satyen K. Pradhan                                                dsnirmalbharat@gmail.com
                                   (NBA)                Department,
                                                        Government of Sikkim
                                                        Panchayati Raj
                                                        Department,
 58   Mr.      Saurabh Babu        Director                                     dirpr-up@nic.in
                                                        Government of Uttar
                                                        Pradesh
               Sunit Kumar
 59   Mr.                          SE (Sanitation)      PRD
               Agarwal
                                                        Rural Development
               Thiru G.            Additional
 60   Mr.                                               and Panchayat Raj
               Lakshimipathy       Director
                                                        Department
                                                        Water and Sanitation
                                   State Consultant
 61   Ms.      Tuhina Roy                               Support Organisation,   tuhinamitra_2@yahoo.com
                                   (IEC & HRD)
                                                        Government of Orissa
 62   Mr.      Vasudeo Solanke     Dy. CEO              Zilha Parishad

               Mahesh Chand
 63   Mr.                          Consultant (S&H)     CCDU                    ojha312007@gmail.com
               Ojha
                                   Consultant on        WSSO, Public Works
 64   Mr.      Manojit Debnath     Sanitation and       (DWS), Government of
                                   Hygiene              Tripura
                                                        Ministry of Drinking
 65   Dr.      Murugan             Consultant (NRC)     Water and Sanitation,
                                                        Government of India
                                                        Ministry of Drinking
 66   Dr.      T.K. Das            Consultant (NRC)     Water and Sanitation,   dr_tkdas47@rediffmail.com
                                                        Government of India


                                   Sr. Water &          World Bank Water and
 67   Mr.      C. Ajith Kumar      Sanitation           Sanitation Program –    ckumar1@worldbank.org
                                   Specialist           Africa
                                                        World Bank Water and
                                   Country
 68   Mr.      Farhan Sami                              Sanitation Program –    msami1@worldbank.org
                                   Coordinator
                                                        Pakistan
                                                        World Bank Water and
                                   Water & Sanitation   Sanitation
 69   Ms.      Harriet Nattabi                                                  hnattabi@worldbank.org
                                   Specialist           Program/World Bank
                                                        –Africa
                                   Water Supply &       World Bank Water and
               Nelson Antonio
 70   Mr.                          Sanitation           Sanitation Program,     nmedina@worldbank.org
               Medina Rocha
                                   Specialist           Nicaragua Office
                                                        World Bank Water and
                                                        Sanitation
 71   Ms.      Rahmi Yetri Kasri   Consultant                                   rkasri@worldbank.org
                                                        Program/World Bank
                                                        - East-Asia Pacific
                                                        World Bank Water and
                                   Water & Sanitation
 72   Ms.      Rokeya Ahmed                             Sanitation Program -    rahmed3@worldbank.org
                                   Specialist
                                                        Bangladesh



29 | P a g e
                                     Online               World Bank Water and
 73   Ms.      Sheryl Silverman      Communications       Sanitation Program -   ssilverman@worldbank.org
                                     Officer              Washington DC
                                     Sr. Water Supply     World Bank Water and
 74   Ms.      Susana Smets          & Sanitation         Sanitation Program -   ssmets@worldbank.org
                                     Specialist           East-Asia Pacific

                                                          World Bank Water and
 75   Mr.      Guy Hutton            Senior Economist                            ghutton@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Sr. Water and
               Jane Elizabeth                             World Bank Water and
 76   Ms.                            Sanitation                                  jbevan1@worldbank.org
               Bevan                                      Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
                                     Sr. Water and
                                                          World Bank Water and
 77   Mr.      Joep Verhagen         Sanitation                                  jverhagen@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
                                                          World Bank Water and
 78   Ms.      Lira Suri             Program Assistant                           lsuri@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Water and
 79   Mr.      Manu Prakash          Sanitation           World Bank, SASDU
                                     Specialist
                                     Sr. Water and
                                                          World Bank Water and
 80   Mr.      Mariappa Kullappa     Sanitation                                  mkullappa@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
                                     Water and
                                                          World Bank Water and
 81   Mr.      Mathew Mullackal      Sanitation                                  mmullackal@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
                                                          World Bank Water and
 82   Ms.      Payal Jayant Hathi    Knowledge Broker                            phathi@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program

                                     Database             World Bank Water and
 83   Mr.      Rakesh Bhati                                                      rbhati@worldbank.org
                                     Coordinator          Sanitation Program

                                     Lead Water and
 84   Ms.      Smita Misra           Sanitation           World Bank, SASDU      smisra@worldbank.org
                                     Specialist (SASDU)
                                     Water and
                                                          World Bank Water and
 85   Mr.      Suseel Samuel         Sanitation                                  ssamuel1@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
                                     Water and
                                                          World Bank Water and
 86   Ms.      Upneet Singh          Sanitation                                  usingh@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
                                     Regional
                                                          World Bank Water and
 87   Ms.      Vandana Mehra         Communications                              vmehra@worldbank.org
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                     Specialist
               Aravinda                                   World Bank Water and
 88   Ms.                            Consultant
               Satyavada                                  Sanitation Program

                                                          World Bank Water and
 89   Mr.      Debabrata Bhuniya     Consultant                                  devbrat1@gmail.com
                                                          Sanitation Program

                                                          World Bank Water and
 90   Ms.      Henrietta Bullinger   Consultant
                                                          Sanitation Program
                                                          World Bank Water and
 91   Mr.      K.C. Sreenath         Consultant
                                                          Sanitation Program

                                                          World Bank Water and
 92   Ms.      Kathy Shordt          Consultant                                  shordt@gmail.com
                                                          Sanitation Program

               Nilanjana                                  World Bank Water and
 93   Ms.                            Consultant                                  nmukherjee@worldbank.org
               Mukherjee                                  Sanitation Program




30 | P a g e
                                                       World Bank Water and
 94   Ms.      Priyanka Singh    Consultant                                     psingh9@worldbank.org
                                                       Sanitation Program

 95   Mr.      Shouvik Mitra     Consultant            World Bank
                                                       World Bank Water and
 96   Ms.      Swati Saluja      Consultant
                                                       Sanitation Program
 97   Mr.      Arnold Cole       WASH Specialist       UNICEF                   acole@unicef.org
                                 Water Sanitation
 98   Mr.      Pankaj Mathur     and Hygiene           UNICEF                   pmathur@unicef.org
                                 Officer
 99   Mr.      Ved Prakash                             UNICEF
                                 Senior Consultant -
 10
      Mr.      Aroon             Monitor Inclusive     Monitor Deloitte         arvijaykar@deloitte.com
 0
                                 Markets
 10            Jayamala
      Ms.                        CEO                   Arghyam
 1             Subramaniam
                                 Senior Consultant -
 10            Jithamithra
      Mr.                        Monitor Inclusive     Monitor Deloitte
 2             Thathachari
                                 Markets
 10
      Mr.      Kedar Sharma      Camera Man
 3
                                                       Water, Sanitation and
 10
      Mr.      R.K. Srinivasan   Technical Advisor     Hygiene (WASH),          rk.srinivasan@planindia.org
 4
                                                       PLAN India
 10
      Mr.      Rakesh Mishra     Reporter              ETV News                 mishraetv@gmail.com
 5

 10                                                    Samachar Plus
      Mr.      Rakesh Sharma     Correspondent                                  rakesh.sharma28@yahoo.com
 6                                                     Rajasthan
 10
      Mr.      Simon Prince      Senior Consultant     MDN Fusion
 7
                                 Planning,
 10            Uday Shankar
      Mr.                        Monitoring and        WaterAid India
 8             Prasad
                                 Evalution Officer
                                                       Water Supply &
 10            Vinod Kumar       National              Sanitation
      Mr.                                                                       vinodmishra2810@gmail.com
 9             Mishra            Coordinator           Colloborative Council,
                                                       India Office




31 | P a g e
ANNEX 2: Program of the Rural Sanitation Knowledge Sharing Forum
                                                         Rural Sanitation Knowledge Sharing Forum
               What works at scale? Distilling the critical success factors for scaling up rural sanitation
                                                     Draft Programme, February 5-7th 2014, Jaipur, India

   Timing          Session           Title/Topic                       Focus                      Format                  Presenter                   Chairperson
                    theme
                                                              Day 1: 5th Feb.2014: Inaugural session
15:00-15:45     Registration with tea/ coffee

16:00- 17:30    Keynote addresses by the Hon’ble Minister RD & PR, Govt. of Rajasthan, Director (Sanitation) MDWS -GoI, Principal                Chair     Person    Mr.
                Secretary RD & PR, Government of Rajasthan, Mr. Joep Verhagen, WSP                                                               Shreemat        Pandey,
                                                                                                                                                 Principal     Secretary,
                                                                                                                                                 RD&PR, GoR
17:30- 18:30    Overview of      District        level    Enabling state policy with key       Presentation      Ms. Aparna Arora, Secretary,
                progress   in    campaigns at scale in    elements of the strategy and         followed     by   Government of Rajasthan,
                rural            Rajasthan                operational guidelines & case        discussions       Mr. Rohit Gupta & Ms. Arati
                sanitation in                             studies of successful district                         Dogra, District Collectors of
                Rajasthan                                 campaigns at scale.                                    Churu and Bikaner
   18:30
                Dinner at Chokhi Dhani
  onwards
                                             Day 2: 6th Feb.2014: Technical sessions - Morning Plenary Session
                                          Chair of the Day: Jane Bevan, Regional Sanitation Adviser, WSP South Asia
09:00- 09:20    Setting    the   Overview          of Overview of Nirmal Bharat Presentation              Mr.     Sujoy      Majumdar,           Ms. Aparna Arora,
                Scene: plenary   progress in rural Abhiyan (NBA) & new initiatives                        Director (Sanitation) MDWS,            Secretary, Government
                session          sanitation                                                               GoI                                    of Rajasthan
09:20–09:40                                            Experiences from World Bank Presentation           Ms. Smita Misra, SASDU,
                                                       Projects in India                                  World Bank India
09:40-10:00                                              A framework for the delivery of Presentation            Mr. Joep Verhagen, WSP
                                                         Sanitation Services at Scale                            India
 10.00- 10.30                                            Discussion                      Plenary panel           All 3 presenters
10:30 - 11:00 Coffee/ Tea Break
 11:00–11:20 Setting       the Sanitation Services        Sanitation at scale in rural India   Presentation      Ajith Kumar, WSP India          Mr.Sujoy  Majumdar,
                Scene: plenary at Scale                   – the case of Himachal Pradesh                                                         Director (Sanitation)
 11:20- 11:40 session                                     Delivering Sanitation Services at    Presentation      Ms. Pariyada Chokewinyoo,       MDWS, GoI
                                                          Scale in Thailand                                      Director of Environmental
                                                                                                                 Health, and Mrs. Neeranuch
                                                                                                                 Arphacharus, Senior Policy
                                                                                                                 and Plan Analyst, Dept. of
                                                                                                                 Health, Thailand
11:40- 12:00                                              Findings from a national study       Presentation      Mr. Mariappa Kullappa, WSP
                                                          on sanitation service delivery                         India
                                                          models in 56 districts in India
   Timing          Session          Title/Topic                      Focus                       Format              Presenter                  Chairperson
                    theme
12:00 -12:30                                           Discussion                          Plenary Panel All 3 presenters
                                                                                           Discussion
12:30–13:00    Theme 1:                                Introduction to Breakout sessions with 2-3 short presentations followed by group     Mr. Simon Prince
               Scaling up Rural Sanitation             discussions – report back in plenary
13:00-13:30: Group photograph
13:30-14:30: Lunch Break
Afternoon – Breakout Technical Sessions
               Breakout         Institutional          1.   Case study: institutional         Presentation   Ms.     Anandhi,    District   Mr. Joep     Verhagen,
 14:30–17:00 Session 1          strengthening for           strengthening at district         and            Collector, Bundi    District   WSP, India
                                taking sanitation to        level in Bundi District,          discussions    Rajasthan
                                scale                       Rajasthan.
                                                       2.   Case study: moving from                          Mr. Pravin Bakshi, District
                                                            unsafe sanitation to                             Collector (Tura), Meghalaya
                                                            collective behavior change in
                                                            Meghalaya, India                                 Mr. D R Joshi,
                                                       3.   Case study: Conjoint                             State Coordinator- NBA
                                                            approach to water &                              UttarakhandDr. Sumihardi,
                                                            sanitation in the State of                       SKM, M.Kes, Chair of
                                                            Uttarakhand                                      Communication Forum of
                                                       4.   Strategic approach to                            Indonesian Environmental
                                                            institutionalize capacity                        Health School
                                                            building for rural sanitation
                                                            in the Ministry of Health
                                                            curriculum, Indonesia
14:30–17:00    Breakout         Supply         chain   1.   Business development at-          Presentation   Ms. Susanna Smets, WSP         Ms. Jane Bevan, WSP,
               Session 2        strengthening/              scale: the role of industry       and            East Asia                      India
                                Sanitation Marketing        association to support            discussions
                                                            sanitation enterprises in
                                                            Indonesia
                                                       2.   Community wide                                   Mr. Muhammad Shamsul
                                                            approaches in delivering                         Kibria, Joint Secretary of
                                                            sanitation services through                      Local government Division,
                                                            Domestic private sector in                       Government of Bangladesh
                                                            Bangladesh                                       and Ms. Rokeya Ahmed, WSP
                                                       3.   A Market Led, Evidence                           Mr.     Aaroon    Vijayker,
                                                            Based Approach to Rural                          Monitor Deloitte
                                                            Sanitation in Bihar
14:30–17:00    Breakout         Demand creation        1.   ‘No toilet no bride’ – creating   Presentation   Mr. Nitin K. Yadav, Special    Mr.   Arnold       Cole,
               Session 3                                    demand at scale in Haryana        and            Secretary & Director, DP and   UNICEF, India
                                                                                              discussions    Mr. Puran Singh Yadav, State
                                                                                                             Project Coordinator NBA,
33 | P a g e
   Timing         Session       Title/Topic                 Focus                    Format               Presenter                  Chairperson
                   theme
                                                                                                 Government of Haryana
                                              2.   The National Choo Bora                        Mr. Elias Chinamo, Asst.
                                                   sanitation campaign in                        Director,   Environmental
                                                   Tanzania: emerging lessons                    Health, MHSW, Tanzania

                                              3.   Experience in demand                          Mr. Ajith Tiwari, Deputy
                                                   creation from Madhya                          Commissioner,          NBA,
                                                   Pradesh                                       Government of Madhya
                                                                                                 Pradesh
14:30–17:00    Breakout     Monitoring        1.   Large scale monitoring of      Presentation   Ms. Upneet Singh, WSP, India   Mr. Ajith Kumar, WSP
               Session 4                           sustainability of sanitation   and
                                                   outcomes using ICT in India    discussions

                                              2.   Monitoring Systems &                          Mr. B.K. Sawai,      State
                                                   Reward schemes - the                          Coordinator,         NBA,
                                                   Sant Gadgababa Swachata                       Government of Maharashtra
                                                   award scheme in
                                                   Maharashtra

 17:00-17:30   Panel        Reporting back    Highlights & key questions from     Panel Q&A      4 Session Chairs               Mr.Nitin K. Yadav,
               discussion                     the 4 breakout sessions                                                           Special Secretary, Govt.
                                                                                                                                of Haryana




34 | P a g e
Day 3, 7th Feb. 2014: Technical session and Conclusions
Chair of the Day: Nilanjana Mukherjee, WSP
 09:00- 09:30 Theme          2: Recap of Day 1, Recap of the day 1 technical                 Panel          Ms. Kathy Shordt, IRC          Mr. Simon Prince
                 Sustaining     Introduction to Day 2   session      proceedings       &
                 Sanitation at                          Introduction to Day 2
                 Scale
 09:30- 12:00 Breakout            Beyond         toilet 1. A national framework for          Presentation   Dr. Murugan, Consultant        Mr. Mariappa Kullappa,
                 Session 5        promotion/                solid and liquid waste           and            economist, NRC, MDWS, GOI      WSP, India
                                  SLWM                      management                       discussions
                                                        2. Solid and Liquid waste                           Ms.      Manjula,       NBA
                                                            resource recovery project of                    Coordinator, Zilla Parishad,
                                                            Dakshina Kannada,                               Dakshina Kannada, Govt of
                                                            Karnataka                                       Karnataka

                                                        3.   Next generation SLWM in                        Manu    Prakash,   SASDU,
                                                             Kerala                                         World Bank
09:30- 12:00    Breakout         Innovative finances    1.   Targeted subsidies for          Presentation   Mr. Shouvik Mitra, SASDL,      Mr. Guy Hutton, WSP,
                Session 6                                    reaching the poor in Orissa     and            World Bank                     India
                                                                                             discussions
                                                        2.   Lessons from rural                             Ms. Susanna Smets, WSP,
                                                             sanitation micro-finance in                    East Asia
                                                             Cambodia
09:30- 12:00    Breakout         Convergence with       1.   Experiences in convergence      Presentation   Mr. Ramulu Naik, Director &
                Session 7        MNREGA & other              of MNREGA and NBA from          and            Mr. Ravi Babu, Director CCD,   Joep Verhagen
                                 sectors In India            Andhra Pradesh                  discussions    SWSM, Andhra Pradesh           WSP/ World Bank

                                                        2.   New Initiatives in taking the                  Mr. Ram Bilash Sinha,
                                                             NBA forward: experiences                       Superintending    Engineer,
                                                             from Jharkhand                                 Government of Jharkhand.

                                                        3.    Moving from contracting                       M S Jawaid, Director, PMU,
                                                              mode      to      community                   PHED, Government of Bihar
                                                              empowerment: Experience
                                                              from Bihar
                Breakout         Communication and      1.   The roll-out of the National    Presentation   Mr. Arnold Cole, UNICEF        Ms. Jane Bevan, WSP,
                Session 8        Advocacy                    Sanitation and Hygiene,         and            Rajasthan                      India
                                                             Advocacy and                    discussions
                                                             Communication campaign

                                                        2.   Large scale campaign on                        Dr. Rajesh Rana, GoI AIDS
                                                             Aids control in India                          Programme
                                                        3.   Using Behavior Change                          Mr. Umar Masereka, Govt of
                                                             Communication to Promote                       Uganda & Ms. Harriet

35 | P a g e
                                                         Hand Washing at scale in                     Nattabi, WSP, Uganda
                                                         Uganda
12:00- 12:30   Panel            Reporting Back       Highlights & key questions from   Panel Q&A      4 Session Chairs              Neelanjana Mukerjee
               discussion                            the 4 breakout sessions                                                        consultant WSP/ Joep
                                                                                                                                    Verhagen, WSP
                                                                12:30 – 13:30: Lunch break
13:30- 14:30   Plenary          Key challenges and   Distilling the critical success Presentation &   Ms. Kathy Shordt, Mr. Simon
                                lessons learnt       factors for scaling up rural participatory       Prince, Joep Verhagen
                                                     sanitation                        session
14.30 –15:30   Vote of Thanks, Closing




36 | P a g e
37 | P a g e
