Report No: ACS8614



World
IT based innovation in rural/urban WSS -
Sanitation Hackathon
(P131958)


26 May 2014




TWIWP
OTHER
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors
of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in
this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may
be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Sanitation Hackathon
 Nov 30-Dec 2, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS




Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................. 5

Executive summary............................................................................................................. 6

Snapshots from across the globe ....................................................................................... 10

Next Steps ......................................................................................................................... 24

Annexure ........................................................................................................................... 27
      List of Problem Statements
      List of Winning Applications
      List of all applications (181)
      List of Partners
Acknowledgements
The Sanitation Hackathon was a joint effort with many contributors. Internally, the event
was planned and executed jointly by Water and Sanitation Program, Water Anchor and
ICT Unit of The World Bank. The global partners included Gates Foundation, Random
Hacks Of Kindness, Google, Microsoft, Yahoo!, NASA, HP, Eirene, UNICEF. Many
other partners at local sites, such as Google Developers, IBM, Infosys, Microsoft, Nokia,
Sprint, Globe Labs & Globe Telecommunications, Smart Communications, Maynilad
water utility, Idea Space, Blogwatch and Unilever contributed towards successful
organization of the event.

The report was compiled by Water and Sanitation Program with inputs from partners.
Executive summary
The increasing availability of open data sets, the spread of mobile phones and the
availability of high-fidelity, low-cost mapping tools has created new opportunities for
solutions to seemingly-intractable water and sanitation challenges. Accordingly, in order
to attract new ideas for addressing these challenges, the World Bank reached out to the
global software community by hosting the Sanitation Hackathon. A hackathon event is an
intensive marathon of brainstorming and programming, where software developers and
designers compete to create new tools for solving a given problem. The first step in
organizing a hackathon was, therefore, to identify the pressing problems in the water and
sanitation sector as defined by Bank specialist and end users of water and sanitation
services. These problems fed into the Sanitation Hackathon events which took place in
2012 simultaneously in multiple global locations, including in Dhaka, Nairobi, Cairo,
Pune, London, Kampala, Tel Aviv, and Washington DC.

The Sanitation Hackathon achieved the following:

   1,223 hackers participated across 16 sites with 23% female participants on an average
   132 Sanitation related problems were recorded online in categories of handwashing,
    latrines, open defecation, waste water, governance, urban and rural.
   125 of these problems were hacked, resulting in 188 projects/prototypes
   The sanitationhackacthon.org website received more than 15,000 unique visitors from
    183 countries
   More than 10 million impressions (number of times a tweet was delivered to a
    person’s twitter feed) of tweets using the #sanhack or #toilethacker hash tag
Introduction:
The need for innovative solutions to the chronic lack of sanitation worldwide is immense.
Of those people who lack access to improved sanitation, 1.1 billion have no facilities at
all and defecate in the open. These sanitation shortages account for thousands of deaths
daily, especially among children. Additionally, poor sanitation costs billions of dollars in
economic losses annually, as high as 7 percent of GDP in some countries. "That's billions
of dollars that could educate poor children or help build infrastructure - like schools and
roads," said World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim.

Conversely, more than 6 billion people worldwide have access to a mobile phone,
including in rural and urban areas in developing countries. The surge in mobile phones in
Africa - some 94 percent of urban Africans, for example, are near a GSM signal - is
transforming the way people complete daily tasks, from knowing when to sell farm
commodities, to finding easier ways to pay bills or send money to family and friends.
With ever increasing mobile penetration and falling prices of smart phones, mobile
applications provide a platform to address myriad critical issues and an opportunity to
solve problems in the developing world.

A hackathon event is an intensive brainstorming and programming marathon, drawing
together the talent and initiative of software developers. These events are typically
between several days and a week in length and some are commercially oriented. The
barrier to entry in the creation of mobile and web applications is very low, enabling a
process of ideation and innovation as well as the creation of prototype software solutions
under the time constrains of a hackathon. Recognizing the potential for co-creation of
knowledge, an increasing number of hackathon events aim to pair technology expertise
with real world development problems. Random Hacks of Kindness (RHoK) is an
example of this new phenomenon.

The 2011 Water Hackathon was a first-of-its-kind gathering of software developers with
the aim of increasing awareness of water sector challenges facing developing countries
amongst technical communities in-country and globally. Led by the Water and Sanitation
Program, Water Anchor and ICT Unit the World Bank the Water Hackathon took place
in October of 2011 in more than 10 countries. New ideas and solutions were developed
by people not normally exposed to the water, sanitation and hygiene sector. At the water
hackathon out of the 113 problems that were defined, 50 solutions were created and more
than 60% of the solutions created are in various stages of deployment in projects.

Sanitation Hackathon

In November 2012, the two-day Sanitation Hackathon was organized simultaneously in
more than 16 locations including, Manila, Jakarta, Dhaka, Lahore, Pune, London,
Helsinki, Cape Town, Dakar, Lima, Dar-es-Salaam, Kampala, Hartford, New York,
Washington DC and Chicago. Another 28 satellite cities contributed through RHOK, the
global and regional partners of which included Google, Microsoft, Yahoo!, NASA, HP,
and the World Bank. In all, 1,223 hackers participated, nearly one fourth being female
participants. About 125 sanitation problems were hacked resulting in 188 prototypes.
The Sanitation Hackathon was organized by the World Bank Group in partnership with
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Random Hacks of Kindness (RHOK), Eirene,
UNICEF, and many other partners at local sites, such as Google Developers, IBM,
Infosys, Microsoft, Nokia, Sprint, and Unilever.




Often neglected, the world’s sanitation crisis needs urgent attention across multiple
sectors to meet the basic needs of the 2.5 billion people without access. One billion
people have no facilities at all and forced to defecate in the open. Lack of access to clean
water and sanitation kills more than 4,000 children a day worldwide and a lack of
sanitation results in billions of dollars in economic losses to developing countries.
Challenges facing the sanitation sector are diverse and widespread, affecting youth
development, community behavior, global health, and more. At the current rate, the
world will not meet its Millennium Development Goal target by 2015.

With the global revolution in low-cost information and communication technologies,
there is a huge opportunity to address information flow problems across the sector,
helping to make improved sanitation services more accessible and sustainable for the
world’s people.

The Sanitation Hackathon leveraged the existing partnerships and momentum of the
Water hackathon community, including the lessons learned and expert problem
statements, and to apply a specific focus on sanitation clients and sector needs.

The development objective of sanitation hackathon to create a network of atypical
partners engaged in finding solutions to sanitation-related challenges and to raise
awareness of sanitation sector challenges in developing countries to software
professionals.
The Sanitation Hackathon had the following phases to achieve the intended results:

Component 1 – Problem Statements (August – October 2012): Define country specific
sanitation challenges for which ICT could provide solutions developed through clinics
with sanitation sector professionals and software experts

Component 2 – Technical Community Engagement (August – October 2012): Creation of
a network of partners engaged in finding solutions to sanitation-related challenges.

Component 3 – Access to Appropriate Prototypes –Hackathon event (December 2012 –
March 2013): Simultaneous events across the globe to develop new applications and
codes to address sanitation challenges and continuing the challenge with a hack at home
contest to continue to refine their prototypes after the event held in December

The event was characterized by more outreach to software developers’ and greater
ownership of challenges. More than a thousand computer programmers and other
information technology specialists in 16 cities around the world developed 181 new
application software, or apps from Dec 1-2 to help improve access to safe sanitation for
the 2.5 billion poor people who lack it. The "hackers" competed for 48 hours in the first
ever global Sanitation Hackathon.

In a video welcome message, Dr. Jim Kim, President, World Bank told the hackers their
expertise could impact the lives of the world's poorest people. "With your help, we want
to tackle this massive challenge. The availability of mobile phones is a game changer
because of mobile technology, which has created enormous opportunities. We believe
there are technological solutions that can help us provide sanitation for more poor people
and can save more children from preventable diseases. You could be the very people who
create the tools for a solution that helps families, villages and maybe whole countries to
tackle the sanitation challenge at a large scale."

The spirit behind the Sanitation Hackathon as articulated best by anthropologist Margaret
Mead, that one should “never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens
can change the world. Indeed, it’s the only thing that ever has.”

While all sites targeted bringing about new technological innovations in the sanitation
sector, the event emerged very differently at the different locations.
Snapshots from across the globe




Manila and 5 cities in Philippines

Context: Potential megacommunities exist in many areas like health, transport, etc. where
leaders raise questions like “what problems are we dealing with?” “why can’t we solve
them within our walls,” and “what other organizations are affected by the same issues?”
Organizations and people then deliberately come together as megacommunities around a
compelling issue of mutual importance, following a set of practices and principles to
make it easier for them to achieve results. Using this principle, the Phillipines team
approached the Google Developer Group and Google Business Groups to come on board
as partners to promote the cause of “social good.”

Pre-Hackathon: Prior to the hackathon, government representatives and civil society
members were asked to identify sanitation problems during consultations. While the
agendas were both specific in content and relatively unstructured in scope, there was
plenty of informal moments during which people could speak openly. Meetings were not
conducted with the standard “packed-in” conference format of presentations and panel
discussions, because the primary purpose was to build relationships and help participants
develop the ability to work together. The problem statements were distributed to the
different communities during the Hackathon. Local government representatives acted as
mentors and resource persons.

The WSP team was able to develop partnerships with six Google Developer's
communities around the country in Baguio City, Bacolod, Cebu City, Davao City, Makati
City and Zamboanga City. The hackathon could be simultaneously hosted in the three
major land groups in the Philippines – Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. Several key
players included telecommunications companies like Globe Labs & Globe
Telecommunications and Smart Communications; water utilities like Maynilad; tech
incubators like Idea Space and online organizations like Blogwatch.

Hackathon Event: It was interesting that each city produced different applications in tune
with local sanitation challenges and problems. More than thirty full applications were
developed at the end of the Hackathon.

“Local” communities were not constrained nor by the age-old boundaries of geography
and demography. Social media like Facebook (via the Facebook page and
announcements), g talk, google hangout, google hangout on air and YouTube kept the
momentum alive across cities and competitive fervor high. Courtesy Google, the event
was covered by national television, radio, newspaper, blogs, Facebook, twitter and
Instagram, and google plus.

Because it was simultaneously done in six cities, the Internet connection was very
critical. This proved tricky all the sites did not enjoy good Internet connection. However,
the organizers bridged such boundaries by making team presentations on YouTube and
communicating via cellphones.

Through sponsors and partners, the team leveraged as much for $24,000.00 across six
cities to cover venue, food, Internet, and event management. An additional $20,000 was
also obtained for prizes and awards.

Outcome: Awarding activities are ongoing and have already been carried out in different
cities. Dialogues have been initiated between winners with the purpose of collaborating
further with the developers. Idea Space has given a grant to the winner.

A megacommunity is a living entity and is continually challenged to absorb new players.
Google Developers Group Chapters and their community managers will be instrumental
in the next phase to further communication via email, google talk and google hangout.

Three to four entries from the cities of Bacolod and Baguio have already been made for
hack@home challenge.

Links to video presentations:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vq_f_2TGyr8
http//youtu.be/UBCTYN1LJB8
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tBqrvsNaD5o
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8kv3BzAAkg

Press Conference Makati




Briefing of Judges
Viewing presentations via youtube -




Dar es Salaam in Tanzania
Context: Dar es salaam focused on leveraging the participation of the hackers to
implement prototypes such that they might achieve the greatest possible impact. The
organisers struggled with how to introduce hackers to the existing sanitation situation and
encourage embracing, inﬂuencing and planning for the future. Two field trips to rural
Rufiji Delta and urban Tandale were organized a week prior to the Hackathon, which
hosted members of the IT and media communities. Technologists were able to witness
and internalize the challenges facing the sanitation sector.
(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WwCcKbAx_VA)
156 people registered, 68 participated, 6 teams were formed, and 7 problem statements
were tackled by 8 prototype applications

Pre- Hackathon: In order to further facilitate innovative solution development, the team
invited a number of sanitation stakeholders for a brainstorming session where they
presented their problem statements.

The goal of sessions, camps, meet-ups was to detect more problems at the point of origin.
This is the first point of engagement in defining the problem statements.
The emphasis was to find and exploit a broad range of strategic viewpoints:
• Top-down: viewpoints emanating from subject matter experts at top positions within the
government, multilateral and bilateral aid agencies
• Bottom-up: viewpoints emanating from field level sanitation specialists and service
providers
• Outside-in, viewpoints emanating from everyone, including customers, vendors,
competitors, and the world at large, and
• Peer-to-peer viewpoints emanating from different site leads.

In order to ensure that the Tanzania hackathon is demand-driven, the team organized the
first brainstorming session for sector stakeholders in September. That gave them the
platform to express the pressing problems in sanitation which could be solved using ICT
tools. The initially indicated problem statements were then followed up with their owners
on individual basis through specifically-designed Crisis, Need and Impact Statements
template. Together they identifed eight critical issues, ranging from segmentation of the
behavioral messages by key population to strengthening supply chain, with the priority
being the sanitation performance reporting, monitoring and aggregation. The authors of
the problem statements came from the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW),
UNICEF, NIMR, TaWaSaNet, Development Partners Group (DPG), Care International,
WaterAid, UKaid, JICA and WSP.

An innovation hub KINU that was launched less than a year ago was the lead partner.
The pre-events and the Hackathon itself were located in KINU (private) and
TANZICT/COSTECH (public) boasting secured highest speed Internet connection.
Existing creative open spaces attracted expertise and maintained the spirit of energy and
openness. , snacks, comfortable chairs, powerstrips and creativity were in ample supply at
the site. Other Sanitation Hackathon in Tanzania partners from private sector included
EXP, Coca Cola and Skyprint.

Hackathon Event: The Tanzania event saw the participation of Senior Tanzania
government official, Director of Preventive Services in the Ministry of Health, Mr. Elias
Chinamo, who in his keynote address spoke of bringing in “new partner from the ICT
community” to find cost-effective solutions to “address the data collection systems,
health management information system and periodic surveys”. He informed the
participants of the sanitation context in Tanzania, i.e. the implementation of the National
Sanitation Campaign. Philippe Dongier, the World Bank Country Director for Tanzania,
Uganda, and Burundi, shared with the participants his experience as Manager of ICT
programs at the World Bank and motivated them to be the “real factor of change”. The
BongoSafi uStream channel live streamed the inaugural ceremony and other key
moments of the Tanzania site event.

Hackers were particularly motivated as they got an opportunity to “pitch” proposals to
Gary Gale, Director, Web & Community, NOKIA
(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w4PNFU0NsA) who was one of the judges at the
Hackathon encouraged the participants.

During the Hack, the organizers identified some challenges. One of them (lack of
familiarity with open source code repositories) was addressed directly after the event
during a short workshop at KINU.
The social media as well as the branding was designed on the ‘Bongo Safi’ theme that
translates as ‘Clean Tanzania’ or ‘Cool Tanzania’. Facebook was the main community-
outreach channel, where the information about the pre-events and upcoming hackathon
was regularly posted. Between December 1-7, a total of 1,640 people were reached via
‘Sanitation Hackathon in Tanzania’ Facebook site. To enable registration, inform about
the event, as well as share photos and videos, the Tanzania site also used Twitter (adding
local #bongosafi hashtag), Youtube, Flickr, Blogspot, Eventbrite and Lanyrd.

Post- Hackathon: Popular among winning hacks were some variation on behavioral
messaging (http://www.slideshare.net/Tumainigroup ) and mobile reporting systems.
Overall, 6 tools were developed, with some of them including responses to a few
problems, e.g. ODF and sanitation monitoring app. For example, some tools designed to
map data relied on crowdsourcing to obtain the data in question (e.g Intervention and
Approach Map (http://www.slideshare.net/reg_8/sanitationhackathon-presentation-
15449428) ), Strenghtening Supply Chain in Toilets Sanitation
(http://www.slideshare.net/big_com/dream-team-15449297 )). The same was true for
some of the tools aimed at building a database of information.

Follow up events include events arranged within the pre-incubation such as meeting with
the stakeholders, final presentation of the working demos, and feedback session with
WSP (e.g. December 14) etc.

Outcome: Each of the three winning teams were offered pre-incubation at the tech
sponsors TANZICT/DTBI hub, while GWOB offered the first prize winners, the Dream
Team (Strenghtening Supply Chain in Toilets Sanitation) additional mentoring and
support for solutions. The incubation possibilities included access to networked and well-
equipped facilities/labs as well as access to mentors who could provide guidance on
product development and marketing. By the end of the three month incubation the teams
committed to develop working technical prototypes. Two of the winner teams have
presented their road maps for this process to the Hackathon team.

The updates have been provided on Facebook, which was the most visited community
outreach channel.

From Dar es Salaam, there are 25 registrants in the hack@home challenge and three ideas
have been submitted.

Sanitation Hackathon in Tanzania
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=He4V3UG7rRw
Time doesn't exist at Sanitation Hackathon in Tanzania
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HwUqNl5vYiw
Gary is impressed!
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w4PNFU0NsA
Sanitation Hackathon Field Trips HD
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CaUMqBFgbWg
LINKS TO COMMUNITY-OUTREACH CHANNELS:
https://www.facebook.com/bongosafi
http://www.flickr.com/photos/bongosafi
http://www.youtube.com/bongosafi
http://www.eventbrite.com/bongosafi
http://www.lanyrd.com/2012/sanhack
http://www.bongosafi.blogspot.com

Lima in Peru:
Context: Hackathons are inherently local events. To endorse intensive engagement and
co-production of applications across multiple locations was centric to Lima’s event
design. The Sanitation Hackathon in Lima became a regional event as the design included
both onsite and remote locations for hosting the event to reach more people with the
given resources.

Pre-Hackathon: Since a convergent specialist approach was required, a firm was recruited
to launch and execute the event. Their expertise to enroll strategic partners including
government institutions, universities and technology partners to participate and help in
the dissemination of the event led to high outreach.

Partners and strategic allies were invited to join this initiative through direct invitations
and one on one meet-ups. They participated as consumers of prototypes developed (for
example the Information System on Water and Sanitation of the Governments of Panama,
Honduras and Nicaragua – SIASAR would benefit with the development of one of the
proposed apps) or as part of the jury (Ministry of the Presidency of Peru through a
representative of the Science and Technology Office of Peru).

Before the event, video conferencing with sanitation specialists using Adobe Connect
were organised for interested technologists living abroad (including those from Peru,
other parts of Lima and other countries). Two preparatory meetings were held in the
World Bank Lima office because it was very accessible for hackers and sanitation
specialists and it offered the best technical facilities to connect virtually with participants
from the region.

The participants were advised and monitored during their inscription process and while
modeling their applications. Sanitation facts and general information was disseminated
through short videos and interviews in the social media channels. Other innovation
experiences from previous hackathons were shared.

Since the event was to be hosted from remote sites, the WSP provided detailed
information regarding:
 Feasibility of developing a remote event only if adequate promotion and interaction
    with participants is guaranteed
 Possibility to launch a remote event in parallel with the local event.
 Improved communication and feedback between stakeholders, participants and
    members of the jury.
 Planning the Hackathon dates keeping in mind the timetables of all participant
  countries. This proved difficult since the dates chosen clashed with another regional
  hackathon happening the same day and other institutions committed efforts for their
  own hackathons happening in the same month.
 Initiating coordination with potential partners and allies with several months of
  anticipation.
 Engagement with government institutions to access their data.
 Rescue the proposals that weren’t chosen as finalist for potential development with
  local partners and provide feedback for possible incubation.
 Promoting the application of business modeling, mentoring and incubation. Random
  Hacks of Kindness is promoting this model in partnership with Geeks without Bounds
  (http://gwob.org) and Social Coding for Good (http://www.benetech.org/)
  http://www.rhok.org/blog/sustainability-partnerships-how-apply-and-what-you-get

The six “sanitation challenges” identified from the sessions were:
Challenge 1: How can we collect data on sanitation in areas without connectivity?
Challenge 2: How can we promote hygiene to prevent infant mortality?
Challenge 3: How to get bathrooms/toilets at lower prices?
Challenge 4: How governments should prioritize investments in sanitation in certain
areas?
Challenge 5: How water and sanitation utilities can provide better service to users?
Challenge 6: How to solve other problems of sanitation? (open category)

Hackathon Event: The Hackathon was launched at WSP LAC’s Regional Office in Lima
to ensure easy connectivity with participants from across Latin America. However, the
atmosphere in the virtual communities was a bit like a ﬂea market – vibrant, noisy,
unpredictable and never dull. The strategy focused on internet based operations: website,
blog, social media accounts (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, etc.), e-mails and web
conferences.
     The website provided information regarding goals of the hackathon and logistics
        of the event
     Social networks accounts went viral with constant updates of activities on
        Facebook, YouTube and Twitter accounts.

As part of the Jury members, we had a representative from the Health sector (Pan
American Health Organization) as well a representative of the Presidency Ministry,
through the Science and Technology Program Unit (FINCyT).

Post-Hackathon: Each one of the three winners received personalized advisory and also
US$ 1,000 (one thousand dollars) to improve their hacks.

Outcome: The three winning teams are in the process of improvising their apps to
showcase them before sanitation specialists and decision makers in the Latin American
Conference on Sanitation to be held in Panama in May, 2013. In parallel there will be a
BBL to show the community the results obtained.
Total of registered teams: 35; Total of registered participants: 80; Total of male
participants: 64; Total of female participants: 16 and total of proposals in competition: 8
Links of videos to You Tube sites and photos from the event
www.facebook.com/HackatonSaneamiento
www.youtube.com/hackatonsaneamiento

Cape Town in South Africa

Context: From Main Street to Wall Street, leaders are beginning to see the value of
connection and community. Finding it difficult for the project to take off from the ground
and to create greater impact, the WSP team in Cape Town joined hands with Random
Hacks of Kindness (RHOK) that was organising a hackathon to address real world social
development and humanitarian challenges on the same weekend.

Pre-Hackathon: Random Hacks of Kindness encouraged partners to become involved and
bring their own strengths and resources to bear in support of the Sanitation Hackathon.
SeeSaw, a social enterprise that customises ICT to support sanitation and water providers,
was a strategic partner in articulating problem statements as well as facilitating the event
given its past record of organizing Hackathons. Different partners i.e. Silicon Cape
Initiative, Random Hacks of Kindness, Community Water and Sanitation Working
Groups made presentations in different communities and profiled the event online.

Hackathon Event: The event was pitched at three separate sanitation events and three tech
events in the run up to the weekend and ideas sought. The FSM conference in Durban
that boasted more than 200 participants in early November was one of the platforms to
announce the hackathon. The challenges were posted both on the official website, blog
and video clips available on Youtube and Facebook. There was continuous engagement
with registrants through emails providing more detailed information prior to the event.
Press releases and posters increased visibility and the event was covered in both
electronic and print media.

There was hardly any participation from the Government given the event was taking
place on the weekend. However, NGOs were more inclined to participate to co-create
technological solutions for social causes.

Challenges:
 No ‘pre-event’ took place given the risk of low turnout and raising logistical and
  financial cost. While coders and sanitation experts were highly motivated to work
  together during the hackathon, there was hardly any dialogue between different groups
  prior to the event.
 Uncertainty regarding contracting processes slowed event planning.

Post Hackathon: The Facebook page of the event and blogs continue to be updated.
Participants were invited to submit ideas to the Hack-at-Home contest. At least two
entries have been posted on hack@home.
Outcome: The WSP is facilitating the dialogue between the winning two teams with the
relevant stakeholders for mentoring to take their ideas and prototypes forward.
Silicon Cape and RHOK have their own outreach channels – and there is a monthly
ICT4D social event at which updates are being shared.

Links of videos to You Tube sites and photos from the event
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okPeXCQmtP8
https://twitter.com/OnTheSeeSaw/status/274893937477550081/photo/1
https://twitter.com/OnTheSeeSaw/status/274865084545777665/photo/1
http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=141674189315043&set=pb.13109475703965
3.-
2207520000.1360144962&type=3&theater
https://plus.google.com/photos/105822237327704938744/albums/572724063512364683
3
/5817418742091969282?banner=pwa

Dhaka in Bangladesh

Context: Dhaka’s IT scene has been growing fast during the last years and Bangladesh is
the forth biggest exporter of short code in the world. Already, technology resolves issues
like payment of water bills using a mobile phone, charging money to a mobile money
account, checking crop prices on your mobile and accessing information about child
vaccination.

Pre-Hackathon: Given this context of high number of technologists already working in
the development sector, Dhaka attracted the maximum number of participants to show up
on any site across the globe as 310 hackers assembled to join the competition on
November 30th.

The hackathon organizing team held a pre-hackathon Innovation Expo. Bringing
students, companies, local government leaders to the same arena, the Expo functioned as
an innovation hotspot. The most promising small- and medium-sized IT firms were
invited. These companies included, Bkash, which offers financial services via mobile
phone; Kothay, which develops maps offering different types of location data; AjkerDeal,
which helps in finding the best deal for your favorite product; and BizCube, an
incubation lab. The companies collected suggestions from students and local
governments for developing their services further to tackle the problem statements.

The government leaders came from 12 different districts across Bangladesh to present
their problem statements to the IT students. The expo led to many interesting
conversations between IT firms, the chairmen and the students, about developing new
innovations for tackling the problems discussed.

Hackathon Event: The Hackathon partnered with more than 20 IT related companies that
not only engaged in problem identification and promised support in deployment of
applications. For the first time in history, 20 local governments and 1500 students came
together on one platform with sanitation centre stage.

However, it was not by chance that people showed up. The hackathon was a cleverly
designed event keeping in mind two factors:
    a) the event be seen as a continuous process, not as a one-stop event
    b) long-lasting relations with the ICT sector in developing apps to tackle poverty.

The expo, which attracted some 1,500 students, was the starting point for the registration
for Sanitation Hackathon. Word of mouth ensured that hackers flocked to the hackathon
site and IT firms felt confident of large turnout and local leadership support.

While various communication strategies were used to attract participants, connecting
with Base, the umbrella association for IT companies, was a key differentiator that made
it possible to inform all IT companies.

Local government partners were selected by interest. The focus was on enrollment of city
corporations that were more IT savvy and had their specific technology requirements.
Thirteen local government representatives mentored students on real-world problems in
their localities. The Government was enrolled by cooperating with Access to Information
team of Prime Minister’s Office. They provided support in preparation of hackathon,
offering data and volunteers during the event. INGOs were brought in as problem
statement owners.

Critical to the event’s success was having an IT mentor for every problem statement,
devoted to solving that special one. Mentors ensured that all the solutions were
documented and no two teams worked on the same solution. The mentors also chose
which solutions to present to the audience.

The connectivity- and bandwidth support was worth around USD 7000 and swags were
worth around USD 1000.

Post Hackathon and Outcome:Already, discussions are underway with a tech incubator to
support 10 to 20 teams.

Photos and videos:
http://hackathonbd.com/gallery/video/?tubepress_page=1

Lahore and 7 other cities in Pakistan
Context: The site was active in creating an environment that was conducive to
breakthroughs. Four intensive sessions were held to define problem statements in rural
and urban water and sanitation utilities/service providers and received about 35 problem
statements. These were combined and simplified (from development language to IT
lingo) into total 14.
The sanitation challenges that emerged included verification of ODF through technology;
connecting the demand & supply of sanitation, sanitation games for awareness raising,
tracking the complaints and improving governance using mobiles etc.

Pre- Hackathon: Eight tech camps were organized in various parts of Pakistan, some of
which were within private university premises. The lead partner Punjab Information
Technology Board (PITB) provided the venue (for hacking and for residence of non-
Lahore hackers) and also their IT equipment's and facilities. Chairman PITB, Dr Umar
Saif announced "incubation chamber" facility for two teams to continue refining the app
with technical and financial assistance of PITB.

Hackathon: Rachid Benmessaoud, Country Director, World Bank in Pakistan delivered
the keynote address highlighting the Bank support to innovation and youth. It attracted
influential people like the former Federal Minister of Science & Technology & IT, Dr
Professor Atta ur Rehman to kick start the inaugural event. Partnering Urban Unit
supported participant registration on November 30th using technology to issue bar coded
registration name tags.

Post-Hackathon and Outcome: About 15 national and multi-national companies and
institutions supported the event as sponsors from give ways for hackers to breakfast and
dinners and from providing mentors to prizes for winners.

Pune in India
Pre-Hackathon: Ahead of the event, two brainstorming sessions were held in India, which
brought together sanitation sector specialists and software developers to identify
problems in the sanitation sector where ICT could help.

The Pune event garnered considerable interest from Government, IT companies and
sector professionals. Around 18 partners/sponsors collaborated (more than the water
hackathon) with the event including three ministries from the Government of India, the
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Urban Development and the
Ministry of Drinking Water Supply.

The lead technology partner Infosys provided their 100 acre campus to host the event.
Over the years, they have catalyzed some of the major changes that have led to India's
emergence as the global destination for software services talent. They pioneered the
Global Delivery Model and became the first IT company from India to be listed on
NASDAQ.

Post Hackathon: The WSP has organized a workshop in Delhi for the six winning teams
to present their prototypes before high profile government officials from the Department
of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Department of Urban Development and Department of
Information Technology and also other development sector specialists in the first quarter
of 2013.
Outcome: WSP has already supported the winner of the Bangalore Water Hackathon in
development of a mobile application which provides customers the opportunity to
provide feedback on the quality of service in water and sanitation corroborating the
reporting done by the city on the Ministry of Urban Development on service level
benchmarking. The application is being piloted amongst 25,000 people.

This year, two Incubators are supporting the winners of the sanitation hackathon in their
prototypes post the event. The Infosys Foundation is in the process of refining and
developing team TernUp’s Toilet app and The Hatch for Startups is working with the
3sensitizers to develop their prototype.

Helsinki in Finland
Context and Pre-Hackathon: In Helsinki, a hackathon of approximately 30 people was
organized in Aalto University, which is often referred to as the innovation hub of Finland.
The Helsinki Hackathon used problem statements from Dhaka and from other sites.
Hackathon: The Helsinki event was conducted by people from the innovations lab of
IBM Finland and other interesting companies. Finland’s key for innovations lies in games
and also the hackathon had its game aspect to it. One interesting phenomena in Aalto
University’s partnerships is the Bottom of the Pyramid or “BoP”. Finnish games
developers and other startups pay attention to innovations for the poorer part of the global
population. That’s why the sanitation hackathon was seen as an interesting event where
Finnish innovations could be useful in other parts of the world, in cases when
partnerships are born. This was the main gain of organizing the sanitation hackathon.
Finnish development cooperation concentrates on water and Finnish Water Forum was
one of the main organizers of this event.

Outcome: Now that more people in the IT sector are more aware of the problems related
to sanitation and water in developing countries, also Finnish technology can be for help
in solving the water and sanitation problems in the developing world.

London in United Kingdom
Pre-Hackathon: Ensuring a legacy from any hackathon is important and the Sanitation
Hackathon is no different. Having hackers turn up, write some code and leave isn’t
sustainable. Part of the solution is to facilitate communication with other sites. Instead of
competing, open source software is about collaboration. The same applies here. The
different sites will communicate with each other, so what happens in Dar es Salaam isn't
replicated in London and vice-versa.

Another critical piece is ensuring that the right tools and environment are there for the
participants. In London and Dar es Salaam, server space was made available for teams to
use during the hackathon so hacks were available online. Others could view their work
and functionality during the event as well as after, potentially getting feedback from
problem statement owners, NGOs and Ministries. All the code will be open source and
available on Github so more hackers can develop on top of the solutions. Technically for
the event we aim to have blisteringly fast internet, a lot of power points with a few spare
Raspberry Pi and Arduino boards available for hardware hacking.
The event was sponsored by Unilever’s Domestos brand. Two of its judges were Andrew
Stott and Alex Kay. Andrew Stott was the UK Government's first Director of
Transparency and Digital Engagement, creating data.gov.uk. He continues to advise the
UK Government as a member of the UK Transparency Board, is a senior consultant to
the Transport, Water and ICT Group in the World Bank and is on the Advisory Board of
the Open Knowledge Foundation.

Alex Kay is the Managing Director of Opera Ventures and Executive Trustee of the
Qismat Development Fund. Among many innovations around economic models, he
developed the world’s first “Micro Donations Platform”, which empowers anyone to
raise funds for a cause and has integrated over 150,000 charities and NPOs worldwide.
Hackathon: Around 30 people participated in the Sanitation Hackathon in London,
organized by WSUP (Water and Sanitation for the Urban Poor).

Hub Westminster hosted the Launch of the London Sanitation Hack on the 30th of
November sponsored by Unilever's Domestos brand. The evening program started with
explaining the meaning of the events objectives. The Hub Westminister is a make
laboratory for change makers seeking to take ideas from action to impact.

Post-Hackathon and learnings: Some of the winning apps were: 1st place: Upraise my
Loo, Quick Financial Sustainability Check, Latrine Surfer. As one of the supporters,
Geeks Without Bounds offered prize of two mentorship sessions to the team deemed
"most needed to continue." An accelerator for humanitarian projects, GWOB helps good
ideas reach deployment readiness. Other supporter were Skoll Centre for Social
Entrepreneurship and ARUP.

Due to the rise of the maker movement and cheap customisable hardware, it’s important
to stress that a hackathon isn’t just about software, hardware is equally important (An
important distinction here is that software in the sanitation sector generally refers to
behaviors, but here refers to actual software, such as programs.) The equilibrium between
software and hardware has been at play within the IT industry since its inception. The
hackathons in London will aim to address the global sanitation challenges, however if the
right environment can be facilitated then hopefully the right (and best) solutions,
hardware or software, will result.

Outcome: Impact HUB aims to provide access to investment, space, programs and a
global peer network hosted to foster collaborative practices and learning opportunities.
Next Steps
The two-day Sanitation Hackathon event in December became a gateway for teams who
developed creative solutions to obtain additional support to further refine and prepare
their apps. It provided the platform to attract hackers to work on development challenges
who are not only getting incubation support but also provided with opportunities to
showcase their prototypes to new audiences through organisers of the event.

The Sanitation Application Challenge
The Sanitation App Challenge was a continuation of the efforts put forth during the
Sanitation Hackathon. During and immediately after the hackathon, participants and the
wider public were invited to register for the Sanitation App Challenge, a months-long
process that linked developers with each other and with mentors to support the
development of prototypes into apps that are stable and ready for deployment.

The Sanitation App Challenge (www.sanitation.hackathome.com) is part of a global
project aimed at improving the lives of millions of people. The online "Hack at Home"
challenge, raises the bar and increases the sense of competition from the local level to the
global level. The Sanitation App Challenge builds on the problem statements defined
during the Sanitation Hackathon, which brought together technology experts with
sanitation professionals in an intensive marathon to find innovative solutions to the
problems facing the sanitation sector.

Through various mechanisms - including forums, videoconferences, webinars, etc. -
developers and mentors with expertise in sanitation, business development, marketing,
design and other backgrounds will work together to refine projects that address a global
subset of problem statements submitted here.

After four rounds of judging, mSchool, SunClean, and Taarifa emerged as the winners
from over 70 that registered following a global hackathon event that engaged
technologists and sector experts in 40 cities from Lima, Peru, to Pune, India, and beyond.

The grand prize winners were:
 mSchool, developed by Manobi, a mobile and internet services firm headquartered in
   Dakar, Senegal, is an SMS reporting tool that enables students, parents, and teachers
   to monitor and report on school sanitation facilities. The app maps all complaints, and
   contains a back-end dashboard that enables the Ministry of Education, regional
   governments, and civil society to track when and where complaints are made - and if
   they are met.
 Sun-Clean, developed by a team of students at the University of Indonesia, is an app
   designed to teach children good sanitation and hygiene practices in an entertaining
   way. The Sun-Clean app, includes two games: Disposal Trash and Hand Wash for
   Kids.
   Taarifa, created by a team of developers based in England, Germany, the United
    States and Tanzania, is an open source web application that enables public officials to
    tag and respond to citizen complaints about the delivery of sanitation services. It
    includes data collection, visualization and interactive mapping functionality in
    addition to a back-end data management tool.

An event was hosted by World Bank at the World Bank-IMF Spring Meetings in
Washington D.C. with representatives from each team flown in to participate on April 19,
2013. From Washington they will travel on to California for a tour curated by IDEO.org
that that will include workshops, site visits, and knowledge exchange about principles in
human-centered design.

Follow-up workshops & Incubation support
Several follow-up options are available to help refine the most promising tools to emerge
from the hackathon and provide opportunities to technologists to engage with their
sanitation counterparts.

South Asia
Lahore: The real time success of the hackathon has been the emergence of the
Government of Pakistan as a champion to support product development of the winning
apps. The winning teams of the hackathon started their incubation process from June
2013 by working in PITB's Plan 9. A session of winner’s teams was conducted with the
utility staff for April 2013.

Dhaka: Efforts to collaborate with incubation facilities to streamline support for winning
prototypes have succeeded with 5 teams getting deployment support. This includes
support for data monitoring and gathering (OpenStreetMap), game development and
linking the teams with IT companies for internship and work contracts.
There are also further negotiations underway with local governments, private sector,
partner organisations and ministries for future funding.

Pune: Software deployment is not the key solution but there needs to be a strong
emphasis on stakeholder buy-in and interaction with the sanitation system. For this
purpose, a workshop in Delhi is proposed for the six winning teams to present their
prototypes before high profile government officials.

Already, the Ministry of Urban Development has extended support to the winners of the
Water Hackathon in 2011 in development of a mobile application on service level
benchmarking. The app provides customers the opportunity to provide feedback on the
quality of service in water and sanitation corroborating the reporting done by the city on
the. The application is being piloted amongst 25,000 people.

This year, two Incubators are supporting the winners of the sanitation hackathon in their
prototypes post the event. The Infosys Foundation is in the process of refining and
developing team TernUp’s Toilet app and The Hatch for Startups is working with the
3sensitizers to develop their prototype.
Conclusion:
Strong partnerships with local technology leaders allowed the World Bank to reach this
community, and the response was enthusiastic. The iterative process of defining pressing
problems also brought to the surface existing and nascent innovations and innovators
within the water and sanitation community. This deepened their engagement and
strengthened their ties, both to one another and to the hackathon community.

The process also emphasized the importance of follow-up activities after the hackathon.
Winning teams were rewarded with business incubation support and offered further
opportunities to engage with their wat-san counterparts. In some cases, this led to
financing start-ups and the recruitment of local developers by various governments.
These outcomes reinforce the conviction that in order to achieve lasting impact, a
hackathon should be part of a process, not just a one-off event, with deep preparation in
both expert and local communities, as well as follow-up.

The openness of the approach attracted considerable attention from within the water
community and also from print and online media, including blogs and social networks,
which traditionally do not feature water content. “This was the new Egypt at work,” said
one participant in Cairo. Water Hackathon offered a low-cost, high-reward opportunity to
open up water sector challenges to the talent and creativity of the ICT design and
development community. This approach also required a change in mindset for the World
Bank, calling for greater openness, experimentation and tolerance of failure.
      Annexure
      List of Problem Statements

1    Sanitation Shouts with Toilets nearby
2    Expanding Choices, Opening Horizon
3    NSAWAM-EASTERN REGION,GHANA
4    Problem Reporting in Rural Area
5    slove the sanitation and water supply problem by web and mobile apps
6    Analysis and solve the local and rural sanitation problem by mobile and web based
     application
7    Poor access to data!
8    mTech for SanHealth: MOBILE APPLICATION STRATEGIES FOR TRACKING AND
     MAINTAINING SANITATION FACILITIES (PUBLIC TOILET SYSTEMS) IN
     DEVELOPING COUNTIRES
9    Create awareness of the problem of public defecation and help people build their toilets
10   SanApp(Complaint Greivances and redressal system for the rural and urban people.)
11   Sanitation Games
12   Mapping open defecation in India
13   Geographical Information System
14   Green Check In
15   Green Check In
16   Shit Meter (Increasing Political Will to Fix Broken Toilets)
17   Strengthening supply chain in toilets sanitation
18   Toilerate
19   Seed to Scale Sanitation Uprgading in Informal Settlements
20   Ceasefire in Cape Town
21   Database Systems for Sanitation Monitoring that are Designed for Intermittent Internet
22   Sani-vest: Collective Investment for Seed Capital
23   Strategic Sanitation Planning Aid
24   Urban Inequity Survey data API
25   Cell Phone Sampling and Surveys in Sanitation
26   GIS enabled fresh water supply management system
27   The Sh!t Map
28   Cry Me A ‘Brown’ River – Harnessing Social Media to Report River Pollution
29   Tracking Aid To Clean Water and Sanitation
30   Making poverty and sanitation maps interactive and intuitive for users
31   Toilet Map
32   Dashboard for Tracking Progress of Sanitation Market System Development
33   Application for Determining Costs for Programming Sustainably (At What Cost
     Application)
34   GPS System to Track Tankers and Pit Emptying Operators
35   Tool for tracking water flow in pit/cesspool
36   Quick financial sustainability check
37   Household Toilet Materials Quantity and Cost Calculator
38   ICT as direct sensors of water and soil contaminates
39   Information Campaign on hygiene and washing hands
40   Sanitation Funding
41   WASH Scouts
42   Saniware Networks and business opportunities
43   Monitor it!
44   Strengthening Supply Chain in Sanitation
45   Behavioral Messaging
46   Open Defecation Reporting
47   Visualizing Sanitation Problems
48   SanCare Text
49   Sanitation Game
50   Develop a game to influence sanitation behaviour among children
51   Sharing expertise and experience towards open-defecation free villages
52   Willingness to pay
53   Hand Washing Saves Lives – CARE (iWASH)
54   FSM Cluster App
55   Poor sanitation in riverine char of Bangladesh: A case study
56   SanTech Ref
57   Captain Health Guard – the germ buster
58   Mobile/web based Social Mobilization using Community Activists for an ‘Open
     Defecation Free’ Environment
59   Customer complaint and grievance redressal
60   Daily monitoring of toilet usage
61   Local Mafia
62   Data collection and analysis
63   Decision support system (Toilet construction costs information and design system)
64   Easy payment and a tool to incentivize people to use community toilets
65   Performance Monitoring of Septage Management in municipal areas
66   POO-Connect
67   Data Repository and Information Dissemination
68   Rating of sanitary conditions in railway stations and trains
69   REGISTRATION & MONITORING OF COMPLAINTS THROUGH SMS AND WEB
     MAPS
70   Reporting sanitation problems to providers
71   Handwashing is funny
72   Empowering rural sanitation with Android
73   Win the handwashing game!
74   Collecting data as a school homework
75    Soap with love
76    Smart and Efficient Septage Collection Systems
77    Awareness raising through Games
78    A resource tool that shows the extent of sanitary services
79    Behaviour change is often a long term process - how can families and teachers be
      encouraged and reminded to practice good hygiene and sanitation behaviour?
80    Application that requests the Government to certify a village for Transparent Open
      Defecation Free (ODF) Certification Process
81    CITIZEN REPORTING MECHANISM
82    Advocating for collective decision in communities for sanitation related issues
83    Crowd Sourcing Water and Sanitation Information
84    ILLEGAL HYDRANT DETECTION AND INFORMATION IN KARACHI
85    INFORM CONSUMERS OF WATER SUPPLY TIMING IN ISLAMABAD
86    Mobile/web based Platform for Sanitary Supplies
87    Sanitation Sales Networks
88    Toilet Finder
89    Sanitation Game
90    Have you washed your hands?
91    Safe waste disposal
92    Verify it!
93    Electronic Sanitation Performance Reporting, Monitoring and Aggregation
94    How can technology be used to tap into existing social networks/communication channels
      in order to promote sanitation and hygiene behaviour change?
95    Intervention and Approach Map
96    How can mobile phones/apps be used to support the continuous training and motivation of
      natural leaders at the community level?
97    WASTE WATER ALERT AND INFORMATION SYSTEM
98    Jeux éducatif - Educational games: SunuQuartier
99    Garbage collection management and control relating to sanitation
100   Knowledge and facts based solution to understand the causes of diseases related to
      inadequate sanition and hygiene
101   Global Health Initiative to promote and sustain the "Waterless Toilet" currently being
      developed by the Gates foundation
102   Rural Cameroon: Sync your latrine
103   Cameroon: Vote pour tes chiottes/ Vote for sanitation
104   Sanitation + girls = education + empowerment
105   WASH in Schools
106   WikiSan
107   Septage Tracker
108   Set Settal - Tool to connect citizens and sanitation service agencies
109   Tracking complaints and quick responses
110   Tracking Septage Disposal in Accra
111   Children as changelings !
112   Urban Sanitation and Climate Finance in Rio de Janeiro
113 WASH education and local capacity development
114 Capturing of Laboratory Data
115 Crowd-flushing "what works"
116 Ghana Sanitation Solutions
117 Latrine Investment Tracker
118 Where is the data in areas without connectivity?
119 A virtual SOS to reduce child mortality
120 Let's decrease the price of my toilet...
121 Where to invest to be the best?
122 MAP IT APP
123 NGO-WHERE?
124 DONATE MATE
125 Effluent Matters
126 M-MAP App
127 Coordination Power
128 SMS Me Back
129 Locality twinning
130 Entrepreneur gap
131 Change Me
132 Crowdsourcing Open Defecation Through Aerial Imagery
133 Toilet Dashboard
134 Fix my toilet @helenzille
135 Peer Platform: Local governments have many sanitation solutions. How can they learn
    from each other?
136 Crap Calculator
      List of applications


1     Samagra Sanitation
2     CochaValley team
3     MTECH FOR SANHEALTH: MOBILE APPLICATION STRATEGIES FOR TRACKING
      AND MAINTAINING SANITATION FACILITIES (PUBLIC TOILET SYSTEMS) IN
      DEVELOPING COUNTIRES
4     Sanitation Investment Tracker (SIT)
5     Taarifa: Uganda
6     Toilet Square Team
7     SunSquare Studio
8     SunClean (Sanitation Games)
9     Andaliman
10    San-Trac
11    ODBusters
12    SanApp
13    Solve water, sanitation and food production with one transportation.gts:s
14    Graceful Eco
15    LatrineSurfer
16    Set Settal
17    A smile 4 u because of my 2
18    MapSh.it - Open defecation mapping and mobile verification tool
19    mSewer mash with elevation and rainfall
20    Postures of Toilet Use
21    School Track
22    alert hygiene
232   Namakula
24    Project Capricorn - Clean Water and Renewable Energy
25    Registration & Monitoring of Complaints Through SMS & Web Maps
26    YEWULENE
27    Toilet Spy
28    ODF - BNU SANHACKERS
29    OPEN DEFECATION REPORTING SYSTEM
30    Shit Meter
31    Hand Wash
32    DumpCert (Be Dump Certified)
33    INTERVENTION AND APPROACH MAP
34    Strengthening supply chain in toilets sanitation
35    Registering & Monitoring of Complaints
36    Strengthening supply chain in toilets sanitation
37    SunClean
38    SMS logging on google maps
39   GIS enabled fresh water supply management system
40   Consumer feedback & Facilitation System
41   MOBILE/WEB BASED PLATFORM FOR SANITARY SUPPLIES
42   INFORM CONSUMERS OF WATER SUPPLY TIMING IN ISLAMABAD
43   Citizen Reporting Mechanism
44   Citizens Reporting System
45   Green Check In
46   Behavioral messaging management system
47   Monitoring of Street Cleaning Staff through Mobile
48   bwsan
49   Online Monitoring System
50   Ciliwung Boy
51   WIN Sys (WASH Integrated moNitoring System)
52   ToiLight
53    Sanitation Adventure
54   CleanIT The Crowd Sourced Citizen Sanitation Problem Reporting website and Android
     Application
55   Upraise My Loo
56   peta-toilet-brebes
57   Online Farmer's Market
58   Electronic Sanitation Performance Reporting, Monitoring and Aggregation
59   Quick financial sustainability check
60   Cablet
61   WSP App Suite
62   Taarifa
63   GreenForce
64   Sanitation map that shows sanitation infrastructure
65   Open Data Kit - Smart Clicker

            Best Apps

         Cablet - Cablet is a public toilet finder service delivered using Web interface and
         Android apps

            Highest Rated Aps

         WIN Sys: WASH Integrated moNitoring System is built for monitoring water,
         sanitation, hygiene toilets in schools and also to educate student

         Trash And Toilet Search,suggest and report toilets and trashcans
Select Aps and their brief description

App Name         Brief Description                                           City
SanMob           Toilet sanitation: USSD mobile application for              Tanzania
                 strengthening supply chain.
                 This project strengthens the supply chain between the
                 suppliers and the households who might need products
                 and/or services for better latrines through the mobile
                 USSD application. It ensures ontime delivery of needed
                 toilet products and eliminates the need of a very long
                 supply chain from the households to the masons to the
                 hardware stores to the suppliers and back again up to the
                 households which causes the unmatched supply and
                 demand due to a long time frame between the demand or
                 request and the supply.
Latrine surfer   A latrine emptier location app. The team tackled the        United
                 challenges set by Water for People:                         Kingdom
                 · Analysed and identified gaps in the WfP data, generated
                 sample charts for dashboard use as their data volumes
                 rise, and sized the potential market in Blantyre
                 · Scoured the web for free databasing and integrated
                 dashboarding tools for WfP purposes, and recommended
                 GoogleFusionTables and GoogleCharts to WfP
                 · Built a prototype app 'LatrineSurfer' to capture
                 geolocation data and customer telephone details at point
                 of latrine emptying
                 · Identified a simple and cost-effective automated
                 customer feedback method
Set Settal       Set Settal is a mobile-web platform aiming to connect       Senegal
                 citizens and residents with local health agencies.
                 Set Settal is a mobile-web platform aiming to connect
                 citizens and residents with local health agencies. The
                 platform is designed to help sanitation companies to
                 identify areas of interventions. Residents are directly
                 involved in the management of hygiene in their area of
                 residence. They can report an incident by SMS or internet
                 platform to Set Settal.
                 http://youtu.be/uqS_H3Wdt5c
MapSh.it         Mapping and verification app currently hosting map of       United
                 10,000 + "open-defecation free" gram panchayat in India.    States
                 1) The team mapped all "open-defecation free" gram
                 panchayats in India (using data from India's Minsitry of
                 Drinking Water and Sanitation). The map should allow
                 the public to easily see where the open defecation
                 problem is greatest/where the most progress is being
              made. The map - especially when combined with health
              and income data - may also help policy makers better
              target investments in sanitation.
MSewer mash Combine data resources detailing sewers, rainfall and           United
with rainfall elevation along with populations and inflow to drinking       States
and elevation water, to detail hotspots
              Unplanned events can contaminate drinking water with
              sewage. Use data to find sites proactively, and also have a
              reactive method to enter rupture/overflow at specific
              locations. Plot vectors of where people and water will be
              affected by sewage.
School Track  School Track is a program designed to track the number        United
              of students by gender at schools.                             States
              Born out of the NYC's Sanitation Hackathon,
              SchoolTrack is a program designed to track the number
              of students by gender at schools. The World Bank
              requested this application to determine if providing
              sanitation facilities and women's health education at
              schools improves the attendance of girls.
              http://www.sanitationhackathon.org/node/16379/edit -
              edit-field-application-description
Project       Mobile off-grid hybrid renewable energy production and        Finland
Capricon –    water purification container plant for crisis management
Clean Water   operations.
and Renewable System uses local renewable energy sources (RES) for
Energy        the energy production. Basic station/plant has PV
              modules, Wind turbines and Energy storage. Thus, the
              system is equipped with battery storage units, to store
              energy, which will be used at night time and on time with
              high electricity demand. System provides electricity to
              rescue hospital, rescue camp area lighting,
              communication systems, one single power system. The
              system's heat production plant provides necessary heat
              for rescue hospitals and other sanitation needs. Heat
              power is used for creating potable water, hot water, steam
              and heat for e.g. hospital sterilization needs, etc.
              System need to utilize ground water, and possibly re-
              water; rain water, grey water, etc. The CHPWp system
              focus is to be easy to operate, with low maintenance, and
              low technical staff. System is to have
              Mobile/GPRS/Internet access to maintain and remotely
              monitor and operate the system as well.
              Project Capricorn - Crisis management project - the
              CHPWp unit is uniquely developed for accurate
              production and supply of these vital resources
              (heat/power/cooling/water) so that different functions can
               be carried out efficiently. The crisis operation needs
               electricity/heat/cooling/water for field hospital, other
               operational units and basic infrastructure. In addition,
               camps need general lighting, so that camps can operate
               24/7 and so that the area can be safe and productive.
               Also, clean water operations need electricity, so that the
               filtering systems can operate effectively.
               Communications and control systems need also 24/7
               electricity. In addition, the need for small aircraft runway
               lighting can be safely managed with the centralized
               power generation system.
Toilet Spy     Allows follow up and reporting of toilet projects. Donors       Finland
               are interested in following the status of toilets.
               The application provides means to record toilets and their
               characteristics. Then, there are different forms for follow-
               up (comprehensive and quick) where status can be
               updated and a picture can be taken. The application is
               integrated with a map view. Reporting is done with
               Excel: e.g. what percentage of toilets are out of order in a
               certain region, or what is the reason for each toilet being
               out of use.
Shit Meter     Mobile application that reports toilets in need of repair       Malawi
               and publishes information to public.
               This project facilitates political will to fix broken toilets
               through public pressure, particularly in informal
               settlements in South Africa. Toilets in need of repair will
               be reported via SMS by community members, which get
               sent to the Shit Meter website to aggregate the data for
               analysis and also informs the municipality of the works to
               be done. The aggregate data of the toilets to be fixed and
               city response time (as well as a few other key indicators)
               will be disseminated through various communication
               channels to the public. When a toilet is fixed, the repair
               person can update the information on the database
               through their mobile phone and the Shit Meter will be
               updated (real time).
Handwash       A web platform that enables people to get data about            Tanzania
               hygiene.
               Provides information about hygiene and also allows
               students in schools to report any problems concerning
               their toilets and washing environments. It also lists all
               reports made by the students through the website.
               Includes reporting services, allows kids to report toilet
               problems in schools.
DumpCert (Be   GPS tracking solution for pit toilets Dumping-Tracks.           South
Dump           When there are no sewers, richer houses are connected to        Africa
Certified)     septic tanks (ask any farmer). Poorer houses have pit
               toilets, or nothing at all. Both of these fill up and need
               emptying - and in many places this service is offered by
               the municipality. So, where does the thieving come in?
               Let's imagine I'm the truck driver that sucks it all out. I
               come to your house or place of business - and it turns out
               it will take more than one trip - in fact, three. But I don't
               get paid a whole lot and it is a shit business (excuse the
               pun) so I decide to cook up a deal - I'll charge you for two
               trips so you save money and you'll agree to pay cash. I
               put the cash for the two trips in my pocket and then tell
               the municipality (my boss) that it only took one trip. The
               cash for the other trip stays in my pocket.
               So, what's the big problem here? Well apart from the fact
               that this money is no longer going where it should (and
               hence the municipality is even less likely to extend
               sanitation services to the poor), I now have a truck full of
               waste I can't take to the treatment plant. After all, I just
               told my boss I only emptied it once. So where do I dump
               it? Why, the nearest river. Of course! Turns out there are
               few better ways to spread disease (ask the guys in Haiti!).
               The technology: We will put GPS modules on the Tracks.
               That will allow us the get the location of the tracks, in
               real time, at a regular interval. The GPS coordinated of
               the tracks will be plotted on a Map. That will allow
               municipalities to know i the track drivers have gone off
               track.
               The GPS data will also be sent to a server to be processed
               so that we can detect "interesting" patterns in the
               trajectories of the track drivers. eg: The driver may know
               that they must not get of track because there is a GPS
               device on the track. What the diver might want to do is
               stay in the allowed trajectory but, get waste from point A,
               B, C... and drop them at point X then come back at night
               to get those waste and dump thm in a river.
               The GPS data will be statistically analyzed in real time to
               detect those types of patterns.
Intervention   The San-IA Mapper is a tool that evaluates and maps the Tanzania
and Approach   current sanitation interventions and approches done by
Map            sanitation stakeholders
               This tool aims at helping the government in mapping and
               evaluating current sanitation interventions and
               approaches done by sanitation stakeholders in Tanzania.
               This is a user-friendly web open source platform where
               development partners around the world are able to
               visualize what is happening in regions of Tanzania by
                means of a map.
                The sanitation stakeholder is able to view the information
                of the existing situation of the interventions done in the
                area and the approaches used. Sanitation stakeholders are
                required to register into the system. Once new
                interventions are done the registered sanitation
                stakeholder is required to update the current work
                performed. Once a system administrator validates the
                data feed into the system the map will automatically
                update and the current data viewed on the platform.
Intervention    The San-IA Mapper is a tool that evaluates and maps the       Tanzania
and Approach current sanitation interventions and approches done by
Map             sanitation stakeholders.
                This tool aims at helping the government in mapping and
                evaluating current sanitation interventions and
                approaches done by sanitation stakeholders in Tanzania.
                This is a user-friendly web open source platform where
                development partners around the world are able to
                visualize what is happening in regions of Tanzania by
                means of a map.
                The sanitation stakeholder is able to view the information
                of the existing situation of the interventions done in the
                area and the approaches used. Sanitation stakeholders are
                required to register into the system. Once new
                interventions are done the registered sanitation
                stakeholder is required to update the current work
                performed. Once a system administrator validates the
                data feed into the system the map will automatically
                update and the current data viewed on the platform.
Strengthening Internet based application that will enable households to       Tanzania
supply chain in get standard toilet services and tools from recognised
toilet          supplier
sanitation      Households will be able to send some requests(using a
                mobile or internet) to a known and trusted hardware
                supplier who provides toilet services and tools. This will
                enable households to get toilet buildings(services) timely,
                at low cost and liable services and tools. It will help a
                hardware supplier to enlarge the market since he will
                know the demand of tools and services so as he will
                know what must be supplied. If well promoted, the
                application will help to reduce unplanned(unstructured)
                toilets both in rural and urban areas since the hardware
                store suppliers will be liable to provide standard toilet
                tools and services(buildings)
SunClean        Game and Education about sanitation. Teach how to             Indonesia
                wash your hand and grouping trash
GIS enabled     Help in identify the problems like demand and supply,           Pakistan
fresh water     water problematic areas and water disease distribution
supply          based on complaints and health.
management      A GIS based system will provide fresh water to citizens
system          and improve development authority management and
                performance.
Quick           A quick and easy way for practitioners to check chances         Netherlands
Financial       of sustainable sanitation by comparing life-cycle costs
Stability check with desired service levels.
                Since cost of services over time are not understood by
                sanitation projects and programmes, there is a major risk
                to sustainability. Unrealistic and unknown expectations
                are set during project preparation and no actions are taken
                to ensure that households can cover sanitation-related
                expenditures in the medium to long term. The described
                tool will provide a quick and easy way for practitioners to
                check the chances of sustainability of their programmes
                by comparing life-cycle costs with desired service levels.
                It will be useful for planning, assessing sustainability
                from a cost perspective and for monitoring value for
                money. Target users are practitioners and planners that
                seek to improve the sustainability of new and existing
                sanitation services.
Mobile/ web     Develop a two-way communication channel where                   Pakistan
based software sanitary stores can communicate with manufacturers and
for sanitary    benefit from discounts
supplies        The Sanitary store owner can place a request for a
                quotation on the server and can also accept and reject
                bids placed by manufacturers and suppliers. The owner
                can also set the rating of manufacturers and suppliers on
                the basis of quotation, response time, delivery time and
                quality of the product.
Monitoring of Citizens can report problems related to street cleaning to        Pakistan
Street          municipal authorities, who in turn can assign the job
Cleaning        directly to the concerned sweeper
through mobile A mobile application to connect the local municipal
                department and citizens with each other. Using the app,
                the citizens will comment, question and update waste
                collection services in their localities. The local municipal
                department will use this two-way communication channel
                to update the respondent when the issue is resolved. Once
                the collectors collect the waste, they inform the
                municipality and the municipality shares this information
                with the respective citizen to verify the claim of collector.
                The local municipality may share the picture of the site
                after waste collection.
               The municipal entities have hundreds and thousands of
               sweepers but even then the streets are dirty. Poor
               monitoring and accountability of sweepers is one among
               many reasons for low productivity of staff.
Ciliwung Boy   Ciliwung Boy is an educational game to raise awareness          Indonesia
               on sanitation practices and change behaviours
               To help people understand sanitation and hygiene issues,
               children need to be educated first.
               A game that playfully educates on sanitation and hygiene.
               For example, it flays behaviours like people disposing
               waste in the Ciliwung river in Jakarta .
WIN Sys:       Built for monitoring water, sanitation, hygiene toilets in      Indonesia
WASH           schools and also to educate student
Integrated     WIN Sys is short for WASH Integrated moNitoring
monitoring     System is built for monitoring water, sanitation, hygiene
System         toilets in schools and also to educate students. WIN Sys
               uses SMS gateway technology to allow students to report
               the ‘bad’ sanitation facilities, hygiene, water availability
               and location of toilets. This reporting system mechanism
               aims to educate the student about sanitation, hygiene, and
               toilet facilities.
               This System also has a web portal that can monitor the
               report that sent by the students. This web portal also will
               visualize the comparability and number of complaints for
               each school, so that we can judge and make a decision in
               sanitation and water hygiene. Integrated reporting system
               and web portal hopefully can solve the WASH in School
               that focus in maintenance of toilets facilities and
               education the students.
Toilight       Toilet finder to help people locate toilets nearest to them.    Indonesia
               It is an application that can find the nearest toilet to your
               location. People can also add to the database about
               location of toilets. It uses the power of users, to help
               making the database richer that's very important for the
               sustainability of our system. Share comments can be done
               to many kinds of social networking.
               We enrich the toilets profile with the tissue, water, lamps,
               hand dryer, location, and direction and another important
               parts of toilet information so people can decide which
               toilet is the best for them. To know the streets conditions,
               data can be retrieved from twitter.
CleanIT        CleanIT is a collaborative initiative which helps the           Indonesia
               citizens to report water and sanitation related problem to
               authorities
               The application uses a centralized database to save all
               sanitation related data and issues. It also has a complaint
          reporting system to report to the municipal authorities.
           1. Citizen Reporting
          The app uses the GPS location of the user who wants to
          report a sanitation related problem and then marks the
          problem on the status map and emails the municipal
          authorities about the problem.
          2.CrowdSourcing
          Citizens have been given the facility to report problems
          or upload geo-coded photos of unsanitary conditions in
          their neighbourhoods. These photos are also marked on
          the map either using the mobile application or the website
          3. Status
          A user can see the state of his neighbourhood and also
          know of the poor sanitation areas and nature of
          complaints.
          4. Information
          The website would contain information like articles on
          personal hygiene or how to conserve water.
Online    Creating an online portal for farmers to sell their goods as United
Farmers   industrial food production and excess food disposal            States
Market    present some of the most significant sanitation challenges
          in the world
          US industrial food animal producers generate in excess of
          335 million tons of dry manure waste each year (Source:
          From the American Public Health Association). Disposal
          of this waste by applying it to land often exceeds the
          ability of adjacent land to absorb nitrogen and
          phosphorous, thus leading to soil saturation, with the
          excess running off into streams and shallow aquifers.
          Contamination with animal waste produced within the
          industrial system is a concern for human and ecosystem
          health because the waste often contains pathogens,
          including antibiotic-resistant bacteria, dust, arsenic,
          dioxin and other persistent organic pollutants, antibiotics,
          and complex mixtures of hundreds of volatile organic
          compounds. This project will connect consumers with
          food grown sustainably in their local 100 mile vicinity,
          by creating an online market place and app suite for
          farmer's to list their crops for sale and set their prices for
          individual and industrial consumers. Reducing consumer
          dependence on factory raised meat will directly reduce
          the production of manure and its associated
          environmental contaminants.
          http://www.apha.org/advocacy/policy/policysearch/defaul
          t.htm?id=1361
Cablet    Cablet is a public toilet finder service delivered using       Indonesia
             Web interface and Android apps.
             Cablet is a service to locate the nearest public toilet along
             with the crowdsourced rating of the sanitation quality.
             Cablet has web interface and Android apps designed to
             help users find the nearest toilet and provide directions. A
             User can see his embedded GPS in Android handheld,
             Geo-Location API in HTML5, or full text geo-coding
             service.
             People can rate public toilets more than once in order to
             monitor the dynamic sanitation quality of the toilet
             facility. This information will be delivered as a spatial
             dashboard that can be used by governing
             bodies/management to determine the optimal
             maintenance strategies.
Sanimap      A crowdsourced public worldwide map that shows                  Germany
             existing sanitation infrastructure.
             Sanimap.com is a project idea that arose from a (stalled)
             sanitation-related map online under sanimap.net. The
             basic idea was to have a public, crowdsourced map that
             would display sustainable sanitation projects worldwide.
             This initial aim has been expanded to also include
             conventional wastewater treatment (infrastructure) where
             available (i.e. municipal sewage treatment plants) to
             include as many stakeholders as possible.
             Sanimap.com currently forwards to a WebGIS
             installation at the Harvard WorldMap Project. Initial tests
             have been done with Ushahidi/Crowdmap and
             cartodb.com. Further information on sanimap can be
             found on the forum of the Sustainable Sanitation Alliance
             file://localhost/@ http/::forum.susana.org:forum:categorie
             s:21-events:2325-hacking-toilets -
GreenForce   Report illegal waste disposal anywhere and anytime.             Indonesia
             Find, watch, report, and share it to get some real actions.
             The GreenForce Android application makes it easy for
             people to report illegal waste disposal, map its locations
             and upload it with further detail description. The main
             goal for this application is to increase the awareness
             amongst Jakarta citizens about illegal waste disposal
             activity, thus invoking further actions to be taken.
UpraiseMyLoo A reporting tool on sanitation facilities and associated        United
             financial expenditures to build, operate and maintain           Kingdom
             them
             “UpraiseMyLoo” is a reporting tool on sanitation
             facilities (including household and public toilets) and
             associated financial expenditures to build, operate and
             maintain these facilities. The information will be gathered
             via a mobile phone application, feed via the web into a
             database. Data from the database will be presented
             visually (maps) as well as in tables.
             The mobile application will be used to report data on
             sanitation investment via a simple form. Data to be
             collected will include the type of latrine, the number of
             users, the name of the owner, its components and the cost
             of each component (including the pit, the sitting/
             squatting device and the superstructure), the primary
             building materials and the nature of the suppliers, the
             anticipated emptying frequency and associated expenses.
             If smartphones are used, a photograph of the latrine and
             of the house it is attached to could be included and geo-
             tagged for tracking locations of these sanitation facilities.
             Data for this mobile application could be uploaded by
             implementers of a sanitation programme (be then local
             government, NGO or INGO staff) or by the households
             themselves, who would self-report their expenditure on
             building but also subsequently on emptying latrines (and
             associated expenses). They could also use this app to
             report on subsequent events related to that particular
             facility (e.g. pit collapse, or emptying, or upgrading of
             the latrine) as each household/latrine would receive a
             specific identification number. To provide this type of
             information, they could be incentivised to report with a
             coupon for free latrine emptying services or mobile
             airtime.
Taarifa      Taarifa is an application for reporting, monitoring and         United
             aggregration, linking governments and organisations with        Kingdom
             citizens.
             The Taarifa Platform is an open source web application
             for information collection, visualization and interactive
             mapping. It allows people to collect and share their own
             stories using various mediums such as SMS, Web Forms,
             Email or Twitter, placing these reports into a workflow.
             Where these reports can be followed up and acted upon,
             while engaging citizens and communities.
             http://youtu.be/a2Af83gn2Gc
Sanitation   Sanitation Adventure is a platformer game. The fun way          Indonesia
Adventure    to learn sanitation and hygiene!
             Game can teach us new things. So why don't we use
             game, to learn about Sanitation
             Sanitation Adventure made with the purpose of indirectly
             introducing sanitation to children in a fun way (without
             being boring about it).
             By teaching them indirectly, we hope the children will
                 grow more curious about sanitation, and they want to find
                 out more about sanitation, and why sanitation is
                 important for them.
Graceful Eco     Graceful Eco intends to solve effluent matters by           Bangladesh
                 reporting environment pollution information. It's a crowd
                 reporting system.
                 Graceful Eco intends to solve effluent matters by
                 reporting environment pollution information. Our
                 application makes connection with suffering peoples,
                 foreign buyers and local NGOs. Those who are suffering
                 by pollution of a factory they can report easily by sending
                 a text message or an email or using our web form.
                 Graceful Eco will monitor those reports and by the help
                 of local NGOs it will verify those reports. Foreign buyers
                 can use our application monitor pollution reports using it.
                 Our sms and mobile application based reporting system
                 helps general users to report a pollution easily and they
                 can share photos and videos of that issue too. Our
                 powerful verification system will help the foreign buyers
                 to. find the real reports so that, they will know the real
                 situation of their factories.
Registration &   SMS/Web/Mobile based complaint solution for WASA-           Pakistan
monitoring of    M
complaints       http://www.slideshare.net/sajjidak/sanitation-hackathon-
through SMS      bnu
and web maps
SMS logging     Monitoring of WASA complaints, registration through        Pakistan
on google       SMS /web
maps            The citizens only had a single way to register their
                complaints on the WASA problems using phones that
                remained engaged most of the time. To resolve this
                problem, the idea of sending complaints via SMS was
                introduced. The location tracking will be done by PTA
                and the authentication of the complaint will be done by
                crowdsourcing.
                The slides can be found:
                http://www.slideshare.net/adnanzahid071/water-and-
                sanitation-15448325
Crowdsourcing Farmers can advertise in crowdsourcing their agricultural Italy
agriculture     products for sell and/or Barter.
products barter Development of a multiplaform app ( Web, Ios, Android,
                Blackberry, WP) which allow farmers to signal their
                products (Description of product, goods price , quantity,
                etc), for selling or barter.
                Primary food elements research will be simplified
                Any signalation will be categorized, localized through the
                Gps smartphone capability and mapped in a map.
                Once the user launches the app, he will be geolocalized
                and according to his position, navigating categories,
                application will show products (advertised by the
                farmers) he was looking for.
                Every product will have a short description, goods price,
                quantity, etc.
                All signals will be showed on a Map and will be rated by
                the users with a +1 , -1 feedback system.
Inform          The solution is all about synchronizing of water supply        Pakistan
consumers       and electricity timing.
about water     The problem comes up for people facing disturbance in
supply timing   supply of water in the area , when ever there is electricity
in Islamabad    in wires there is no water in reservoir , but when there is
                water in reservoir there is no electricity in the wires . So
                there is no supply of water for the consumers.
                The solution is all about synchronizing of water supply
                and electricity timing.We started with an idea to send an
                sms to a consumer to let him know What will be the
                timing for the supply of water in his Area.
Problem         An easy to use problem reporting system specially              Bangladesh
Reporting       targeted for the rural people.
System          Users can report their problems using only voice
                message, so that even illiterate people can use this
                system. They will be given a phone number and an area
                code to report their problems. They will call in that
                number and say their area code (voice recognition system
                will be used to detect the code). Then they will describe
                their problem in detail. It will be recorded in the server
                and then sent to the authority of that area automatically.
                Authority will check these voice messages at specific
                intervals and then they will start taking required action.
                They can call the reporter for more information if needed.
                What actions have been taken for a problem will be
                recorded along with the recorded problem description to
                make monitoring easier. Authority can also send useful
                health and sanitation information to the rural people using
                this system.
LION Sync       LION Sync will fundamentally change monitoring by              United
                allowing easy syncing of sanitation data between offline       States
                computers and remote databases.
                Better monitoring can dramatically improve our efforts to
                address the global sanitation crisis. Monitoring can help
                sanitation implementers improve coordination, improve
                learning, and systematically identify the rural
                communities that are most in need of sanitation
                 assistance.
                 Many great datasets already exist for sanitation planning.
                 Sometimes the data are stuck on paper forms, other times
                 they are in Excel spreadsheets - but rarely are they easily
                 accessible to the people who really need them. When
                 decision makers can't get access to these data, then
                 evidence-based decisions don't get made.
                 The fundamental challenge underpinning this situation is
                 internet connectivity. For both data collectors and
                 decision makers in developing countries, the dominant
                 paradigm of internet access is one of intermittence.
                 Database tools are thus needed which can allow for
                 seamless integration of online and offline data systems -
                 ensuring that data collectors can input data whenever data
                 are available, that these data can be robustly integrated
                 into a central database, and that the central database can
                 be synced onto local computers and thus be accessible
                 whenever the data are needed. To date, no easy solution
                 for this type of application exists.
                 LION Sync (Local Information Offline Network Sync) is
                 a project to create a framework for easily syncing online
                 and offline information, and to then build a
                 demonstration application for sanitation data
                 management on top of this framework. Through this
                 project the LION Sync team hopes to solve an important
                 general data management problem, with wide application
                 in developing country information management, while
                 also creating a useful tool for sanitation monitoring as a
                 demonstration of LION Sync's potential.
Solve water,     Ship water in IBC-tanks, rebuild the tanks to ELTC           United
sanitation and   toilets, producing safe fertilizer for tank gardens          States
food             This project is based on CompostEra's
production       emergency proposal for providing drinking water,
with one         sanitation and food production through one multi-
transportation   function transportation. The starting point is shipping
                 drinking water in 1000lit. IBCtanks. The black IBC-tanks
                 used for this, are eminently suitable for making odor-free,
                 non-polluting enclosed Long-Term Composting Toilets,
                 effectively placing feces in quaratine for decades as it
                 decomposes shrinks, see http://vimeo.com/228321
                 We have commercial long-term experience of the
                 Enclosed Long-Term Composting toilets since the 1960s
                 but it is now that the technology has attracted attention to
                 itself because of the simplicity, low cost and making it
                 attractive to the user.
Namakula         Help Community Health Worker to share actionable             Finland
                 information with the mother
                 Mothers in the low-resource countries lack information
                 about child care which leads to harmful behaviour and
                 practices. This is one of the key reasons behind high
                 infant mortality rates in many developing countries. The
                 project aims to empower Community Health Workers
                 (CHWs) to share actionable information with the
                 mothers. The key is to share the right information in the
                 right time and in a personal way.
                 The project equips the CHWs with a mobile application
                 that provides essential information about hygiene,
                 nutrition and immunization. This helps CHWs to share
                 the information with the mother. The app also allows
                 CHWs to collect data and monitor the impact of their
                 work. The new tool will also increase the motivation of
                 the CHWs by allowing them to experience progress,
                 share and compare data and raise the status of the work
                 they undertake.
Open             Mobile app tackling Open Defecation and sanitation           Tanzania
defecation       issues by transforming the mindset of the community via
reporting        promotion and mobile incentives.
system           Project makes the local society member rank up points
                 for pointing out social sanitation faults in the community
                 via a text message; that data is then mapped and reported
                 for open data research.
WSP APP          Native apps for Sanitation and Staff reporting/tracking.     Pakistan
Suite            Handling registration and monitoring of sanitation and
                 staff complaints through SMS and web maps. Monitoring
                 street cleaning staff through plain SMS using dumb
                 mobiles, as well as through native iPhone and Android
                 apps. A system that engages citizens to report water and
                 sanitation problems to the municipality compelling
                 them to respond quickly.
Aid is working   A mobile app to easily communicate in real time the          Spain
                 social impact achieved in sanitation projects.
                 A mobile app to allow charities and NGOs to easily
                 communicate in real time the social impact achieved in
                 sanitation projects, organized in a StoryLine where you
                 can visually follow the milestones and evolution of the
                 humanitarian project from the beginning to the end
                 (problem-solution).
ODF BNU          It was a system to help verify and certify the area is       Pakistan
Sanhackers       ODF to help people to access hygienic and clean sanitary
                 conditions
                 It helps report and promote two way communication
                 between the authority/NGO and the area which is under
                inspection.
Registering     Development of an SMS, Web and Smart Phone Solution           Pakistan
and             with SugarCRM in the backend to achieve the goals set in
Monitoring of   the problem.
Complaints      This project aims at solving the problem of registering
                and monitoring complaints through SMS and the web.
                A smartphone application has been provided that enables
                the users to view existing cases and their resolutions,
                submit new problems and also share the problems with
                the world using popular social apps.
Infos Sante     Knowledge and fact based solution to understand the           Senegal
                causes of disease related to inadequate sanitation and
                hygiene.
                http://youtu.be/TPM7Any9Afg
Empowering      Empowering Girls is an app which allows an NGO to             United
Girls           track girls attendance in school via text messages. There     States
                is no reliance on 3rd party software
                Empowering Girls is an app which allows an NGO to
                track girls attendance in school via text messages. A local
                representative from the school will send a text message to
                a central hub (smart phone at the NGO office). The
                central hub application is envisioned and built to run on
                any android smartphone that could be locally sourced and
                activated with a local cellular service provider. There is
                no reliance on 3rd party software or server resources to
                be set up.
                The NGO can keep the smartphone in a centralized
                location and provide the phone number to
                volunteers/facilitators out in the field, who could text
                back their relevant data in a predetermined text (SMS)
                message (eg: KEYWORD;
                CENTERCODE;ATTENDANCE).
                The text message will contain school location (via an
                assigned code) along with the number of girls in school
                that day. The data (from all of the schools) will be
                combined into a single file (a google fusion table) which
                will then be used to measure attendance rate over time.
                This will then be used to compare attendance rate (of
                girls) at the schools before and after intervention (the
                creation of appropriate sanitation facilities for female
                students) and charted as needed by the NGO
                representative. The phone application will also provide a
                copy of the data as a CSV file stored on the smartphones
                memory card.An Android Phone for NGO site and
                feature phones for the schools are required.
Reporting       Citizens will be able to report sanitation problems to the    Pakistan
mechanism for  municipality covering every category of people.
complaints     People can send complaints via the web, using an android
               phone or report or send an SMS.The system is simple,
               user friendly and low budget to develop. It uses Map
               Tagging and an email based system.
Citizen        A system that engages citizens to report water and           Pakistan
reporting      sanitation problems to the municipality compelling them
system on poor to respond quickly.
sanitation
Green Check    How to know the location of the nearest trashcan and its     Indonesia
in             profile
BWSAN          Simple, web based, multi –platform to share information      Indonesia
               on sanitation
               https://docs.google.com/open?id=0B0Skq0WqX1o7U3o0
               dWpiekhVWDQ
Online         An online website which keeps a record of complaints         Pakistan
complaint      based on the user's submissions. A map shows all
submission     locations marked by the website administrator, pointing
and monitoring out complainant locations. Exact time of each location is
system         saved and displayed along side the summary of each
               record.
Postures of    Sit hover squat stand posture data questionnaire             United
toilet use     experiment United States ergonomics bathroom toilet          States
               public sex gender
               They're "sitting" toilets, but people use other postures.
               Upon analysis of certain questionnaire data, findings
               revealed insights on what postures people use, why toilets
               get dirty and how to keep toilets clean. They also
               demonstrated that toilets are used in a range of ways and
               that dirty toilets affect different people differently.
Electronic     A tool that can aggregate and share community sanitation     Tanzania
Sanitation     data in Tanzania.
Performance    The project is aimed at helping the government and other
Reporting,     organizations to obtain correct sanitation data from
Monitoring     individuals without having a third party
and
Aggregation
ODK Data Kit The ODK-Smart Clicker is a hardware/software solution          United
– Smart        designed to provide a very simple, low-cost way to           States
Clicker        generate ODK data
               This project can support a number of other related project
               both for sanitation issues and other applications of the
               ODK. It was initially conceived to support data collection
               in special education classrooms where teachers are too
               busy with other tasks to take time to fill out a form on
               ODK-Collect.
                The Clicker is an open hardware device (initial prototype
                being built with arduino) that is small enough to wear
                around your neck, wrist, or carry in your pocket. The
                device has a very simple interface, with just four buttons
                and an on/off switch. The device is programmed to
                collect data regarding the button pushed, primarily time
                and location. The buttons themselves correspond to the
                data that is desired to be collected. Once data taking is
                complete the device sends the compiled data to an ODK
                server for later use.
Consumer        A combination of two android apps for tracking and           Pakistan
feedback and    notifications
facilitation    Two way communication between consumer and PDA;
system          Registration and Monitoring of complaints through SMS
                and web Maps;
                Monitoring of street cleaning staff through mobiles;
                Citizen Reporting Mechanism
Daily           A tool that can monitor usage of toilets by tracking the     India
monitoring of   opening and closing of doors
toilet usage    The prototype involved connects a solar powered LED
                light that lights up every time the door of the toilet is
                opened. Based on the usage pattern from Households
                (with data on typical usage patterns for households with
                number and mix of adults and children), one would be
                able to monitor usage. In addition, the information can be
                mapped at the village level and can be used to monitor
                performance across villages.
Raildoot        Rating of sanitary conditions in railway stations trains'    India
                ‘Raildoot’ means a friend who conveys problems to
                railway authorities. The mobile application allows
                commuters to register complaints, authorities to track the
                complaint and act on; and for decision makers to use the
                data for high level planning.

EcoLogic?       A game to raise awareness on sanitation among children     India
                In this web based quiz, schools will encourage students to
                compete. The quiz has a scorecard and schools will be
                rewarded according to their performance.
Sancheck        Rating of sanitary conditions in railway stations trains   India
                An android application that captures images with details
                like train coach numbers and conditions of toilets, check
                and rate against benchmarks for sanitation. The
                information can then be used by railway authorities to
                take corrective action and report back to the complainant.
Cleanathon   Customer complaint and redressal system                      India
             The app has four modules whereby customers can
             register complaints, learn about sanitation through videos
             and social networks, calculate hygiene factor for a
             household and get rewarded with free coupons or free
             talktime etc.
Ensanble     Application to empower citizens to take action against       India
             poor sanitation conditions and facilities
             Someone who came across an unhygienic and poorly
             maintained public toilets, or spotted waste water flowing
             on the streets or an overflowing septage tank, can click
             and upload a picture from their mobiles, select the
             problem to report and send it to the server with their
             contact details. Based on the nature of complaint, it
             would get forwarded to the authorities for corrective
             action.
List of Partners
