Report No: ACS8481




The Independent State of Papua New Guinea
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Policy
Development in Papua New Guinea
SYNTHESIS REPORT OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE




30 May 2014




TWIEA
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC




                               i
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                   ii
                   An international partnership to help poor
                   people gain sustained access to improved
                   water supply and sanitation services




Papua New Guinea
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Policy
Development Support




Synthesis Report




Final Report
30 May 2014




                      iii
Table of Contents
Abbreviations ............................................................................................... v
Executive Summary ...................................................................................... 1
1. Background ............................................................................................. 4
2. Overview of the Technical Assistance ..................................................... 6
2.1 Membership of the WaSH Policy Task Force                                                                    7
2.2 Policy development process                                                                                  8
2.3 Summary of key documents developed for the Policy Task Force and partners                                  11

3. Overview of WASH Policy ..................................................................... 12
4. National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority ............................... 13
5. Overview TA Achievements against PCN Outputs and Outcomes .......... 17
5.1 Draft WaSH sector Policy developed and adopted by Government of PNG                                        19
     5.1.1 Facilitation of the WaSH Policy Task Force                                                           19
     5.1.2 Recommendations for organizational and institutional responsibilities                                19
     5.1.3 Review of sector financing, tariff setting and operational efficiency                                20
     5.1.4 Potential for private sector engagement in PNG’s WaSH Sector                                         21
5.2 WaSH service delivery capacity improved across sector agencies                                             22
     5.2.1 Capacity development                                                                                 22
     5.2.2 Support to strengthen the capacity of the National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
     Committee (WASHCOM)                                                                                        22
     5.2.3 Support to provincial governments departments implementing rural WaSH programs                       23
5.3 Improved service provision to the urban poor                                                               23
     5.3.1 Formative research on peri-urban sanitation with a gender focus                                      23
     5.3.2 Monitoring pilots on reduce non-revenue water in Port Moresby                                        23

6. Summary .............................................................................................. 23
Annex ......................................................................................................... 25
Papua New Guinea National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Policy




                                                        iv
Abbreviations


  DNPM          Department of National Planning and Monitoring.
  DOH           Department of Health
  DPRT          Development Partners Round Table
  EU            European Union
  LLG           Local Level Government
  NCD           National Capital District
  NEC           National Executive Council
  NGO           Non-government organisation
  NWSHA         National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority
  PCN           Project Concept Note
  PNG           Papua New Guinea
  PPP           Public Private Partnerships
  PSP           Private Sector Participation
  RWSSP         Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Programme
  SDA           Service Delivery Assessment
  SOE           State-owned enterprise
  STC           Short Term Consultant
  TA            Technical Assistance
  WaSH          Water, Sanitation and Hygiene




                                               v
Executive Summary

This synthesis report details the process and outcomes of Water and Sanitation Program - World
Bank (WSP) Technical Assistance (TA) to Policy Development Support and Capacity Building, Papua
New Guinea Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH), ) P144823.

Context: Papua New Guinea (PNG) has a population of 6.9 million people, 87% of whom live in rural
environments. Access to improved water and sanitation has been declining in recent years and as a
result PNG is not on track to meet either the Millennium Development Goals, or its own national
development targets of 70% access by 2030, and 100% access by 2050. Joint Monitoring Programme
(JMP) data for 2010 estimated that only 40% of the population had access to improved water supply
and 45% to improved sanitation with significant rural-urban variations. Latest 2013 revised JMP data
for sanitation suggests figures to be even lower, at 19% nationally, with only 13% access in rural
areas.1 With approximately two-thirds of the population of the Pacific region, Papua New Guinea
falls far behind all its neighbours in providing access to improved water and sanitation. Poor service
delivery – despite positive economic growth – is attributed to poor sectoral leadership, unclear roles
and responsibilities, a lack of organisational capacity and limited government funding.

The government of PNG has been attempting to develop a national water and sanitation policy since
2005. In 2008 the National Executive Council (NEC) established a multi-agency Task Force for this
purpose but due to a lack of leadership it made little progress.

Recent WaSH Policy History: A European Union (EU) funded programme, the Rural Water Supply
and Sanitation Programme (RWSSP) operated for 6 years from 2006 and established examples of
good practice for rural WaSH service delivery in PNG. However, with little additional funding in the
sector and no institutional framework to support a nation-wide approach there was little
opportunity for further application of what had been learned once the RWSSP programme ended.
Acknowledging this possibility RWSSP organised, with WSP and WaterAid’s support, a National
Water and Sanitation Conference in 2011 in order to explore ways forward. This workshop
recommended that the Department of National Planning and Monitoring (DNPM) take the lead on
developing a national Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Policy. The need for a national policy was
further supported by the findings and recommendation in WSP’s 2012 Water and Sanitation Service
Delivery Assessment (SDA).2 Subsequently, in July 2012 the Secretary of DNPM requested technical
assistance (TA) from WSP to assist in the policy development process. This request was approved
and in November 2012, coinciding with the launch of WSP’s Service Delivery Assessment, the WaSH
Policy Task Force reconvened, facilitated by the WSP TA.

Support to the WASH Policy Task Force: WSP provided TA between November 2012 and May 2014
to facilitate the work of the multi-departmental Task Force and to support the development of a


1
 Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water 2013 Update WHO Unicef. 2013
2
 Water Supply and Sanitation in Papua New Guinea. Turning Finance into Services for the Future. WSP-World
Bank, July 2013


                                                    1
comprehensive draft WaSH Policy for submission to the NEC. In addition, the objective of the TA
was to develop capacity in WaSH sector agencies and improve service provision to the urban poor.

Early on in the TA, terms of reference for the Task Force were revised and the scope of the policy
clarified thereby ensuring that it had a focus on improved service delivery of water, sanitation and
hygiene. A time frame of 12 months for the preparation of a draft national policy was established.
Using a policy template provided by the Department of Health (DoH) the Task Force developed key
objectives and service delivery principles. The SDA provided a valuable tool for analysing the
challenges and bottlenecks to effective service delivery which the Task Force were able to identify
before moving onto the detail of identifying key policy strategies.

An early priority was to begin work on identifying a suitable institutional framework and financing
pathways for service delivery and in February 2013 additional specialist TA was provided to support
this endeavour. A local TA was also recruited in June 2013 to provide administrative support to the
DNPM during the policy preparation process.

TA assisted both the DNPM as chair of the Task Force and the Task Force directly in order to
facilitate development of the policy. Throughout this process three key principles were adopted to
optimise success:

    1) Ensuring the policy was developed based on the best information available
    2) Promoting ownership and developing networks between implementing partners
    3) Promoting political commitment.

In addition to many individual meetings the Task Force as a whole met nine times during the
development of the policy to discuss and decide on content. In addition, the process was informed
through field visits to identify challenges and options faced by implementing partners in the field.

Non-government organisations (NGOs) were also part of the Task Force and a strong partnership
with WaterAid helped the process greatly, providing additional insights and on-the-ground
experience to the process. In addition, the World Bank country office was invaluable in providing
logistical support as well as strategic insights and promoting political and donor support.

A first draft WaSH policy was produced after 12 months. This was then circulated widely beyond the
Task Force. Four regional consultation workshops on the first draft followed: in the National Capital
District (NCD), and Wewak, Goroka and Kavieng Regions.

Draft Policy Approved by the Task Force: In March 2014 the WaSH Policy Task Force approved a
draft policy document for submission to the NEC. This developed for the first time: disaggregated
and revised WaSH targets, fundamental principles of service delivery, consolidated definitions and
minimum standards and underlying issues restricting service delivery. Finally, the policy defines
seven strategies to achieve the targets, along with resource implications and an implementation
schedule.




                                                 2
The draft policy has been well received amongst implementing agencies and appears to have strong
political and development partner support.

National Water and Sanitation Authority (NWSHA): A significant achievement has been the
agreement, after lengthy consultation, of an institutional framework for improved service delivery
through the establishment of a new authority, the National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority
(NWSHA). The Board of NWSHA – which will be comprised of representatives from the public and
private sector as well as civil society – shall be responsible for planning, developing policy, building
capacity and regulating the WaSH sector, with a particular focus in services in rural areas. NWSHA
will have a head office in Port Moresby as well as Provincial and District offices. These will take an
active role in identifying and helping to implement schemes through the provision of training,
funding, monitoring and planning support to Provincial and District Governments.

Capacity Building: The policy outlines a consolidated approach to WaSH delivery which forms the
basis for future capacity assessment. Capacity building based on this has been included as a key
strategy in the new draft WaSH Policy. Support to the existing WaSH co-ordinating committee
(WASHCOM) was provided, although this body only met rarely during the TA input.

Discussions were held with two provinces which are planning to implement WaSH activities. Both
are supported by agencies or individuals involved in RWSSP and are working already to develop the
capacity for improved service delivery.

Piloting Improved Sanitation and Water Service Delivery to the Urban Poor. A WSP has started
formative research on water and sanitation situation in urban settlement areas in PNG which will be
completed in mid-2014. In addition, initial support was provided towards the implementation of a
water vending pilot but this initiative needed considerable adaptation for the socio-cultural situation
in PNG as the communities did not agree to work with private water vendors. Adaptations of the
approach were tried using a community management model, but were not successful. This, together
with a change of priorities introduced by a new CEO for Eda Ranu, the state owned enterprise
responsible for service delivery in Port Moresby, meant that the initial plan for water vending has
not been able to proceed, and new pre-paid meters are being explored.




                                                   3
1. Background

PNG has a population of 6.9 million with a growth rate of 2.8% accounting for two thirds of the
population of the South Pacific Region. The population is predominantly rural (87%) and the country
is one of the most culturally diverse on the planet, with at least 841 different languages.

Despite a period of positive economic growth which saw GDP increase from US$1,047 in 2007 to a
forecasted US$2,255 in 2012, PNG struggles to transform increasing national revenues and per
capita Gross Domestic Product into measurable improvements in household income, livelihoods or
individual well-being. PNGs poverty headcount has not changed significantly over the last 15 years
and development indicators have “stagnated” ranking low against many international comparisons.3

Between 1990 and 2010 access to improved drinking water and sanitation declined as service
delivery failed to keep pace with population increase. In 2012, the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme’s (JMP) Progress Update estimated that only 40% of the PNG population had access to
improved drinking water sources and 45% had access to improved sanitation facilities. People living
in formal urban areas were better off in terms of access to improved drinking water sources (77%)
and improved sanitation facilities (71%) compared with those living in rural areas for improved water
(33%) and improved sanitation (41%). After revisiting baseline data in 2013 the JMP suggests a
considerable and concerning revision to the sanitation coverage figures for 2011. In its 2013 update
report the JMP estimates rural sanitation access at only 13%, urban access at 57% and national
sanitation access at 19%. With two-thirds of the entire Pacific regions population, PNG lags far
behind its neighbours in providing access to both safe water and sanitation. Little information is
available regarding access to improved water source and sanitation in peri-urban settlements.

PNG is off-track to meet Millennium Development Goal 7 of 70% access to water supply and 70%
access to sanitation by 2015 as well as its own development targets outlined in the PNG Vision 2050
and Sustainable Development Plan 2030 that seek 70% access to improved drinking water sources
and sanitation by 2030 and 100% access by 2050.

Low access to basic water and sanitation services in part explains (and also exacerbates) the poor
gender inequality statistics in PNG as although this situation impacts whole communities, it is the
lives and health of women and girls that suffer most from the lack of access to water and sanitation
services. Recent research has also suggested that exposure to open defecation has a significant
impact on child stunting and cognitive ability.4 This relationship appears to increase with density of
population, making children living in higher density settlements more likely to suffer negative
impacts from open defecation.

The Water and Sanitation sector in PNG has lacked the institutional framework and organisational
co-ordination for effective service delivery and as such can be considered an ‘orphan’ sector. This is

3
  Country Partnership Strategy for the Independent State of Papua New Guinea (FY2013 – 2016). World Bank,
2012
4
  The nutritional value of toilets: How much international variation in child height can
sanitation explain? Dean Spears. First circulated: 2012


                                                   4
reflected in the scorecards developed during the Service Delivery Assessment which reflect well in
the urban water sector but poorly in the rural water supply and urban sanitation sectors against
international comparators including the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of
Congo.5,6 Water PNG is a state owned enterprise (SOE) responsible for delivering water and
sanitation services to provincial and district towns on a commercial basis. Capacity and resource
constraints mean that it currently operates in only 14 of the 19 Provinces and 6 of the 89 Districts.
Eda Ranu, also an SOE, has responsibility for delivering metered water and sewerage to businesses
and residents in Port Moresby. Responsibility for delivering water and sanitation services in rural
areas is less clearly defined. Water PNG’s mandate includes the “promotion” of water and
sanitation on a self-help basis, though there is little evidence of any activity in this regard. The DoH’s
role is to develop policy at the national level, direct financial support and provide technical
assistance and advice to Provincial Environmental Health Officers, over whom it has no management
authority. It also has responsibility for monitoring and enforcing drinking water quality and
sanitation standards delegated to it through the Public Health Act, though it lacks the resources to
do this. The majority of rural WaSH activities are implemented by non-governmental organisations
(NGOs) and church groups, but the scale of this intervention is small in relation to needs.

Inter-ministerial and inter-secoral co-ordination in PNG remains difficult in most sectors, despite the
efforts of the government to promote this, for example through new the structures established in its
Organic Law. Co-ordination of the many actors involved in WaSH was anticipated through the multi-
agency WASHCOM chaired by the DoH, but this has unclear terms of reference, no actual authority
and meets only on an ad hoc basis.

The result is that PNG’s WaSH sector development has largely focussed on urban services, as
reflected in the access data. Rural areas are poorly served and a growing population in peri-urban
and informal settlements also receive limited or no service due to the SOEs having an unclear
mandate and lack of experience in working with informal communities.

The Government of PNG has been discussing the need for a National WaSH Policy since 2005 when,
in the absence of any overall responsible department, the NEC instructed PNG Water to “a) develop
a National Policy for Water Supply and Sanitation Services for the country” and “b) develop a
proposal to restructure the Water Supply Services Program to expand and support the rural water
supply services taking into account the operations of Eda Ranu and the Local Level Government
Water Systems”. A draft policy was subsequently submitted but was not endorsed. In 2008, a Task
Force on water policy development was established, however, little progress was made due to poor
sectoral leadership arising from institutional ambiguity among stakeholders.

In 2006 an EU funded Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Programme (RWSSP) commenced providing
grant funding to over 30 NGOs throughout PNG. The programme ran for 6 years during which time
it developed a consensus of good practise in rural WaSH service delivery. In 2011 RWSSP organised
a National WaSH conference, supported by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) and WaterAid,


5
  Water Supply and Sanitation in Papua New Guinea. Turning Finance into Services for the Future. WSP-World
Bank, July 2013
6
  See for example WSP SDA examples from the Central African Republic and Democratic Republic of Congo.

                                                     5
to capture and build on the lessons learnt during programme implementation. An outcome from
this workshop was that the DNPM should take the lead in a fresh attempt to develop a WaSH Policy.

The Secretary DNPM formally requested technical assistance with this process in July 2012.


2. Overview of the Technical Assistance
This Synthesis Report details the process, activities and outputs of Technical Assistance (TA)
P144823 Policy Development Support and Capacity Building, Papua New Guinea Water Sanitation
and Hygiene (WaSH). A summary timeline of related activities is summarized in Box 1.
Specific outputs of the TA, which includes the current draft policy, are included in the annexes.

 Box 1: Timeline of WASH Policy Development

 PNG has been considering the development of a water and sanitation policy for a number of
 years. Progress in this regard is summarised below.
 2005. National Executive Council (NEC) instructs the SOE Water PNG (then PNG Waterboard) to
 develop a policy to restructure the sector and improve service delivery, particularly to rural areas.
 The resulting policy document was not endorsed by government, for reasons which are unclear.
 January 2006. The EU RWSSP commences. The programme runs until Sept 2011 providing grant
 funding to 30 national and international NGOs, community and faith based groups, throughout
 the country and works in 742 communities. During implementation the programme shares a
 significant pool of evidence based knowledge between its partners as its focus shifts from water
 and sanitation to hygiene promotion.
 2008. NEC develops terms of reference for a policy Task Force. With limited sectoral leadership
 and a lack of common direction the Task Force proves ineffective.
 May 2011. Brisbane WaSH conference. WSP hold introductory meetings with RWSSP team.
 October 2011. WSP PNG Scoping study. Recommends areas for WSP support including:
 “facilitating broader discussion on policy development – through supporting RWSSP to convene a
 National Conference. Proposes WSP support should be “strategic highly targeted and specific.”
 November 2011. National WaSH conference in PNG. Sustaining achievements: Next steps in
 Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Development in Papua New Guinea. Organised by RWSSP with
 support from WSP and WaterAid. Strong support for the development of a WASH policy and
 identifies key components and DNPM as the lead agency. Conference supports the
 implementation of a Water and Sanitation Service Delivery Assessment which subsequently
 commences in early 2012.
 July 2012. Secretary of the DNPM makes a written request to the World Bank for TA to support
 the WaSH policy development process.
 November 2012. Launch of the Service Delivery Assessment and first TA mission to support WaSH
 policy development. Task Force reconvened and terms of reference and membership revised.
 Scope of policy to focus on service delivery confirmed.
 November 2012 onwards TA missions to PNG working with the Task Force and other sector
 partners.
 February 2014. Draft WaSH policy prepared.


                                                   6
The overall objective of the TA was to support the development of a comprehensive draft WasH
policy for submission to the NEC. This was to be achieved largely through working with a multi-
agency WasH Policy Task Force which was to be re-established after a number of years of dormancy.
In addition, the TA was to assist where possible in sharing the lessons learnt from RWSSP and to
promote service provision to the urban poor.
The TA was led by Trevor Nott who was responsible for facilitating the Task Force and providing
technical input. Trevor had previously worked for 5 years in PNG on the EU funded RWSSP. As such
he had developed a close working relationship with many of the WaSH stakeholders and was familiar
with country specific issues. This role was supported by Isabel Blackett as Task Team Leader and
Penny Dutton, who advised on peri urban sanitation and was the author of the WSPs Service
Delivery Assessment. An early priority of the Policy Task Force, chaired by the DNPM, was to clarify
institutional responsibilities and in February 2013 Stuart King from Strategy and Economics (S) Pte.
Ltd. was recruited to take the lead on institution and financing issues. Later the same year Linda
Bade, a local consultant, was recruited to provide DNPM with administrative support.
The TA team was able to draw on support from two key partners to help with the facilitation of the
policy development process. WaterAid had worked with WSP since the start of the SDA study and
remained a valuable partner throughout, providing insights and support. In addition, the World
Bank provided logistical support as well as extremely useful strategic guidance, linkages to a broader
development agency network, as well as directly encouraging political support for the WaSH Policy.
A table of mission dates and TA inputs has been included in Annex 4.

2.1 Membership of the WaSH Policy Task Force
Task force membership had previously been determined by the NEC in 2008. This was revisited early
on to ensure it remained relevant. It was important that membership was manageable but at the
same time reflected key stakeholders in the sector.
The list of members is as follows:
     Department of National Planning and Monitoring (Chair)
     Department of Treasury
     Independent Public Business Corporation
     Department of Health
     Water PNG (SOE)
     Eda Ranu (SOE)
     World Health Organization (WHO)
     Department of Integrated Rural Development
     Department of Provincial and Local Level Government
     Department of Environmental Conservation
     Department of Works
     Representation from the NGO sector (WaterAid, World Vision and Child Fund)
     Additional specific technical assistance as required




                                                  7
2.2 Policy development process
The TA’s main role was both to assist the DNPM as chair of the Policy Task Force and the Task Force
to achieve its terms of reference. This required developing appropriate pathways towards the policy
completion and facilitating the exchange of knowledge and external information amongst the Task
Force members by providing briefing notes, reports, papers and examples of good practice from the
broader international WaSH environment, drafting sections of the Policy, commenting on drafts
produced by the Task Force and logistical support for meetings. Throughout, the DNPM was an
enthusiastic chair with total commitment to completing the policy process.
Organisations represented on the Task Force often had strong individual priorities so meetings
required an open forum for discussion, along with many one-on-one meetings in order to address
concerns and individual issues. Decisions were rarely made quickly and often required numerous
drafts and rewrites to address outstanding issues as they arose. However, this iterative process has
resulted in very high ownership for the final draft Policy, and developed a shared understanding of
the health and other benefits of improved WaSH as well as the challenges faced by individual
agencies.
Developing a policy that stood the best chance of being relevant and maintaining motivation in the
Task Force to help ensure the policy will not only be approved be by the NEC, but also implemented,
required consideration of three key principles:

1. Ensuring the policy is based on the best information available and responds to a strongly felt
need
Is there a consensus that a policy is required? Is there clear evidence of the benefits a policy will
provide? Is it trust worthy and evidence based? Is the policy itself country specific and relevant and
correspondent with in- country and international best practice?

How was this achieved?
Previous experience had demonstrated that there was a strong desire for a WaSH policy and this
represented an invaluable starting point. This was supported by the recently completed SDA, which
is a useful tool for identifying bottlenecks and the role that a policy would need to play in unblocking
them.
It was important that the policy was developed based on the most relevant local data and
information. Membership of the Task Force, including government departments, SOEs and NGOs,
ensured that those with the most experience of implementing both rural and urban water,
sanitation and hygiene initiatives were represented and able to share their experiences. The TA
team was also able to share their in-country experience as well as their technical knowledge through
the meetings and in written reports and policy discussion papers, and provided additional
documents representing international best practice.
Three field visits and four regional consultation workshops helped inform the policy based on local,
current experiences and realities.
The wealth of experience and commitment within the Task Force ensured a strong analysis of TA
reports and discussion documents leading to informed decision making.


                                                   8
2. Promoting ownership, developing networks and raising awareness/expectation, addressing
competing discourses and building trust

How was this achieved?
Promoting ownership was essential during the policy development process. The TA sought to guide
and facilitate, ensuring that the authority of the DNPM was clearly established as the chair of the
Task Force. The composition of the Task Force, dominated by government departments, also helped
strengthen ownership, ensuring that the policy remained firmly government focused, but also had
the input and ownership of both water utilities and NGOs’.
All decisions regarding the policy format and content were arrived at through discussion and
consensus during Task Force meetings. Facilitating open dialogue during the Task Force meeting
was essential in building trust and co-operation in the process.
The Task Force process was supported through regular on-on-one meetings with individual members
and other staff in their Departments. When appropriate, meetings were held with more senior
management within departments to update them on progress and ensure they were kept informed
of policy progress.
It was important to promote networks beyond the Task Force as this would not only inform the
process, but raise the profile of the Policy, develop expectations and assist in developing
commitment to implementing the policy once it was completed.
In addition to meeting with other agencies in Port Moresby, three field project missions were
conducted in order to better understand the challenges of service delivery from the perspective of
key stakeholders in the field. Also, four regional consultation visits were conducted with Task Force
members to present key policy outputs for comment and feedback. As well as contributing
significantly to the policy development process these trips provided opportunities to meet
stakeholders and promote ownership within the Task Force as members were required to explain
and sometimes defend the policy drafts.
Table 1 below details organisation and individuals consulted and involved with the policy
development process, in addition to the Task Force members.

Table 1: Consultations during the Policy Development Process

    In Port Moresby
    The European Union                           Institute of National Affairs
    National Authorising Office (NAO)            Western Provincial Government Advisor (based in
    Support Unit                                 Port Moresby)
    PNG Sustainable Development Fund             UNICEF
    ADB                                          Anglicare
    JICA                                         CIMC
    National Aids Council                        Office of Urbanisation
    NCDC                                         Department of Works*
                                                 Department of Provisional and Local Government
    National Statistical Office
                                                 Affairs*

                                                 9
    Digicel Foundation                                    PNG Women’s Foundation (NGO)
    Outside Port Moresby
    Rigo District Local Government staff                  Eastern Highlands Provincial Health Authority
    CARE International                                    Eastern Highlands Provincial government
    Appropriate Technology Projects (NGO
                                                          Luffa District LLG (Eastern Highlands)
    Goroka)
    Office of Member of Parliament
                                                          Goroka Urban LLG
    (Goroka)
    Touching the Untouchables (NGO
                                                          Eastern Highlands District Health Authority
    Goroka)
                                                          Planning Coordinator and advisor to the Governor,
    Provincial Health, Kavieng
                                                          Kavieng
    District Health Manager (Kavieng)                     Provincial Works manager (Kavieng)
    Wewak Provincial and District
                                                          WaterAid programme in Wewak
    managers
*Whilst these two organizations were members of the Task Force they did not attend any meetings, so were consulted
independently and as far as possible kept informed of progress.

3. Promoting political commitment
Policy decisions are based on political values and interests. Does the policy support existing
government priorities/strategies? Is it part of the government narrative? In addition, organisations
and donors have their own development agendas and priorities that determine the areas of policy
with which they are likely to engage. Is WaSH policy on the donor agenda? Are they putting any
pressure on government?

How was this achieved?
Developing commitment to the policy was important both to promote its passage through the
approval process and to encourage and harmonise development partner projects in support of it in
the future.
The WaSH Policy was developed as a means to achieve the government’s existing water and
sanitation targets as identified in, for example, PNG Vision 2050, Strategic Plan 2010-2030 and MDG
commitments. Separate targets also existed in service providers own development plans such as the
Water PNG Master Plan 2012-2030 and the National Health Plan 2011-2025. One of the early
achievements of the Task Force was to work through these various targets, include
recommendations made in the SDA, incorporate new hygiene targets and, for the first time, produce
clear consolidated targets relevant to the whole WaSH sector in a single document. Although these
targets had previously existed, there had been no effective strategy or plan to achieve them, nor had
institutions been clearly identified as being responsible for their implementation.
Throughout the process it was important to keep higher levels of government informed of progress
and to ensure that the WaSH Policy remained in their political consciousness. To help achieve this
the Secretary of DNPM was kept informed of progress through meetings and ‘Information Notes’
submitted to both the secretaries of office and the office of the Minister of DNPM updating them on
key decisions and timescales. During departmental progress reviews, which the minister attended,

                                                         10
progress and direction of the policy was regularly reported in order to inform but also to ‘test the
waters’. This was supported by the World Bank office which wrote to the Minister outlining the
importance of the policy and their support for the process. Meeting a Minister can be difficult to
arrange, but when the occasion afforded, chance meetings were used to further promote the Policy.
This dialogue was essential during the process since the policy was advocating the establishment of
a new Authority, with an associated budget, representing a significant commitment of resources.
Informal, tacit approvals were received as the process progressed which should help ensure that
significant opposition is not met later on.
As a significant supporter of WaSH in PNG, the EU was regularly updated on progress of the Policy,
which fortunately coincided with programming for their EDF11 round of funding. Whilst willing to
commit significant funds to the WaSH sector, programming was difficult with a perceived limited
absorptive capacity, poor sectoral leadership and lack of policy and strategic direction. TA and Task
Force members were fortunate to be able to attend an EDF11 programming workshop early on in
the process. Later, as the policy became more defined, a briefing note to the EU delegation was
prepared outlining key areas of possible support. Finally, a draft copy of the policy was sent to the
EU delegation who have responded favorably to supporting implementation of the policy through
EDF11 funding.
In addition, with support from the World Bank Country Manager, the TA was able to make a
presentation on the recently published SDA to the broader development community at the
Development Partners Round Table (DPRT). This was well received and helped raise awareness
about the need for a WasH Policy.
Also contributing to the political/organizational commitment is the recent decision of the DoH to
develop a sub policy for WaSH access in hospitals and medical centres, which it is hoped will directly
contribute to the WaSH Policy goal of 100% access in all medical centres by 2030.

2.3 Summary of key documents developed for the Policy Task Force and partners

The following documents were developed during the policy dialogue. The aim of the TA was to
provide information in a concise and consolidated format that facilitated dialogue and decision
making within the Task Force.

       Institutional Evaluation of PNG’s Water and Sanitation Sector. March 2013, Stuart King
       Water Sector Financial Review. July 2013, Stuart King
       WaSH Policy Task Force discussion document. Policy Definitions and Standards. July 2013.
        Trevor Nott
       WaSH Policy Task Force discussion document. Policy Proposals on Rural WaSH. July 2013,
        Trevor Nott
       WaSH Policy Task Force discussion document. Policy Targets. 10th July 2013. Trevor Nott
       Institutional Evaluation of PNG’s Water and Sanitation Sector: Establishing a National Water,
        Sanitation & Hygiene Authority. September 2013. Stuart King
       Opportunities for EU support to strengthen water, sanitation and hygiene service delivery in
        PNG. Briefing note to the EU delegation. September. 2013 Trevor Nott



                                                 11
       Private Sector Participation and Public Private Partnerships in Papua New Guinea’s Water,
        Sanitation and Hygiene Sector. January 2014. Stuart King
       WaSH Policy Task Force meeting minutes. Nov.2011-March 2014
       PNG National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH) Policy Second Draft 19.02.14


3. Overview of WASH Policy

The draft WaSH policy provides a sector background, disaggregated and revised WaSH targets,
articulated fundamental principles of service delivery, consolidated definitions and minimum
standards and addressed underlying issues restricting service delivery. In addition, the policy defines
seven strategies to achieve the targets, along with resource implications and an implementation
schedule.

The goal of the National WaSH policy is to contribute towards improving the quality of life,
specifically:

    1. Reduction in morbidity and mortality caused by water-related diseases.
    2. Improved livelihood opportunities and economic growth through improved health and
       reduced economic and financial losses.
    3. Increased equity of services between rural, peri-urban and urban areas, and to
       disadvantaged groups.

This will be achieved through the objective of ” providing equitable access to safe, convenient and
sustainable water supply and sanitation, and to promote improved hygiene practices and long term
hygiene behaviour change at the personal, household, community and institutional level, particular
to rural and urban settlement areas that are currently under-served”.

In order to measure progress against this objective, the policy identifies clearly defined targets:

For water supply:
• In rural areas, 70% of the population has access to a safe, convenient and sustainable water
    supply.
• In urban areas, 95% of the population has access to a safe, convenient and sustainable water
    supply.
• 100% of educational institutions and medical centres across the country have access to a safe,
    convenient and sustainable water supply.

For sanitation:
• In rural areas, 70% of the population has access to safe, convenient and sustainable sanitation
    facilities.
• In urban areas, 85% of the population has access to safe, convenient and sustainable sanitation
    facilities.
• 100% of educational institutions and medical centres have access to safe, convenient and
    sustainable sanitation facilities.


                                                   12
For hygiene:
• 100% of educational institutions and medical centres have handwashing facilities with running
    water and soap.
• 100% of the households that have access to an improved water supply practice total sanitation

The policy presents clear definitions for all terms used. These targets are recognised as being
ambitious and aspirational. They were developed by the policy Task Force considering existing
targets included in the PNG Vision 2050, Development Strategic Plan, the Medium Term
Development Plan, corporate plans of the SOEs and the Millennium Development Goals, as well as
the targets proposed in the WSP Service Delivery Assessment and stakeholder feedback. They are
disaggregated, and marginally more ambitious than existing government targets for the sector.

In order to achieve these targets the policy identifies seven strategies;

    1. Improved sector coordination and leadership, through the establishment of a new Authority
       known as the National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority. (NWSHA)

    2. Increased WaSH sector funding.

    3. Develop and manage an effective management information system.

    4. Improved and consistent approaches to WaSH service delivery.

    5. Appropriate technology promotion.

    6. Enhanced private sector participation and partnerships.

    7. Sector capacity building and training.

Finally, the policy outlines resource implications in terms of the investments required to establish
NWSHA , the investments in infrastructure and the additional human resources required, along with
an implementation schedule.


4. National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority

Strategy 1 of the Draft WaSH policy refers to the establishment of the National Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene Authority (NWSHA). WaSH service delivery in PNG has been restricted due to the lack of
an effective organisational framework. More specifically:

       The absence of any senior policy making body for the sector except for the Department of
        Health (DoH) which, historically at least, has exerted limited influence over water and
        sanitation service delivery and IPBC which, as the historic shareholder of the state owned
        enterprises (SOE), exerts some corporate control over Eda Ranu and Water PNG but no real
        policy making influence.


                                                   13
      Even if there was a sector-wide, WaSH policy making function there is also limited policy
       coordination across the different agencies involved in the WaSH sector. This translates into
       a lack of alignment between national policy and provincial or district implementation (as
       well as between provincial and district level government) and an absence of momentum or
       pressure in relation to policy implementation. Rural WaSH development is the biggest loser
       here but the sector as a whole suffers from this lack of centralised policy formulation,
       coordination and execution.
      The absence of any firm or direct relationship between WATSAN utility operators and most
       urban (outside of the NCD) and rural customers. This is particularly true for the rural sector
       where the Provincial and District government generally fail to make WaSH development a
       priority and the DoH has only a limited impact. In urban areas, which are the responsibility
       of Water PNG, the vast majority of district towns and a significant proportion of provincial
       towns remain un-served by the utility despite its monopoly service mandate.

In March 2013, the WaSH Task Force was presented with an Organisational Report setting out four
institutional options that could potentially help overcome these challenges presently confronting
PNG’s WaSH sector. These options were discussed at WaSH Task Force meetings held in March and
May 2013 and, although there was not full consensus among stakeholders on the best institutional
model to adopt, it was agreed that one of the approaches – the establishment of a National Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene Authority (NWSHA)– should be further developed to both better understand
how it would be structured and operate and, allied to this, whether this model can manage to meet
the multifarious demands it would likely face in order to successfully progress the development of
PNG’s rural and urban water and sanitation sectors.

A second Organisation Report containing a detailed description of how NWSHA would be structured
and operate as well as a high level implementation plan was prepared in May 2013. The Report was
discussed with the WaSH Task Force at a series of meetings held in June, September October and
November 2013 until consensus was reached on NWSHA’s operational remit and how this ought to
be represented in the WaSH Policy document. Key elements of NWSHA’s operating mandate
include:

      As illustrated in the Figure below, the NWSHA will have a central headquarters as well as
       offices in Provinces and Districts, established in accordance with the implementation of a
       Development Plan that NWSHA will produce upon its establishment.
      The Board of NWSHA – which will be comprised of representatives from the public and
       private sector as well as civil society – shall be responsible for developing and implementing
       policy for the WaSH sector. The Board may choose to do this by itself or it may set up
       special purpose working groups to deal with particular issues or concerns. The Board will
       replace the existing national WASHCOM.




                                                14
      The NWSHA’s role with respect to National co-ordination and leadership will include:
       i. Disaggregating national targets /goals in relation to WaSH development.
      ii. Translating these targets / goals into a phased Development Plan that sets out in detail
           how water and sanitation system development will be implemented and coordinated
           among relevant stakeholders. The Development Plan will contain a clear prioritisation
           strategy for how WaSH targets will be achieved and the budgetary requirements
           associated with Policy implementation.
    iii. Ensuring adoption and mainstreaming of all WaSH Policy principles.
     iv. Identifying and allocating funding support to WaSH development activities (including
           Community Service Obligation (CSO) mechanisms).
      v. Assuming responsibility for appropriate regulation that will include water quality
           regulation, other technical regulation and, solely in relation to non-state-owned-
           enterprises, economic and competition regulation. The application of regulation
           oversight will be applied at a level appropriate for the scale and size of the water and/or
           sanitation utility concerned.
     vi. Increasing private sector engagement in relation to WaSH infrastructure development
           and service delivery.
    vii. Maintaining the WaSH Monitoring Information System (MIS) to help monitor and
           evaluate WaSH sector development and the achievement of National WaSH Policy
           objectives and targets.



                                                15
  viii. Developing alternative/innovative service provision programmes such as franchising
        schemes, output based aid (OBA) schemes, etc.
  ix. Conducting communication activities in support of WaSH sector development such as
        raising awareness of the role of the NWSHA, informing stakeholders of ongoing and
        planned WaSH sector investment activities and promoting understanding of the
        importance of WaSH service delivery.
 The NWSHA’s role with respect to urban WaSH service delivery will include:
    i. Providing support to existing and new operators to develop and implement plans to
        extend service provision to new urban areas through identifying potentially commercial
        locations and assisting with funding sources and appropriate service provision
        approaches.
   ii. Ensuring that all new interventions in urban areas include clearly identified strategies
        for providing services to poor and urban settlement areas.
  iii. Developing and assisting in implementing specifically targeted strategies, in partnership
        with service providers, to ensure services are developed and improved to currently un-
        served customers in existing territories, particularly urban settlements. Developing
        strategies will involve:
        a. Identifying opportunities for CSO funding and providing assistance with
             applications.
        b. Identifying potentially commercially viable service delivery options.
        c. Helping identify new and additional sources of financing.
        d. Supporting the development of new approaches to better serve peri-urban
             settlements.
        e. Assisting SOEs and other service providers in dealing with issues of non-payment
             and non-revenue water reduction.
  iv. Identifying and supporting new operators to provide water and sanitation services to
        urban customers.
   v. Providing support to all urban WaSH operators with respect to issues that have broad
        stakeholder or sector relevance.
 The NWSHA’s role with respect to rural WaSH service delivery will include:
    i. Providing assistance to rural WaSH facilitation and implementation organisations,
       including provincial, district and local level administrations, provincial health offices,
       NGOs and the private sector to support the planning and implementation of water,
       sanitation and health infrastructure at rural community level.
   ii. Assisting in the development of water and sanitation investment and service support
       plans to be submitted to local and district level government authorities.
  iii. Ensuring Service Improvement Program (SIP) support includes sustainable WaSH
       activities.
  iv. Providing funding support in relation to rural WaSH development in the absence of
       sufficient SIP support.
   v. Working with development partners to increase finance and support rural WASH
       development initiatives.




                                             16
       vi.   Working with the SOEs and other operators to identify opportunities to extended
             existing urban service areas to surrounding communities and identifying other support
             that utilities can provide to rural communities

This last set of responsibilities relating to helping to extend WaSH service delivery in rural areas is
particularly important. Essentially the NWSHA provincial or district field office will take an active
role in identifying and helping implement rural schemes through the provision of training, funding,
monitoring and planning support.


5. Overview TA Achievements against PCN Outputs and Outcomes

A summary of outputs against the project concept note is included in Table 2.




                                                   17
Table 2: Summary of Achievements against Outputs anticipated in the PCN

Intermediate Outcome                    Outputs                                                   Achievements
                                                                                                 Draft WaSH Policy developed and approved by Task Force.
A WaSH sector Policy, including        Advice to a multi-stakeholder Task Force in
urban and rural subsectors,             developing key policy documents including
developed and adopted by                vision, principles, objectives and targets.              Revised institutional options discussed and agreed and summarized
Government of PNG.                     Recommendations provided for appropriate                  in the policy and supporting documentation.
                                        organizational and institutional responsibilities
                                        and processes for implementing the Policy.               It is still too early to pilot the policy processes. This needs to happen
                                       Identification of opportunities to pilot key policy       after the policy has been approved and represents a critical initial
                                        processes and integrate gender appropriate                stage of the policy roll out.
                                        approaches.
                                                                                                 Policy contains a consolidated approach to WaSH service delivery.
WaSH service delivery capacity         Assessment of the key skills and capacity
                                                                                                  This will form the basis of a capacity assessment and has been
improved across sector agencies.        required for rural WaSH implementation.
                                                                                                  included in the TORs of NWSHA.
                                       Capacity development of rural WaSH
                                                                                                 Currently there is little funding for WaSH outside of DFAT (Australia)
                                        implementing organizations through lessons
                                                                                                  Community Sector Organization (CSO) WaSH funding which is being
                                        learned in the recent EU funded RWSSP.
                                                                                                  implemented by ex RWSSP NGOs. Will form part of NWSHA TORs.
                                       Support to strengthen the capacity of the
                                                                                                 Attempts were made to support WASHCOM, but few meetings were
                                        National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
                                                                                                  scheduled.     Expectation is that NWSHA will largely replace
                                        Committee (WASHCOM).
                                                                                                  WASHCOM.
                                       Support through advice, training and examples
                                                                                                 Discussion held with two provinces (New Ireland and Western) to
                                        of best practice to provincial governments
                                                                                                  assist with implementation of their WaSH programmes. Linkages
                                        departments implementing rural WaSH
                                                                                                  facilitated between Western Province and World Vision to improve
                                        programs.
                                                                                                  WaSH service delivery. New Ireland yet to start.
                                       Formative research undertaken on the status              The peri-urban settlements research has been designed, started and
Improved service provision to the       and needs of peri-urban sanitation in PNG with a          is ongoing.
urban poor.                             gender focus and dissemination of results.
                                       Assistance provided to Eda Ranu on monitoring            Eda Ranu had a change of senior management during the TA period
                                        pilots to reduce non-revenue water, by serving            In addition, a decision was made early on to stop the water vending
                                        low income urban communities though water                 Programme and identify possible alternatives.
                                        vending.




                                                                               18
5.1 Draft WaSH sector Policy developed and adopted by Government of PNG

5.1.1 Facilitation of the WaSH Policy Task Force
During the TA period between November 2012 and completion of the WasH Policy draft for
submission, the Task Force met nine times. In addition, three field visits were conducted to Goroka
District, Wewak District and Rigo District in order to better understand the challenges of service
delivery, and four Regional consultation workshops were held by Task Force members in NCD,
Goroka, Wewak and Kavieng in order to present early drafts and discuss comments and
observations.
In its early meetings the Task Force revised their Terms of Reference and membership. Subsequent
meetings looked at the Purpose, Objectives and Principles of the policy before looking at how these
would be achieved.
Policy Strategies became clearer during the Task Force discussions, as members discussed the
challenges they faced in delivering services and, with the TA, identified potential solutions. These
were consolidated by the TA under summarized headings for discussion
Finally seven policy strategies were approved by the Task Force.:
    1.   Improved sector co-ordination and leadership
    2.   Increased WaSH sector funding
    3.   Develop and implement effective management information systems for the WaSH sector
    4.   Improved and consistent approaches to WaSH service delivery
    5.   Appropriate technology promotion
    6.   Enhanced private sector participation and partnership
    7.   Increased sector capacity building and training
The Task Force used a raft of existing documents, TA produced materials and international examples
to reach its decisions. The SDA provided an invaluable support for identifying the key issues and
bottlenecks and to provide financial estimates on costs for improving service delivery.
There exists no standard government template for a policy paper and so an example was provided
by the DoH and approved for use by the Task Force. A first draft of the WaSH Policy was prepared in
November 2013 in line with the original Task Force commitment made at its first meeting for a draft
policy to be made available within 12 months. This was then informed through one–on-one
meetings with all Task Force members and through the four Regional consultations. A final second
draft was approved, in principal, with minor modifications at the Task Force meeting held on the 12th
March 2014.
For the first time, PNG has a draft policy document that details disaggregated and revised WaSH
targets, establishes fundamental principles of service delivery, provides consolidated definitions and
minimum standards, identifies underlying issues that cause blockages in the service delivery
pathway, describes strategies to address them and, in so doing, aligns thinking as a sector, builds
consensus, improves co-ordination and creates common objectives.

5.1.2 Recommendations for organizational and institutional responsibilities
In March 2013, the WaSH Task Force was presented by the TA lead on Institutions with an
Organisational Report setting out four institutional options that could potentially help overcome


                                                   19
challenges presently confronting PNG’s WaSH sector. These options included establishing a new
WaSH Department, formally allocating WaSH responsibilities to an existing government department,
establishing a WaSH Authority and establishing a Rural WaSH Agency. These options were discussed
at WaSH Task Force meetings held in March and May 2013. As one would expect, the views of Task
Force members reflected their particular concerns and interests – the Department of Health for
example, were particularly anxious that rural WaSH be made a priority. Although there was not
initial consensus among stakeholders on the best institutional model to adopt, the discussions
culminated in the decision that the establishment of a WaSH Authority (National Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene Authority) would be explored further.
A second organisation report containing a detailed description of how NWSHA would be structured
and operate as well as a high level implementation plan was prepared in May 2013. The Report was
discussed with the WaSH Task Force at a series of meetings held in June, September, October and
November 2013 until consensus was reached on NWSHA’s operational remit and how this ought to
be represented in the WaSH Policy document. Key discussion points during these meetings that
were later adopted in the final policy document included:

       The recognition that hygiene promotion is intrinsic to achieving effective water and
        sanitation outcomes led to the proposed name of the organisation changing from the
        National Water and Sanitation Authority to the National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
        Authority and a broadening of the scope of responsibility for the Authority.
       Identification of Board members – organisations such as the Chamber of Commerce were
        added to the multi-stakeholder Board.
       A description of how the NWSHA would help extend WaSH services to rural areas. This led to
        the formulation of a rural policy intervention framework that is illustrated and described in
        the Report and summarised in the Policy
       The proposal that NWSHA should establish one (or more) WaSH Funds controlled by an
        independent board chaired by the NWSHA that is dedicated to finance the extension,
        rehabilitation and maintenance of WaSH service delivery, particularly in rural and peri urban
        settlement areas. The Government of PNG would be expected to contribute a minimum
        annual amount to this Fund.
       How NWSHA and its facilitation / implementation partners will work with provincial, district
        and local level government to ensure that funding dedicated to WaSH service delivery
        activities is included in the Service Improvement Program (SIP) funding process and that the
        money earmarked for WaSH investment is utilised efficiently and effectively.

5.1.3 Review of sector financing, tariff setting and operational efficiency
A Report was produced that analysed the financial status of PNG’s water and sanitation sector. The
Report reviewed the financial status of the two State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) – Water PNG and
Eda Ranu – that operate in the sector as well as analysing the scale and scope of national
government and development partner funding that is directed towards the WaSH sector. The
principal objective of the Report was to highlight the relative lack of funding that has historically
been directed towards water and sanitation infrastructure development and service delivery and to
assess the capability of the two SOEs to help address this problem.


                                                  20
More specifically, the Report sought to assess how funding may be sourced to finance the
considerable amount of new investment that will be required to extend service delivery to the
estimated 4.2 million Papua New Guineans (59 % of the population) that presently do not have
access to safe water as well as the approximately 3.8 million people (55% of the population) that do
not have access to improved sanitation.
This investment can realistically come from a number of sources including:

      Self-generated funds from Eda Ranu and Water PNG.
      Eda Ranu and Water PNG (or other licensed entities) utilising commercial loan finance.
      National budget expenditure which may take the form of loans or grants provided to the
       WATSAN sector operators.
      National budget expenditure directed towards the Department of Health (DoH) that,
       according to the National Health Plan 2011-2020, is formally allocated responsibility for rural
       water and sanitation service provision.
      National budget expenditure provided to provincial, district and local level government
       under the Service Improvement Programme (SIP) that is expected to be used principally for
       infrastructure development (including WaSH) purposes.
      Development banks providing grant or loan financing to WaSH sector operators.


Unfortunately, none of these funding sources stands ready to deliver the required investment. The
SOEs (and Water PNG in particular) have limited capability to fund system expansion and rely on
national government budget support. The national government expects the utilities to act in a
commercial manner and provide their own investment funding, whilst the development partners
(principally the ADB, EU and JICA) intermittently fund some important water and sanitation
programmes but these meet only a fraction of the full need. Meanwhile, the Department of Health
(DOH) directs very little money towards water and sanitation infrastructure development outside of
hospitals and clinics. Regional and local government authorities have no systematic programme for
water and sanitation funding spending, relying instead on district and local level government to
include such provision in their development plans which occurs on a seemingly random basis.
The Report was circulated to WaSH Task Force members and some limited feedback was
incorporated into the document.

5.1.4 Potential for private sector engagement in PNG’s WaSH Sector
A Note was produced that provides an overview of the potential for Private Sector Participation
(PSP) and/or Public Private Partnerships (PPP) in PNG’s WaSH sector, the key barriers that stand in
the way of successfully expanding the role of the private sector in the sector and some possible
solutions to these impediments.
The Note is intended for use by the WaSH Policy Task Force and, ultimately, the National Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene Authority as it considers how private sector engagement in the WaSH sector
may be enhanced.
The motivation for producing the Note is strongly linked to the sector funding issue discussed above
– in the absence of sufficient government funding for water and sanitation infrastructure investment

                                                 21
and extension of service delivery to both urban and rural customers, then what potential is there for
the private sector to step in and fill the gap?
The note was finalised in February 2014 and distributed to the WaSH Policy Task Force members
shortly thereafter. No feedback or discussion has taken place at the time of writing.

5.2 WaSH service delivery capacity improved across sector agencies

5.2.1 Capacity development

During its six years of implementation the RWSSP process developed a considerable understanding
of current best practise in the PNG WaSH sector. Opportunities were explored to share this learning
during TA missions. Unfortunately, very little funding was available to implement WaSH activities
post RWSSP so the sector was rather quiet. Options to implement WaSH activities for the DoH were
limited, with no institutional instruction to do so and no funding available. The TA did discuss
options with the WHO representative in the DoH, who had funding, and instigated a programme of
Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) training for Provincial Health Advisors which is currently on
going. Outside of a few NGOs implementing rural WaSH (all of whom had already been involved in
RWSSP) the only significant rural WaSH plans were in Western Province and New Ireland where
Provincial governments had committed to implementing significant programmes. Discussions were
held with the Western Government’s principal advisor. World Vision, a key implementing NGO
under RWSSP, had already expressed a desire to work in Western Province as part of its AusAID
(DFAT) funded CS WaSH submission and so advisor and World Vision were put in contact with each
other and it is understood that discussions with the provincial government have significantly
increased World Vision’s original scope of work.

Discussions were also held with the New Ireland Provincial government who provided a copy of their
WaSH programme outline for comment. This programme had not started by the end of the WSP TA
input. Within the private sector, the Digicel Foundation construct classrooms and communitycentres
throughout the country. An ex-employee of the RWSSP TA is now employed at the Foundation and
is rolling out a programme of water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion for all these venues.

Lessons learnt from RWSSP also contributed significantly to the development of the Policy,
particularly Strategy 4 (Improved and Consistent Approaches to WaSH Service Delivery) which
reflects the lessons learnt and best practise identified during RWSSP implementation. As funds
become available to implement WaSH activities more widely this will form a basis of the
identification of capacity needs.

5.2.2 Support to strengthen the capacity of the National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Committee (WASHCOM)

The WASHCOM is chaired by the DoH. Only one meeting was held during the TA period principally
because during the policy development process it became clear that the proposed authority,
NWSHA, would effectively replace WASHCOM. As a result there was little enthusiasm from the DoH
during this period to call a meeting.




                                                 22
5.2.3 Support to provincial governments departments implementing rural WaSH programs

This outcome was largely dependent on activities, or detailed programming, having started.
Discussions were held with two provincial governments (Western Province and New Ireland).
Neither province had begun implementation during this TA period. Western Province were being
supported by World Vision, which had an excellent track record of WaSH implementation during
RWSSP, and New Ireland by an ex-employee of the RWSSP team.

5.3 Improved service provision to the urban poor

5.3.1 Formative research on peri-urban sanitation with a gender focus

Research is currently ongoing into the existing sanitation and water conditions and barriers to
sanitation in urban settlements. Locations for conducting the research have now been identified in
Port Moresby and Wewak and the surveys have started. The scope of the research has been
decided together with stakeholders interested in the findings (Eda Ranu, Water PNG, National
Capital District Commission, and NGOs) who are also contributing staff to the research. Settlement
profiling and focus groups discussions commenced in five Port Moresby settlements during March
2014. Research in three settlements in Wewak will take place during May 2014.

5.3.2 Monitoring pilots on reduce non-revenue water in Port Moresby

Eda Ranu had been intending to implement a pilot scheme using water vendors in order to reduce
high levels of non-revenue water7. This was supported by WSP through arranging a Water Service
Providers Knowledge Exchange in Port Moresby by the President National Water and Sanitation
Association of the Philippines in February 2012. In addition a study tour was organised to Manila by
Eda Ranu, private sector and community members in April 2012.

In November 2012, WSP was briefed that Eda Ranu had initiated similar pilot activities in Port
Moresby. This pilot was short lived and unsuccessful due to particular social conditions in PNG
based on clan and tribal affiliations and deeply held concepts of resource ownership, benefits and
management. These require very considered and resource intensive participatory approaches. As a
result a new community management approach was developed in order to reduce non-revenue
water costs, but this too proved unsuccessful. As these pilots were being implemented an
unexpected change in leadership at Eda Ranu resulted in a change in priorities for the organisation
and less support for the pilots. Eda Ranu are now considering a pre-paid token scheme.


6. Summary
Finalising the draft WaSH Policy represents a significant achievement for the Task force. The policy
consolidates, for the first time, government and organisational service delivery targets,
disaggregated into rural and urban environments. In addition, it develops new, and consolidates
existing, definitions and minimum standards along with agreed service delivery principles across the
whole sector, and raises the profile of hygiene behaviour change as the ultimate goal of WaSH


7
  Non-revenue water refers to water that is ‘lost’ in the system - either used by consumers or lost through
leakages etc, and not paid for.

                                                      23
interventions. Finally, it clearly identifies key blockages to effective service delivery and promotes
clear strategies in which to address them and achieve the policy objectives. In so doing, the policy
aligns sector thinking, builds consensus, improves co-ordination and creates common objectives.
This should significantly improve the ability of the Implementing agencies, the government as well as
the donor community to work together in order to achieve WaSH access targets.
Success has been the result of a number of key factors. Firstly, whilst not high on the government
agenda, the government was committed to the policy development process and proactive
leadership was provided from the DNPM. Consequently, WSP was able to respond in a timely way to
a growing momentum for policy change by providing additional evidence through the SDA and
appropriate TA. Secondly, the TA facilitated a highly inclusive and interactive consultation approach
to the policy development, based on the facilitation of the Policy Task Force and chairmanship by
DNPM which allowed for open, frank and detailed exchanges of opinions and ideas.




                                                 24
Annexes

Annex 1. PNG National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH) Policy

Annex 2. Institutional Evaluation of PNG’s Water and Sanitation Sector

Annex 3. Establishing a National Water, Sanitation & Hygiene Authority

Annex 4. Dates of TA Inputs and Missions

Annex 5. Task Force meeting dates and key decisions




                                      25
         PNG National
         Water, Sanitation
         and Hygiene
         (WaSH) Policy

         2014-2030




            Version: 09.05.14
              Second Draft


Page 1
PNG National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH) Policy                                                2014-2030




                                                  Foreword

The Papua New Guinea Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH) Policy 2014
embodies the commitment of the Government of the Independent State of
Papua New Guinea to improve the quality of lives of people both in the rural
and urban areas of the country.

Access to improved water sources and safe sanitation has been declining in
recent years as services fail to keep up with population growth and demand.
This has resulted in the increased incidence of disease and hardship felt most
acutely by the more vulnerable in our society. The Papua New Guinea WaSH
policy aims to reverse that trend and improve water, sanitation and hygiene
service delivery for the benefit of the people of Papua New Guinea, and in
doing so improve personal health, productivity and well-being. Access to these
services is a vital component of sustainable development and the alleviation of
poverty.

The policy prepares the framework for better services and is to be used by all
WaSH stakeholders who are involved in regulating, managing, planning,
financing, implementing, facilitating or monitoring water supply, sanitation
and hygiene improvement programs and activities. Through this collaborative
approach we will be working together to achieve the government’s
Development Strategic Plan target of 70% accessibility to water supply and
sanitation by 2030.

The successful implementation of this policy will contribute towards improving
the lives of the majority of PNG’s citizens, enhancing their productivity and
participation in the reconstruction of our country through better water,
sanitation and hygiene services in Papua New Guinea.




________________________                           ____________________________

Hon. Charles Abel, CMB, MP,                                Hon. Michael Malabag, CMB, MP,

Minister for National Planning                             Minister for Health




FOREWARD                                                         Department of National Planning and Monitoring  i
                           Acknowledgment

A multi-agency Task Force, including government and non-governmental
agencies, was established to prepare this policy document. The Task Force
members included:

      Department of National Planning & Monitoring (as Chair)
      Department of Treasury
      Independent Public Business Corporation
      National Department of Health
      Water PNG
      Eda Ranu
      Department of Implementation and Rural Development
      Department of Environment and Conservation
      Department of Provincial and Local Level Government Affairs
      WaterAid (PNG)
      Child Fund
      World Vision
      World Health Organization (WHO)

Technical assistance to the Task Force was provided by the Water and
Sanitation Programme (WSP) of the World Bank.

The Task Force sought opinions from a broad range of sector stakeholders
across the water, sanitation and hygiene sector.

Thank you all.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  i
Table of Contents

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS....................................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................ ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.

SECTION ONE - BACKGROUND ............................................. ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
   1.1      Intent of Policy .................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
   1.2      Audience ................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
   1.3      Policy Development Process ........................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.

SECTION TWO – DEFINITIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS ..... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT
DEFINED.

SECTION THREE – POLICY CONTEXT AND DIRECTIONS ........... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT
DEFINED.
   2.1      Goal .......................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
   2.2      Objectives .............................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
   2.3      Principles ............................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
   2.4      Core Government Legislations and Policies .............. Error! Bookmark not defined.

SECTION FOUR – POLICIES AND STRATEGIES ............... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
   3.1      Current Situation ................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
   3.2 Analysis of Issues ................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.2.1 Improve government priority for WaSH ................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.2.2 Develop sector leadership .......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.2.3 Improve funding for infrastructure ......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.2.4 Increase human resource capacity within the sector ....... Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.2.5 Develop monitoring and evaluation systems for the sector .......... Error! Bookmark not
defined.
   3.3 Policy Response ................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
Strategy One: Improved Sector Coordination and Leadership .. Error! Bookmark not defined.
Strategy Two: Increased WaSH Sector Funding ............................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
Strategy Three: Develop and Implement an Effective Management Information System
for the WaSH Sector ................................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
Strategy Four: Improved and Consistent Approaches to WaSH Service Delivery ...... Error!
Bookmark not defined.
Strategy Five: Appropriate Technology Promotion ........................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
Strategy Six: Enhanced Private Sector Participation and Partnerships ..... Error! Bookmark
not defined.
Strategy Seven: Ensure Sector Capacity Building and Training ............ Error! Bookmark not
defined.
   3.4 Resource Implications ........................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.

SECTION FIVE – ORGANISATIONAL RESPONSIBILITES ............. ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT
DEFINED.

SECTION SIX – IMPLEMENTATION PLAN .......................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.

SECTION SEVEN – MONITORING AND EVALUATION ..... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.


TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  2
ANNEX ONE: NWSHA ................................................................. ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.




AcronymExecutive Summary                                        Department of National Planning and Monitoring  3
                         Acronyms and Abbreviations



ADB                          Asian Development Bank
CACC                         Central Agencies Coordinating Committee
CLTS                         Community Led Total Sanitation
CSO                          Community Service Obligation
DEC                          Department of Conservation
DNPM                         Department of National Planning and Monitoring
DoH                          Department of Health
DSIP                         District Services Improvement Programme
EU                           European Union
GoPNG                        Government of Papua New Guinea
ICCC                         Independent Consumer and Competition Commission
IPBC                         Independent Public Business Corporation
IWC                          International Water Centre
JICA                         Japanese International Co-operation Agency
JMP                          Joint Monitoring Programme
K                            Papua New Guinea Kina
LLG                          Local Level Government
MDG                          Millennium Development Goals
MIS                          Management Information System
MTDF                         Medium Term Development Framework
NCD                          National Capital District
NEC                          National Executive Council
NGO                          Non-Governmental Organisation
NWSHA                        National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority
O&M                          Operation and Maintenance
OBA                          Outputs Based Aid
ODF                          Open Defecation Free
PHAST                        Participatory Hygiene and Sanitation Transformation
PPP                          Public Private Partnership
PSIP                         Provincial Services Improvement Programme
PSP                          Private Sector Participation.
SIP                          Services Improvement Programme
SOE                          State Owned Enterprise
VIP                          Ventilated Improved Pit Latrine
WASCOM                       Water and Sanitation Committee
WaSH                         Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WASHCOM                      Water Sanitation and Hygiene Committee (formerly
                             WASCOM)
WHO                          World Health Organisation
WSP                          Water and Sanitation Programme




ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS                       Department of National Planning and Monitoring  4
                          Executive Summary
Papua New Guinea (PNG) has never previously had a water, sanitation and
hygiene (WaSH) policy.

In urban areas, responsibility for providing piped water and sewerage services
in the nation’s capital, Port Moresby, lies with Eda Ranu; and for the
remaining provincial and district towns, responsibility for water and sanitation
services lies with Water PNG (formerly the PNG Water Board). Service
provision to these areas is reasonable (87% access to safe water, 71% access
to safe sanitation), but has been declining in real terms in the face of rapid
urban population expansion.

Papua New Guinea’s peri-urban and rural areas, representing over 87% of the
population, remain poorly served. Water PNG has a mandate to ‘promote
access to water and sanitation in rural areas’, but has been largely inactive
due to its urban priorities. As a result, the Department of Health has taken on
the responsibility but has had limited impact due to a shortage of government
funds and the absence of a clear national strategy. A consequence of the
government’s limited investment and activities in the sec tor is that the
majority of WaSH services in rural and peri-urban areas are provided by the
non-government sector. These are mostly national and international NGOs as
well as community and church based organisations. The total impact of such
schemes, however, is limited due to a lack of both national and international
funding and the absence of a clear government strategy that incorporates a
coordinated and consolidated approach.

As a result PNG will miss its MDG water and sanitation targets for 2015 and,
unless considerable improvements are made, will also miss national targets
identified in the government’s Development Strategic Plan 2030.

The consequences of low access to water and sanitation and poor hygiene
practices are well documented and evident in terms of increased incidences of
water borne disease, most notably diarrhoea, typhoid and cholera leading to
higher morbidity and death, poorer educational attainment, and economic
impacts at both the household and national level.

The purpose of this Policy is to reverse the current decline and significantly
accelerate access to water and sanitation services and to promote long term
hygiene behaviour change. It establishes clear disaggregated targets for 2030,
as well as minimum standards and principles for implementation. To achieve
these targets the policy identifies seven distinct strategies. Whilst supporting
existing activities in urban areas, the policy’s focus is on providing services to
the large unserved populations in rural and peri-urban environments.

Principle among the proposed strategies is the establishment of a National
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority (NWSHA). This will drive forward
implementation of the policy, providing leadership and coordination within the
sector. This initiative is supported by six additional strategies: improved


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                              Department of National Planning and Monitoring  5
funding to the sector; development of an effective management information
system; improved and consistent approaches to WaSH; appropriate technology
promotion; enhanced private sector participation and partnerships; and sector
capacity building. Together, these strategies will seek to ensure that each year
services are delivered to an additional 453,000 people in order to meet the
policy targets.8

To reach 2030 water and sanitation targets, an estimated K302 million (US$
120 million) annual investment in infrastructure, operations and maintenance
is required9. This funding requirement is to be met from public government
funds, the private sector, household contributions and international
development contributions. In addition there will be costs for additional
human resources in the sector, the majority of which is most likely to be met
by recruitment from the private sector.

Establishing the NWSHA head office is estimated to cost K1.8 million per
annum with an additional K 2.6 million per annum for salaries. It is proposed
to establish subnational offices in each province. Each sub-national NWSHA
office will cost approximately K500,000 each to establish with a further
K260,000 each per annum in salaries.




8
  This is an ambitious and aspirational target requiring delivery to an additional 6% of the population per
year. It exceeds the delivery achieved in other developing countries but reflects the governments
commitment to providing services as detailed in the Vision 2050
9
  Water Supply and Sanitation in Papua New Guinea. Turning Finance into Services for the Future . WSP-
World Bank, July 2013

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  6
                       Section One - BACKGROUND

1.1     Intent of Policy
The National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH) Policy has been
formulated to provide a framework to substantially improve access to water
and sanitation services and to change hygiene behaviours, particularly to the
currently underserved rural and peri-urban settlement areas. It aims to
provide direction for planning, management, investments and activities for all
sector stakeholders in order to achieve the policy objectives.


1.2     Audience
The policy is for the benefit of all people of Papua New Guinea – men, women
and children. It serves to guide WaSH stakeholders, including national,
provincial and local governments, state owned enterprises (SOEs),
development partners, non-government organizations, private sector and
community stakeholders, that are involved in regulating, planning, financing,
implementing, operating, facilitating or monitoring water supply, sanitation
and hygiene improvement programs and activities.


1.3     Policy Development Process

Papua New Guinea has not previously had a WaSH policy.

In 2005, National Executive Council (NEC) Decision No. 72/2005 instructed
PNG Water Board (now Water PNG) to develop a national water policy.
However the resulting output was never endorsed. A subsequent NEC
decision, No. 51/2008, established a specific Task Force for the purpose of
establishing a WaSH policy.

The importance of a national policy was further endorsed during the first
National WaSH conference in November 2011. Soon after, based on a request
from government, the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank
provided technical assistance to support the work of the Task Force.

An early decision made by the Task Force was that water, sanitation and
hygiene issues should be addressed in a single policy, and that this policy
should apply to urban, urban settlement and rural areas. It was also decided
that the policy would focus on issues relating to the delivery of water and
sanitation services, rather than water resources management.

The Task Force met regularly during 2012 and 2013 and, in close consultation
with relevant stakeholders (including a number of regional workshops),
produced this WaSH policy document.




Section 1 BACKGROUND                         Department of National Planning and Monitoring  7
Section Two – DEFINITIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS
Urban
The urban environment includes areas within the legally gazetted town
boundary, as well as urban settlements and urban villages which may be part
of the broader peri-urban environment, but are economically and socially
dependent of the gazetted urban area.

Rural
The rural environment includes all non-urban areas.

Safe Drinking Water
These must meet PNG standards as outlined in the Public Health (Drinking
Water) Regulation 1984, adopted from the WHO International Standards for
Drinking Water, 1971. In summary:
    For chlorinated and otherwise disinfected supplies the water entering
      the system must have a zero coliform count. Once in the system 90% of
      samples taken shall not contain any coliform organisms in any sample
      of 100ml and no sample should contain more than 10 coliforms/100ml.
    There should be no E. Coli in any sample.10
    For non-disinfected supplies there should be no E.Coli in any sample
      and no sample shall contain more than three coliform organisms per
      100ml.
    Additional toxic contaminant and aesthetic standards apply and are
      detailed in the Regulations.

Where an emergency situation has been declared, WHO minimum standards
will be temporarily replaced by the Sphere minimum standards for
emergencies.

Convenient and sustainable water supply
This includes a number of elements:
    For household piped water, the minimum service delivery norms are
       150 litres per capita per day (l/c/d) continuous supply with a service
       pressure of 60 Kpa.
    For standpipes and hand pumps, the designs should accommodate for
       50 l/c/d with a maximum of 50 users per water point no further than
       150m from the household.
    Where rain catchment is used, designs must accommodate for a
       minimum of 5 l/c/d for drinking water with a maximum of 50 users per
       water point no further than 150m.

Designs for all schemes must ensure adequate water re-charge on a
continuing basis.


10
  Coliforms are bacteria that live in the intestines of warm-blooded animals (humans, pets, farm
animals, and wildlife). Fecal coliform bacteria are a type of coliform associated with human or animal
wastes. Escherichia coli (E. coli) is part of the group of fecal coliforms.



Section 2 DEFINITIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS                  Department of National Planning and Monitoring  8
All water points should be constructed with suitable drainage to ensure no
pooling of stagnant water.

Appropriate operation and maintenance procedures and schedules for both
rural and urban systems need to be developed during construction.

Improved sanitation facilities
An improved sanitation facility is one which is safe, convenient and
sustainable.

Safe: All sanitation facilities should hygienically separate human excreta from
human contact and prevent faecal material from entering the wider
environment. They should also be constructed in a manner that prevents
polluting the environment, particularly existing ground water and surface
water sources.
Convenient: Latrines should be easily and safely accessible for all household
members, particularly women and children, and used by no more than 5
families, or 30 persons, whichever is fewer .
Sustainable: Sanitation facilities must be maintained to ensure they remain
safe.

Appropriately constructed ventilated improved pit latrines (VIP) are considered
the minimum standard for an improved sanitation facility.

Improved hygienic practices
Long term behaviour change practices, which as a minimum must include:
    Safe handling, storing and use of drinking water. Water is treated where
      the water quality is untested or known to be contaminated by
      bacteriological agents.
    All infant excreta is safely disposed in an improved sanitation facility,
      followed by hand washing with water and soap.
    Hand washing with soap is practiced by everybody at critical times:
      before cooking and eating, after defecation, and post defecation cleaning
      of infants and children.
    All solid waste is disposed of safely and appropriately.

Open Defecation Free (ODF)
A community is open defecation free when, over a sustained period of time, all
members of that community use an improved sanitation facility, and there is
no human excreta visible in the environment.

Total Sanitation
This means that all households have stopped open defecation and use
improved sanitation facilities. In addition, all households adopt improved
hygienic practices.




Section 2 DEFINITIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS   Department of National Planning and Monitoring  9
Section Three - POLICY CONTEXT AND DIRECTIONS

3.1     Goal

The goal of the National WaSH policy is to contribute towards improving the
quality of life, specifically:

       1. Reduction in morbidity and mortality caused by water-related
          diseases.

       2. Improved livelihood opportunities and economic growth through
          improved health and reduced economic and financial losses.

       3. Increased equity of services between rural, peri-urban and urban
          areas, and to disadvantaged groups.

3.2     Objectives

The objective of the WaSH policy is to provide equitable access to safe,
convenient and sustainable water supply and sanitation, and to promote
improved hygiene practices and long term hygiene behaviour change at the
personal, household, community and institutional level, particular to rural
and urban settlement areas that are currently under-served.

This objective will be measured against the following targets to be achieved by
2030:11
For Water Supply:
    In rural areas, 70% of the population has access to a safe, convenient and
     sustainable water supply.
    In urban areas, 95% of the population has access to a safe, convenient and
     sustainable water supply.
    100% of educational institutions and medical centres across the country
     have access to a safe, convenient and sustainable water supply.
For sanitation:
    In rural areas, 70% of the population has access to safe, convenient and
     sustainable sanitation facilities.
    In urban areas, 85% of the population has access to safe, convenient and
     sustainable sanitation facilities.
    100% of educational institutions and medical centres have access to safe,
     convenient and sustainable sanitation facilities.
11
  These targets were developed by the policy Task Force considering existing targets included in the
PNG Vision 2050, Development Strategic Plan, the Medium Term Development Plan, corporate plans of
the SOEs and the Millennium Development Goals, as well as the targets proposed in the WSP Service
Delivery Assessment and stakeholder feedback. They are disaggregated, and marginally more
ambitious than existing government targets for the sector.

Section 1 BACKGROUND                                     Department of National Planning and Monitoring  10
For hygiene:
   100% of educational institutions and medical centres have handwashing
    facilities with running water and soap.
   100% of the households that have access to an improved water supply
    practice total sanitation

3.3      Principles

Implementation of the national water sanitation and hygiene policy is based on
the following fundamental principles:

    1. Access to sufficient safe water and sanitation facilities is a human right.
       As such the GoPNG has an obligation to ensure basic water and
       sanitation facilities are available for the benefit of all.

    2. The right to a basic safe water supply and sanitation does not imply a
       right to free services. With the exception of emergency situations, users
       will be expected to contribute in part or full to the cost of providing and
       maintaining services.

    3. Water supply should not be considered in isolation from improved
       sanitation and long term hygiene behaviour change as these are
       recognized as the most important factors to achieve the policy goals.

    4. The significant role that women and girls play in the provision and
       management of household water and in promoting improved hygiene
       and sanitation practices is recognized. The different gender roles and
       needs of men and women must be considered when planning,
       implementing and monitoring WaSH strategies, programmes and
       projects.

    5. WaSH activities will take into account the specific requirements of
       disadvantaged and marginalized groups, including the very poor,
       women, infants and children, the elderly and people with disabilities.

    6. Partnerships between service providers, both government and non
       government, are essential for effective and sustainable service delivery.

    7. Users are essential partners in planning, implementing and managing
       WaSH services. Active participation and responsibility for WaSH
       services by the users is important for long term WaSH benefits and
       sustainability.

    8. The delivery of WaSH services will follow the principles of decentralized
       planning, implementation and operation developed by the government
       and detailed in the Organic Law.

    9. Water is a finite, vulnerable resource and must be used sustainably.

    10. The delivery of services will adhere to strict minimum standards.

    11. Continuous hygiene and sanitation promotion and capacity building
        must be part of any WaSH intervention in order to promote long term
        behaviour change and realize the goals of the policy.



Section 3 POLICY CONTEXT AND DIRECTIONS        Department of National Planning and Monitoring  11
    12. The ability of shared water schemes to either promote harmony, or to
        increase vulnerability and conflict, is recognised and should be
        considered for every intervention.

    13. All existing laws, policies and regulations relating to water quality and
        quantity, sanitation and hygiene will be adhered to.

3.4 Core Government Legislation and Policies
Existing Relevant Policies

1. Public Health Act 1973
Established water quality standards, and delegated responsibility for
monitoring and regulation to the National Department of Health.

2. National Water and Sewerage Act 1986
Gives the PNG Water Board responsibility for providing water and sanitation
services in urban areas and promotion in rural areas

3. NCD Water Supply and Sewerage Act 1996
Gives responsibility to NCDC for Port Moresby Water and Sewerage

4. National Health Administration Act 1997
Gives power to provincial governments to make laws on rural water supply
and environmental hygiene.

5. 1998 Organic Law on Provincial Governments and LLGs
Decentralises planning. Local Level Governments (LLGs) may now make laws
on the provision of water supply.

6. Environment Act 2000
The management of the water resources in PNG is administered through this
Act. This includes provision of water use in terms of water abstraction and
discharge of waste into the receiving water bodies.

7. PNG Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030
Established development targets of 70% access for water and sanitation

8. National Health Plan 2011-2020
Identified the Department of Health’s responsibility for promoting rural WaSH.

9. Millennium Development Goals/post MDG goals
These detail international development obligations.

10. Community Service Obligation 2013
Provides government subsidies to state owned enterprises for operations in
non profitable areas.




Section 3 POLICY CONTEXT AND DIRECTIONS       Department of National Planning and Monitoring  12
11. On-lending policy
PNG law states that state owned enterprises that receive government funding
should do so on terms that do not give them an unfair advantage over private
sector organisations so as to help ensure a “level playing field”.

Required New Legislation
For this policy to be implemented, new legislation is proposed to establish the
National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority (NWSHA). This will address
the most significant barrier to effective service delivery caused by the current
lack of an overall responsible agency, particularly for rural and peri-urban
areas.




Section 3 POLICY CONTEXT AND DIRECTIONS      Department of National Planning and Monitoring  13
               Section Four - POLICIES AND STRATEGIES

4.1      Current Situation
Papua New Guinea is the largest and most populated Pacific island nation. In
2010 the population was 6.9 million, and with a growth rate of 2.8% this
figure is expected to double in the next 20 years. Six million people – 87% of
the population – live in rural areas, many considered remote with poor access
to roads and basic services.

Responsibility for the provision for water and sewerage in urban areas is
reasonably clearly defined. In the capital, Port Moresby, water and sewerage is
the responsibility of Eda Ranu, with water and sanitation in other urban areas
(88 district towns and 20 provincial towns) being the responsibility of Water
PNG.12 Both are state owned enterprises (SOEs) mandated to operate on a
commercial basis.

This commercial responsibility means that (perceived) non-commercial peri-
urban and settlement areas as well as many district towns remain unserved,
Indeed Water PNG is currently operating in only 14 provincial and 6 district
towns.

Responsibility for delivering water and sanitation services in the rural areas is
less clearly defined. Water PNG’s mandate includes the promotion of water
and sanitation on a self-help basis, though there is little evidence of any
activity. The National Health Plan 2011-2020 designates the Department of
Health (DoH) to plan and coordinate safe community water supplies and waste
disposal systems in rural areas, though this is a departmental document
rather than a national government mandate. Whilst the DOH has been active
in hygiene and sanitation promotion through PHAST, CLTS and the Healthy
Islands programme13, the DoH lacks resources to implement WaSH
programmes on any scale. The majority of rural WaSH activities are
implemented by non-governmental organisations and church groups, but the
scale of these is small in relation to the needs.

In the past, multi departmental Water and Sanitation Committees (WASCOMs)
chaired by the Department of Health were established at the provincial and
national level to help coordinate and deliver water and sanitation services.
However, these are now largely inactive due to a lack of funding, clear purpose
and coordination.14


12
   PNG has 22 provinces and 89 districts in total. Eda Ranu is responsible for 1 province, NCD, and its 1
district. Goroka Town manages its own water and sanitation.
13
   PHAST, (Participatory Hygiene and Sanitation Transformation), CLTS, (Community Led Total Sanitation)
and Healthy Islands are all participatory approaches that encourage communities to look at their current
hygiene and sanitation behaviours and to develop a programme to improve them.
14
 The national WASCOM still meets occasionally to share information between key implementing agencies. In 2013
WASCOM changed its name to WASHCOM (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Committee).


Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES                             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  14
Papua New Guinea is not on track to meet the government’s water and
sanitation targets detailed in its Strategic Development Plan 2010-2030. This
aims for 70% access to water and sanitation nationwide, and 100% access in
education establishments, by 2030. Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) data
indicate that access to improved water and sanitation actually declined in the
period 1990-2010 – from 41% in 1990 to 40% in 2010 with respect to access
to safe water, and from 47% in 1990 to 45% in 2010 for access to improved
sanitation.15 Each year access to water and sanitation services fails to keep
pace with population increase, meaning that more people are without water
supply and sanitation today than they were two decades ago.
The disparity between rural and urban household access is significant, with
87% of the urban population having access to improved water sources
compared to 33% in rural areas. For sanitation, 71% of the urban population
has improved access compared with 41% of the rural population.
Low access to WaSH is reflected in the health of the nation. Papua New
Guinea currently ranks at the bottom of Pacific countries for all WaSH related
health statistics.16 Diarrhoea is a major cause of morbidity in the country and
WaSH related deaths are estimated at 6,164 per year.17 In 2009 cholera re-
emerged in PNG after an absence of 50 years. At 44%, the early childhood
height to age ratio (2005) is poor compared to the rest of the region.18
Although no specific economic studies have been completed in PNG, studies in
the region have shown that poor access to WaSH has a significant national
economic impact, as well as causing considerable hardship for individual
households and communities.19

4.2      Analysis of Issues
There are a number of core issues that need to be addressed if the policy
targets are to be met.

4.2.1 Increase government prioritization of WaSH

While government development plans do include targets (for 2030 and 2050)
for water and sanitation there are currently no policies, strategies or plans as
to how these could be achieved. Historically, WaSH has not had the attention
from government that is required to help ensure that targets are met.
Although the government is committed to a process of decentralised
development through the Organic Law, and subsequent decentralisation of
funding through the Service Improvement Programme (SIP), there are
currently no guidelines for using this to improve access to WaSH.


15
   The Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) of the United Nations Children Fund and the WHO collects data from PNG
based sources to generate estimates of the population that have access to water and sanitation facilities.
16
   Institute for Sustainable Futures Papua New Guinea WaSH sector brief.
17
   As above.
18
    De Onis, M., Bloessner, M. and Borghi, E. 2011. Prevalence and trends of stunting among pre-school children
1990-2020. Public Health Nutrition. World Health Organization.
19
  7.2% of annual GDP in Cambodia, 5.4% of annual GDP in Lao PDR, and 2.3% in Indonesia. Water Aid presentation
to the National WaSH conference Port Moresby, November 2011


Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES                              Department of National Planning and Monitoring  15
Departments that could be more active in the sector, such as the Department
of Health, lack directives and incentives.

As a result, progress has largely been driven from outside government, by
community based organisations, NGOs and foreign donors, particularly the
ADB and the EU. Better coordination by government and commitment to the
sector could potentially significantly increase financial support and improve
the focus of WaSH implementing agencies.

4.2.2 Develop sector leadership

The absence of a single body charged with overall responsibility for developing
and implementing policy for the national water and sanitation sector is a
major impediment to the development of the sector. The result is a lack of
drive where strategic planning, sector investment planning, budget allocation
and programme coordination are all neglected. Implementation responsibility
remains vague and initiatives are largely reactive to available resources,
largely uncoordinated, unmonitored and poorly reported.

4.2.3 Improve funding for infrastructure

Existing funding for the sector is insufficient to make any real progress and
the new policy will need to attract additional funds to enable development to
take place. Government investment to date through the Development Budget
has been modest – approximately K45m in 2011, K44m in 2012 and K35m in
201320. In addition, loans and grants from development partners (principally
the EU, JICA and the ADB) increase total budget allocation to the sector in
recent years to approximately K83m in 2011, K72m in 2012 and K71.6m in
2013.21 The majority of both GoPNG and development partner funding is
allocated to a few urban WaSH initiatives, such as the Port Moresby sewerage
upgrade and District Town Water Supply projects. Funding to the two SOEs,
whether from the government Development Budget or from donor partners in
the form of grants and loans, is insufficient to enable the SOEs to expand their
services significantly, and they struggle to maintain existing service levels
through income received from tariffs.22 In rural areas, none of the recurrent or
development budget allocated to the Department of Health is specifically
earmarked for WaSH except in relation to these services being made available
in hospitals and clinics.

Estimates suggest that in order to achieve government targets an annual
investment of K250m (US$100m) every year from now until 2030 is required



20
   Development Budget money is used for capital expenditure on specific projects. This encompasses
activities such as acquiring fixed assets, purchasing land, etc. It does not include operational costs of
government departments which are covered under the Recurrent Budget.
21
   Water Sector Financial Review 2013. WSP. Stuart King
22
   Eda Ranu has estimated its non-revenue water from illegal connections and tariff collections for 2009
to 2011 to be about 50% of total water production.

Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES                           Department of National Planning and Monitoring  16
for capital expenditure, and a further K50m (US$20m) is needed per annum
for operation and maintenance.23

The government’s (provincial, district and local level government) Services
Improvement Programme comprises approximately K1.4 billion worth of
funding per annum and therefore represents a potential source of WaSH
sector financing. However, as indicated above, to date very little has been used
to increase access to water and sanitation.

4.2.4 Increase human resource capacity within the sector
There are insufficient numbers of staff employed in the sector, across all
relevant disciplines, and a limited supply of new graduates from existing
institutions.24 In addition, the lack of common established implementation
guidelines results in a broad spectrum of implementation approaches, and
skills capacities. Uncoordinated activities means valuable knowledge sharing
and skill transfer opportunities between agencies are missed. All of these
issues impact on current effectiveness in the sector as well as its ability to
absorb additional funds were they to become available.

There are no current estimates of the numbers of staff required to meet the
government’s 2030 targets but a substantial increase in staff will be required.
As a guide, IWA has calculated that in order to meet the more ambitious 2015
MDGs several thousand new personnel would needed.25

4.2.5 Develop monitoring and evaluation systems for the sector
Access to safe water and sanitation is estimated through the demographic
health surveys and the household income and expenditure surveys, both of
which are used by the JMP to develop reports on estimated access to improved
services. Access is not included in the national census data. Challenges in
collecting information and providing accurate estimates are reflected in figures
for sanitation which, for example, in 2012 recorded national access to
improved sanitation at 45% but in 2013 put this figure at just 19%.

Whilst accurate estimates are useful for national summaries they do not
provide the depth of information required for accurate planning, progress
monitoring impact assessment or operation/maintenance follow up.

Water PNG and Eda Ranu have reasonably well established monitoring
systems for service delivery to clients; however very little is known about the
situation in urban areas outside their area of operations. This includes a

23
   Water Supply and Sanitation in Papua New Guinea. Turning Finance into Services for the Future. WSP
July 2013. Penny Dutton.
24
   A recent report, Meeting the Water and Sanitation targets. A study of the Hunan Resource
requirements in Papua New Guinea. International Water Association (IWA) March 2013 estimated that
in 2013, 1,215 personnel from various disciplines were employed in the WaSH sector, though this does
not include technical capacity available from within the Department of Health.
25
   Meeting the Water and Sanitation targets. A study of the Hunan Resource requirements in Papua New
Guinea. International Water Association (IWA), March 2013



Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES                         Department of National Planning and Monitoring  17
number of provincial towns, the vast majority of district towns, as well as
unserved urban areas such as peri-urban and settlement areas around Port
Moresby and other main urban centres.

Very little monitoring takes place in rural areas, beyond the specific activities
of individual service providers, and there is no consolidation of data. There is
no central record of WaSH schemes, implementing agencies, coverage,
functionality or capacity within the rural sector. This has an impact on the
ability for any kind of strategic planning, coordination or reporting against
specific WaSH targets.

4.3      Policy Response

This policy document aims to significantly accelerate the delivery of services,
particularly to rural, peri-urban and settlement areas to achieve the policy
targets. It will achieve this through the following seven strategies:

    8. Improved sector coordination and leadership.
    9. Increased WaSH sector funding.
    10. Develop and manage an effective management information system.
    11. Improved and consistent approaches to WaSH service delivery.
    12. Appropriate technology promotion.
    13. Enhanced private sector participation and partnerships.
    14. Sector capacity building and training.

Strategy One: Improved Sector Coordination and Leadership

In order to improve sector coordination and leadership a National Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene Authority (NWSHA) will be established. The NWSHA
will have a central headquarters as well as offices in provinces and districts,
established in accordance with the implementation of a Development Plan. (A
NWSHA organisational diagram is included as annex 1).

The NWSHA’s role will encompass national, urban and rural endeavours,
working together with existing sector institutions and organisations as
summarized in Section Five. The Board of NWSHA – which shall comprise
representatives from the public and private sector as well as civil society –
shall be responsible for developing and implementing policy for the WaSH
sector. The Board may choose to do this by itself or it may set up special
purpose working groups to deal with particular issues or concerns. The Board
will replace the existing national WASHCOM.

The NWSHA’s role with respect to national coordination and leade rship will
include:
1. Disaggregating national targets /goals for WaSH development.
2. Translating these targets / goals into a phased Development Plan that sets
   out in detail how water and sanitation system development will be
   implemented and coordinated among relevant stakeholders. The


Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  18
     Development Plan will contain a clear prioritisation strategy for how WaSH
     targets will be achieved and the budgetary requirements associated with
     Policy implementation.
3.   Ensuring adoption and mainstreaming of all WaSH policy principles.
4.   Identifying and allocating funding support to WaSH development activities
     (including CSO mechanisms).
5.   Assuming responsibility for appropriate levels of regulation which is likely
     to include water quality regulation, other technical regulation and, solely
     in relation to non-state-owned-enterprises, economic and competition
     regulation.
6.   Increasing private sector engagement in WaSH infrastructure development
     and service delivery.
7.   Maintaining the WaSH Monitoring Information System (MIS) to help
     monitor and evaluate WaSH sector development and the achievement of
     National WaSH policy objectives and targets.
8.   Developing alternative/innovative service provision programmes such as
     franchising schemes, output based aid (OBA) schemes, etc.
9.   Conducting communication activities in support of WaSH sector
     development such as raising awareness of the role of the NWSHA,
     informing stakeholders of ongoing and planned WaSH sector investment
     activities, and promoting understanding of the importance of WaSH service
     delivery.

The NWSHA’s role with respect to urban WaSH service delivery will include:
1. Providing support to existing and new operators to develop and implement
   plans to extend service provision to new urban areas by identifying
   potentially commercial locations and assisting with funding sources and
   appropriate service provision approaches.
2. Ensuring all new interventions in urban areas include clearly identified
   strategies for providing services to poor and urban settlement areas.
3. Developing and assisting in implementing specifically targeted strategies, in
   partnership with service providers, to ensure services are developed and
   improved to currently unserved customers in existing territories,
   particularly urban settlements. Developing strategies will involve:
        Identifying opportunities for CSO funding, and providing assistance
          with applications.
        Identifying potentially commercially viable service delivery options.
        Helping identify new and additional sources of financing.
        Supporting the development of new approaches to better serve peri-
          urban settlements.
        Assisting SOEs and other service providers to deal with issues of
          non-payment and non-revenue water reduction.
4. Identifying and supporting new operators to provide water and sanitation
   services to urban customers.
5. Providing support to all urban WaSH operators with respect to issues that
   have broad stakeholder or sector relevance.


Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  19
The NWSHA’s role with respect to rural WaSH service delivery will include:
1. Providing assistance to rural WaSH facilitation and implementation
   organisations, including provincial, district and local level administrations,
   provincial health offices, NGOs and the private sector to support the
   planning and implementation of water, sanitation and health
   infrastructure at rural community level.
2. Assisting in the development of water and sanitation investment and
   service support plans to be submitted to local and district level government
   authorities.
3. Ensuring Service Improvement Program (SIP) support includes sustainable
   WaSH activities.
4. Providing funding support for rural WaSH development in the absence of
   sufficient SIP support.
5. Working with development partners to increase finance and support rural
   WaSH development initiatives.
6. Working with the SOEs and other operators to identify opportunities to
   extend existing urban service areas to surrounding communities, and
   identify other support that utilities can provide to rural communities.

Strategy Two: Increased WaSH Sector Funding

Increased funding shall be allocated to support WaSH sector infrastructure
   development, service delivery and promotion through a number of
   mechanisms including:
    1. The NWSHA will produce an annual business plan that will identify the
       money it requires to cover its operational expenses. The business plan
       shall also set out the NWSHA’s proposed activities and associated goals
       for the following five years.
    2. The NWSHA shall identify, through its Development Plan, the funding
       required from the GoPNG to finance WaSH infrastructure and service
       development. This national budget funding shall be provided to the
       NWSHA, which will develop clear, transparent funding guidelines and
       determine how this money shall be spent in accordance with the
       implementation programme contained within the Development Plan.
    3. The NWSHA shall establish one (or more) WaSH Funds controlled by an
       independent board chaired by the NWSHA that is dedicated to financing
       the extension, rehabilitation and maintenance of WaSH service delivery,
       particularly in rural and peri-urban settlement areas. The GoPNG will
       be expected to contribute a minimum annual amount to this fund.
    4. The NWSHA and its facilitation / implementation partners will work
       with provincial, district and local level government to ensure that
       funding dedicated to WaSH service delivery activities is included in the
       Service Improvement Program (SIP) funding process and that the money
       earmarked for WaSH investment is utilised efficiently and effectively.
    5. NWSHA will coordinate development partner programme funding and
       synchronise with the Development Plan. This funding may be added to


Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  20
       the WaSH Fund(s) or provided directly to facilitation / implementing
       agencies, utilities or communities.
    6. The NWSHA shall work with and assist state owned enterprises, as well
       as any other eligible organisations engaged in water and sanitation
       sector activities, to apply for and utilise funding provided through the
       Community Service Obligation (CSO) framework.

Strategy Three: Develop and Implement an Effective Management
Information System for the WaSH Sector
1. The NWSHA Development Plan will establish a baseline of WaSH service
   access and need for the country that will include projections until 2030
   associated with population growth and migration. From this, a
   prioritisation plan will be identified for WaSH service rollout.
2. The NWSHA will develop and maintain a WaSH Management Information
   System (MIS). Centralised information in the MIS will be used by NWSHA
   and other agencies for coordinating WaSH service delivery as well as
   measuring progress against the goals set out in the Development Plan and
   policy targets.
3. The NWSHA will support and coordinate existing data collection activities,
   both from implementing agencies such as the SOEs and the NGOs as well
   as the national census, household income and expenditure surveys, etc., to
   optimise data collection for the MIS and avoid duplication. Where suitable
   data cannot be collected in this way NWSHA will collect its own data.
4. As a minimum, data required for the MIS will include:
       a. Existing water and sanitation infrastructure and functionality.
       b. Funding and sources assigned for WaSH sector development
       c. A register of past, ongoing and planned activities targeted at water
           and sanitation development, together with details of the
           organisations and individuals involved in implementation.
       d. WaSH resource capacity within the sector, including human
           resources and skills, and spare parts providers.
       e. Other relevant information, such as population, consolidated WaSH
           related morbidity /mortality patterns, needed to assist in prioritising
           areas and measuring the impact of WaSH interventions.
5. Whilst the NWSHA shall be responsible for establishing and maintaining
   associated records and databases, it will be the responsibility of all service
   providers to ensure their activities are recorded. Service providers include:
       a. Provincial, district and local level government offices.
       b. Rural communities.
       c. Water PNG and Eda Ranu.
       d. NGOs, private sector organisations and other facilitation and
           implementation partners.
       e. Other public and private utilities.
       f. Other government departments including the Department of Health
           and Department of Education.
6. The MIS shall be used to:


Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  21
       a. Identify and prioritise locations and communities in high need of
           WaSH interventions.
       b. Measure progress towards the policy targets.
       c. Coordinate maintenance, particularly in relation to rural schemes.
       d. Provide information to assist the Department of Health in the
           monitoring of water quality in completed schemes.
       e. Advocate for scheme funding and better coordinate existing funding.
       f. Coordinate interventions between service providers.
       g. Assist in joint training and capacity building initiatives.
       h. Contribute to the Provincial Human Resource Plan.
7. Data collected from the WaSH monitoring system will complement existing
   secondary data, for example the National Census, Household Income and
   Expenditure Survey and the Demographic Health Survey, to evaluate
   impacts against the broader policy goals relating to improved health,
   livelihood opportunities and equity of access.

Strategy Four: Improved and Consistent Approaches to WaSH
Service Delivery
1. All WaSH interventions should aim for 100% total sanitation.
2. In order to achieve this, WaSH services should be delivered in an integrated
   manner with the aim of changing hygiene behaviours through hygiene
   promotion, the provision of a convenient and sustainable water supply, use
   of improved drinking water sources, and the promotion of safe sanitation
   facilities, leading to zero open defecation.
3. NWSHA staff shall work with relevant agencies such as the Department of
   Health to design and deliver national, regional and local promotion and
   awareness raising activities, to extend and improve understanding of the
   importance of WaSH. Attention will focus on the use of hygiene promotion
   and communication approaches rather than hygiene education, which has
   proved largely ineffective in changing adult behaviour.
4. Hygiene promotion should be seen as a continuous process leading to long
   term behaviour change, rather than a one-off intervention, and
   mechanisms for hygiene promotion and reinforcement through established
   institutions such as medical centres, schools, government offices should be
   explored.
5. Participatory approaches should be adopted to promote appropriate
   planning, operation, management and maintenance. This is particularly
   important in areas where water and sanitation schemes are likely to be
   community managed.
6. Participatory approaches should be fully inclusive to consider the
   involvement, priorities and needs of women and adolescent girls, people
   living with disabilities and HIV/AIDs, infants and children and the elderly.
7. In order to maximise the potential of improved hygiene practices, individual
   household water supply connections should be promoted where possible,
   taking into consideration sustainability, community preferences, technical
   practicalities and affordability.



Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES            Department of National Planning and Monitoring  22
8. All private, commercial and public institutions, including district and
    provincial markets, should be expected to provide hygienic toilets, with a
    water supply, soap and handwashing facilities. Toilet facilities should be
    sex segregated and have disabled access.
9. All WaSH programmes should be accompanied by a sustainability plan.
    This should justify the proposed intervention in terms of:
        a. Environmental suitability and sustainability.
        b. The spare parts supply chain.
        c. Financial sustainability, tariffs and methods of collection.
        d. Operation, maintenance and management agreements.
        e. Long term hygiene promotion strategies.
        f. Relevant land use agreements and memorandums of understanding.
        g. The roles and responsibilities of community-based committees,
            whether existing (such as the water users groups and Ward
            Development Committees) or new, should be clearly outlined.
10. All land use agreements must be clearly outlined and formally agreed. For
    rural community managed systems, compensation should not normally be
    considered.
11. In order to promote and accelerate rural service delivery in rural
    communities and non-commercial urban areas, users will not be expected
    to pay for the total capital investment required for a water supply, but
    should be expected to make a cash and in-kind contribution. Tariffs
    should be calculated to cover the expected operation and maintenance
    costs and these should be included, along with the proposed method of
    payment and management arrangements, in the sustainability plan.
12. Subsidies for sanitation should be limited, but can be considered if
    carefully targeted to promote access to the disabled, for improved
    menstrual hygiene, for innovation, for sanitation in challenging
    environments where VIP may not be feasible, and for access for the very
    poorest.
13. All institutions, such as government buildings, schools, health centres etc.,
    should expect to pay the full cost of their water and sanitation schemes.
14. Minimum standards detailed in this policy should be adhered to by all
    service providers.
15. NWSHA will assist the DoH, and other relevant partners in developing
    emergency response plans to react effectively to WaSH related emergencies
    such as cholera and typhoid outbreaks.

Strategy Five: Appropriate Technology Promotion

The selection of appropriate technologies has important implications for
   affordability and sustainability.
1. This policy promotes a “some for all”, rather than “all for some” approach.
   Sustainable low cost options should be considered wherever possible in
   order to improve national coverage. Suitable alternatives to sewerage
   should be investigated and adopted wherever possible in urban areas.



Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES             Department of National Planning and Monitoring  23
2. Technology choices must consider environmental sustainability and be
   robust to short and long term anticipated climate changes.
3. Technology choices must be socially acceptable and affordable to the
   consumers, both in terms of capital investment and operating costs.
4. Where water or sanitation schemes are designed that will depend on
   community management, the design must consider, and reflect in the
   sustainability plan, the capacity and willingness of the community to
   operate, maintain and manage it successfully.
5. The NWSHA will develop and promote technical standards and best
   practice implementation approaches for delivering water and sanitation
   services and promoting hygiene behaviour change to help ensure the
   quality and sustainability of system development and service delivery.
   Specifically, the NWSHA shall be responsible for:
         a. Production of a Technology Implementation Manual that contains:
            o    Water, sanitation and hygiene promotion planning tools and
                 associated implementation guidelines in order to implement
                 WaSH activities as described under Strategy Two
            o    Design and quality standards (for a range of technologies).
            o    Service level expectations.
         b. Promotion, incentivisation and communication of appropriate
             innovative technology and approaches.
         c. Dissemination of relevant international good practice.
         d. Helping ensure that the water and sanitation supply chain is
             properly coordinated with the recommended system implementation
             approaches contained within the Technology Implementation
             Manual, and that any gaps in the supply chain are filled using
             public or private providers

Strategy Six: Enhanced Private Sector Participation and
Partnerships

Partnerships with private sector organisations, which includes the NGO
   sector, will be encouraged to extend and improve the delivery of WaSH
   services to communities through improved programme implementation and
   the strengthening of supply chains for improved sanitation marketing and
   the sustainable provision of essential services. Specifically:
1. Responsibility for promoting partnerships should rest with all
   implementing agencies including the NWSHA, state owned utilities and
   provincial, district and local level government.
2. Increasing the presence of the private sector in the WaSH sector will be
   encouraged. This could be at a number of different levels including:
            Asset construction. This may range from developing large scale
             treatment and network assets in urban areas to assisting in the
             building of small scale, community based water and sanitation
             systems.



Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES            Department of National Planning and Monitoring  24
            System operation. This may range from operating major assets (such
             as treatment facilities or urban water and sanitation networks)
             through to running one or more small scale systems on a part time
             basis.
            Outsourcing. Private sector organisations could be contracted to
             provide specific services such as billing, meter reading, maintenance,
             etc.
            Materials supply. The private sector will be expected to provide the
             majority of the supply chain resources and materials required to
             develop and operate WaSH assets.
            Other services. There is potential for a wide range of other
             interventions by the private sector, such as offering system design
             services, building community awareness, delivering WaSH skills
             training, etc. The non-government sector (NGOs in particular) already
             perform an important role in this area, especially to rural
             communities, and building and maintaining partnerships with these
             organisations will be critical for the GoPNG going forward.
3. Private Sector Participation (PSP) and Public Private Partnership (PPP)
   models will be considered for enabling improved private sector engagement.
   This may include approaches such as Design-Build-Operate (DBO), Build-
   Own-Operate (BOO) and Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) schemes for
   construction and operation activities as well as concessions, leases and
   management contracts for systems operations only. Alternative approaches
   may also be sought, such as seeking to attract private investment in the
   domestic construction industry.


Strategy Seven: Increase Sector Capacity Building and Training

Significant strengthening of the human resource capacity of the sector will be
   achieved in order to improve service delivery. This will require ensuring all
   existing and new staff working in the sector have the necessary skills, and
   encouraging new staff into the sector. Specifically:
1. The key skills and competencies required for WaSH programme
   implementation shall be identified by the NWSHA as part of its Technology
   Implementation Manual.
2. The NWSHA shall conduct a provincial human resource assessment. This
   will detail existing staff and competencies working in the sector, along with
   additional staff and competencies required to achieve policy targets.
3. A subsequent capacity building programme will be developed to improve
   the skills of existing staff and the development of new skilled human
   resources. This may include:
       a. Identifying how existing competencies can be shared successfully
          between organisations, for example through training, seminars, job
          secondments, joint implementation plans etc.



Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES               Department of National Planning and Monitoring  25
       b. Reviewing, and if necessary, improving the information and skills
           taught by academic and training institutes.
       c. Providing updates and sharing information between provinces.
       d. Establishing ties with international organisations and disseminating
           information on international best practice.
       e. Facilitating attendance at relevant international meetings and
           seminars.
4. Staff numbers in the sector need to be increased significantly to achieve
   the policy objectives.26 The NWSHA will try and close that gap through a
   number of mechanisms including:
       a. Identifying relevant staff vacancies in government departments and
           advocating for their recruitment in prioritised provinces based on
           completing WaSH plans.
       b. Increasing funding into the sector, increasing the number of WaSH
           interventions and developing organisational capacities, which
           together shall help draw staff into the public sector through
           increased NGO and private sector activity.
5. The delivery of these capacity building, training and WaSH promotion
   activities will be carried out principally by government departments and
   both public and private agencies and training institutes with the support of
   the NWSHA. However, where appropriate, NWSHA staff will also be
   expected to contribute to the delivery of capacity building initiatives.

4.4 Resourcing

Establishing the NWSHA

The National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Authority will have a head office
in Port Moresby. This will employ approximately 26 staff. Establishing and
running the office will cost approximately K1.8m p.a., with a salary expense of
around K2.6m p.a. at current prices.27

Provincial offices will then be established based on prioritisation criteria
developed by the Authority. It is expected that provincial offices will be
established gradually, probably at a rate of 2/3 per year. In larger provinces it
may also be necessary to establish a number of district offices. Provincial and
district offices are expected to have 3 staff each, with an
establishment/running cost of approximately K500,000 p.a. each and an
annual salary cost of approximately K260,000 each.




26
   Meeting the Water and Sanitation targets. A study of the Hunan Resource requirements in Papua New
Guinea. International Water Association (IWA), March 2013
27
   The staffing of NWSHA is illustrative rather than prescriptive and will be decided once the NWSHA
board and Chairman has been appointed. Staff costs have been estimated based on existing pay scale
data. See Institutional Evaluation of PNG’s Water and Sanitation Sector: Establishing a National Water,
Sanitation & Hygiene Authority. Stuart King, September 2013.

Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES                          Department of National Planning and Monitoring  26
Additional WaSH sector staffing

Significant additional human resources are required if the policy targets are to
be achieved.28 Personnel are required to implement water, sanitation and
hygiene initiatives, and to support operation and maintenance. These will need
to be recruited in both the public and the private sector through the methods
identified under policy strategy seven.

Funding requirements for infrastructure development

Achieving the policy targets will require significant investment in
infrastructure construction. The WSP Service Delivery Assessment (SDA)
estimates that the      funding required in the sector, based on current
approaches.   29 The report uses targets that are similar to, but not exactly the
same as, the policy targets; nevertheless they represent an indication of the
level of investment required.

The following required investments have been calculated:

                      2030             Annual Capital                        Annual O&M
                      targets from     investments required                  investments required
                      WSP report       (US$million/year)                     (US$million/year)
Rural water
                            66%                       22                                    3
supply
Urban water
                            94%                        8                                    2
supply
Water
                            70%                       30                                    5
supply total
Rural
                            68%                       12                                    1
sanitation
Urban
                            84%                       58                                   14
sanitation
Sanitation
                            70%                       70                                   15
total


This translates as a total investment of US$ 2.09 billion (approximately K5.25
billion) between now and 2030. Significant savings are possible with the
identification and implementation of more suitable and lower cost technology
alternatives, as described in policy strategy five.

In line with the policy principles detailed in this document, and regulations
governing the state owned enterprises, users will be required to meet some of
these costs, particularly for O&M. This would be in the form of tariff payments

28
   A recent report by IWC , “Meeting the Water and Sanitation targets: A study of the Hu man Resource
requirements in Papua New Guinea” March 2013,estimated the number of extra personnel,
representing management, technical and community development, that would be required for PNG to
meet its more ambitious Millennium Development Goal targets for 2015
29
   Water Supply and Sanitation in Papua New Guinea. Turning Finance into Services for the Future . WSP,
July 2013.

Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES                          Department of National Planning and Monitoring  27
to the SOEs or, in rural areas, from community based management
arrangements. The majority of funding, however, will need to come from
public funds, international donor support and private sector investment.




Section 4 POLICIES AND STRATEGIES        Department of National Planning and Monitoring  28
Section Five – ORGANISATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES

The table below summarises the roles and responsibilities that are expected to
be carried out by the organisations and agencies principally engaged in WaSH
sector service delivery.


       Organisation                              Role & Responsibility
                                    Responsible for sector policy development and
National Water,        implementation
Sanitation and Hygiene
Commission (NWSHA)  Attracts and directs financing to support urban
                       and rural WaSH delivery
                                    Develops and implements technical regulation for
                                       the WaSH sector
                                    Delivers economic regulation (except for SOEs) for
                                       the WaSH sector
                                    Monitors and evaluates WaSH sector development
                                    Establishes an information database on WaSH
                                       service delivery
                                    Provides advisory and knowledge support to WaSH
                                       implementing bodies
                        Chairs NWSHA’s Board
Department of National
                        Responsible for WaSH sector budgetary allocation
Planning & Monitoring
(DNPM)                  Sets national targets for WaSH development in
                         consultation with the NWSHA
                                    Sets water and sanitation quality standards in
National Department of                 consultation with the NWSHA
Health (NDoH)
                                    Provincial, district and community environmental
                                       health officers assist with rural WaSH service
                                       delivery
                                    Responsible for public health initiatives such as
                                       the Healthy Island Approach, which promotes safe
                                       drinking water, sanitation and hygiene
                                    Allocates financing to support NWSHA’s
Treasury                               operational activities
                                    Allocates development budget to support WaSH
                                       sector development
                                    Allocates Provincial , District and Local Level
                                       Government Services Improvement Program (PSIP)
                                       funding



Section 5 ORGANISATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES                 Department of National Planning and Monitoring  29
       Organisation                              Role & Responsibility
                                    Responsible for water resource management,
Department of                          licensing and fee collection.
Environment and
Conservation (DEC)                  Sets water quality standards for water bodies
                                       (including bulk water abstraction)
Department of                         Has statutory responsibilities over matters of local
Provincial and Local                   government pursuant to in accordance with the
Government Affairs.                    Organic Law on Provincial Governments 1995 and
                                       Local-level Governments and the Local-level
                                       Governments Administration Act 1997.
                                      Responsible for the dissemination of policy.
                                      Reports on performance of provinces and LLGs
                                      Links top down strategies with bottom up needs
                                      Responsible for disbursement and monitoring of
Department of                          SIP funding.
Implementation and
Rural Affairs.                      Maintains a database monitoring assets and
                                       services in local government.
                                    Responsible for economic regulation (tariff setting)
Independent Consumer                   for SOEs – which includes Eda Ranu and Water
and Competition
Commission (ICCC)                      PNG – as well as competition monitoring
                                    An Eda Ranu and Water PNG shareholder
Independent Public
                                    Develops the Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
Business Corporation
(IPBC)                                 policy framework
                                    Develops Community Service Obligation (CSO)
                                       policy
                                    Responsible for water and sewerage service
Eda Ranu
                                       provision in the National Capital District (NCD)
                                    Responsible for water and sanitation service
Water PNG
                                       provision in provincial and district urban areas
                                       outside the NCD.
                                    Promotes water and sanitation on a self-help basis
                                       in rural areas
                                    Responsible for planning and delivering WaSH
Provincial and District                infrastructure and services to communities
Administrations
                                     Provide funding support for the NWSHA
Donors
                                     Provide funding support for rural and urban
                                           WaSH programmes
                                     Implementers of rural and peri-urban WaSH
NGOs                                       programmes




Section 5 ORGANIATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES                  Department of National Planning and Monitoring  30
                  Section Six - IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
The Implementation Plan comprises three phases:

        The activities and tasks leading up to the legal establishment of the
         NWSHA, as presented in the Phase 1 table.

        The ‘operationalising’ activities undertaken by the NWSHA, such as
         staff recruitment and the production of the Development Plan and
         Operations Manual, that will equip the Authority to carry out its remit.
         The NWSHA may also be expected to establish a taskforce (the WaSH
         Sector Review Group in the Phase 2 table) to assist it in developing,
         reviewing and monitoring WaSH sector development. This group will
         include representatives from a broad selection of stakeholders not just
         board member organisations.

        The NWSHA conducting its operational activities in accordance with its
         Development Plan. Detailed implementation activities comprising this
         last stage cannot at present be described as they will be defined in the
         Development Plan. However, some key events (see Phase 3 table) can be
         identified including:

             o    The NWSHA will produce an annual report detailing its activities
                  over the past twelve months, its achievements in reaching its
                  goals and targets and its priorities for the forthcoming year.

             o    The NWSHA will be expected to contribute to the WaSH sections
                  of future 5-year medium term development plans prepared by the
                  DNPM.

             o    The entire WaSH policy will likely need to be reviewed
                  approximately five years after it has been implemented.




Section 6 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN5                  Department of National Planning and Monitoring  31
Implementation Phase 1

              Implementation Activities                                         Year 1                                      Responsible Agency
                                                          1   2   3   4    5    6     7     8     9     10 11       12

Finalise National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Policy                                                                   DNPM
   (NWSHP)
Submit NWSHP to NEC for clearance                                                                                        DNPM
Issue decision to proceed with enabling the NWSHP                                                                        NEC
Obtain Certificate of Necessity                                                                                          Office of the State
                                                                                                                             Solicitor
Commence drafting of legislation for establishing                                                                        DNPM
   NWSHA
Carry out stakeholder legislation consultation process                                                                   DNPM
Submit legislation to Central Agencies Coordinating                                                                      DNPM
   Committee
CACC reviews draft legislation & consultation process                                                                    CACC
CACC submits legislation to NEC for approval                                                                             NEC
Legislative Council issues a Certificate of Compliance                                                                   Legislative Council
Policy and legislation tabled at parliament                                                                              Parliament
NEC adopts parliamentary approved NWSP                                                                                   NEC
Policy gazetted                                                                                                          NEC




                           Section 6IMPLEMENTATION PLAN                   Department of National Planning and Monitoring  32
Implementation phase 2

             Implementation Activities                                             Year 2                                      Responsible Agency
                                                         1   2       3   4    5     6       7   8    9     10     11    12

NWSHA Board appointed
NWSHA Board appoints Chief Executive Officer (CEO)                                                                           NWSHA
CEO commences NWSHA staff recruitment                                                                                        NWSHA
NWSHA produces Development Plan                                                                                              NWSHA
NWSHA produces Operations Manual                                                                                             NWSHA
NWSHA develops TNA Capacity Building Plan                                                                                    NWSHA
NWSHA establishes Planning Database and M&E                                                                                  NWSHA
  framework
WaSH Sector Review Group established and meeting                                                                             NWSHA, Stakeholders
NWSHA produces Annual Report                                                                                                 NWSHA


Implementation phase 3
                                                                                   Years 3 – 12
             Implementation Activities                   3       4       5     6        7       8     9      10        11    12     Responsible Agency
NWSHA implements its Development Plan                                                                                              NWSHA, stakeholders
NWSHA produces Annual Report                                                                                                       NWSHA
NWSHA contributes to MTDP 2016-2020 & 2021-2026                                                                                    NWSHA, DNPM
5-Year NWSP Review                                                                                                                 DNPM




                         Section 6 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN                       Department of National Planning and Monitoring  33
Section Seven - MONITORING AND EVALUATION
The NWSHA will compile WaSH monitoring data and produce summary
reports as part of its annual reporting process.

This data will be used to measure progress against the Development Plan and
WaSH policy targets. Achievements will be compared against additional
development indicators, such as health, to evaluate impact and progress
towards the policy’s broader goal.

This information will be made available in a timely manner to contribute to the
regular updating of the MTDF.

This policy will be reviewed every 5 years following its approval.




Section 7 MONITORING AND EVALUATION           Department of National Planning and Monitoring  34
                           ANNEX ONE: NWSHA
Organisational structure




Annex 1 NWSHA                         Department of National Planning and Monitoring  35
NWSHA Intervention points




Interagency linkages




  Section 6 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN   Department of National Planning and Monitoring  36
