    Report No: ACS9402
.




    EU Accession Countries
    Poverty Mapping of New Members in EU
    Completion Memo

.
    June 11, 2014


.
    ECSP3
    EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
.




.
Document of the World Bank
.
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
    World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:

.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
    its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
    1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                 Poverty Mapping in the New Member States of the EU (P130960)
                                       Completion Memo
                                         June 11, 2014


Background
According to the latest data from Eurostat, more than 124 million people in the European
Union—almost 25 percent of EU citizens—are at risk of poverty or social exclusion1. One of the five
headline targets of the Europe 2020 strategy is to reduce the number of people living at risk of poverty
or social exclusion by 20 million by the year 2020. In its 2014–2020 multiannual financial framework the
EU has budgeted one trillion euros to support growth and jobs and reduce poverty and social exclusion.
Success depends on developing the right policies and programs and targeting them effectively. Just as
rates of poverty and social exclusion vary widely across EU member states, there is also a high degree of
variability in living standards within member states. It follows that promoting convergence of living
standards across the EU requires detailed knowledge of the disparities in living standards within each
member state, and especially in those member states with high levels of poverty and social exclusion.

In 2011 the European Commission (EC) and the World Bank entered into an agreement to construct
small area estimation poverty maps for the new EU member states. The objective is to help the EC and
EU member states target funds and programs in the 2014–2020 budget cycle most efficiently to the
areas in highest need. These high-resolution poverty maps combine information from recent national
population censuses and EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC) household surveys2 to
estimate the rates of monetary poverty for small geographic areas such as counties, districts, or
municipalities. In previous years, the EC has had to rely on less detailed data and maps at the “NUTS 2”
level (for example, the eight development regions in Romania) for program planning and the allocation
of EU funds.3 The greater geographic disaggregation of the new poverty maps reveals which parts of
these larger regions have particularly high rates of poverty and require greater attention for poverty
reduction programs; and combined with data on population size, they also provide information on
where most of the poor are located. The poverty maps not only help guide allocations of EU funds, but
may also be used for decision making and policies at the national and sub-national levels in each of the
EU member states.



1
     "People at risk of poverty or social exclusion" - Statistics Explained (2014/2/1)
<http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/People_at_risk_of_poverty_or_social_exclusion
>
2
  For most countries the 2011 population census was used along with EU-SILC from 2011 or 2012. See Table 1 for
information about the specific years and levels of aggregation used in each country.
3
  The NUTS (Nomenclature des Unités Territoriales Statistiques) classification is a hierarchical system of dividing
up the economic territory of the European Union for the development of regional statistics, regional
socioeconomic analysis, and the framing of EU regional policies. To date the NUTS 2 classification has been used
for determining eligibility for aid from European Structural Funds. Below the NUTS 3 classification areas are
defined according to Local Administrative Units (LAU). Most EU member states have LAU 1 and LAU 2 divisions, but
some only have LAU 2.
The first phase of the project, from February through November 2012, was a methodological pilot
study that tested slightly different approaches to small area poverty estimation to arrive at a
preferred method of estimating the EU poverty maps. The pilot study was carried out in Slovenia and
Denmark, because in addition to having the EU-SILC and population census data, they also have
available complete sets of household income data from tax registries. The various methodologies were
validated by first estimating the poverty rates in small areas as if only the EU-SILC and census data were
available, and then comparing it to the poverty rates calculated from the income tax data, which served
as the benchmark reference. The pilot phase was guided by a Steering Committee, which was made up
of the leading experts in small area estimation from European universities and national statistical
institutes (NSIs); senior staff from Eurostat, DG Employment, and DG Regional Policy; and chaired by
Directors of DG Employment and DG Regional Policy. The pilot study report is among the project
deliverables, and is described briefly in section 2 below.

The second phase of the project, from October 2012 through June 2014, produced the small area
poverty maps, which were developed in close cooperation with counterparts in individual EU member
states. Constructing the poverty maps from microdata required access to data not available from
Eurostat. This typically required conducting the analysis on-site at national statistical offices, with widely
varying degrees of involvement by NSO analysts. It also meant that the preferred approach of using
survey and census microdata was sometimes not possible, in which case the team resorted to using
aggregate, or area-level, data to estimate poverty rates for small areas. After obtaining initial results, the
draft poverty maps were shared and discussed with in-country experts, both as an informal validation of
the results and to open discussions about the likely underlying causes for the observed spatial patterns
of poverty and potential policy remedies. The team then revised the analysis, taking into account the
comments received.

Small area poverty maps have been produced for seven new EU member states: Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia. Under this project, maps were also to be produced for
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, and Lithuania. This has not been possible to date because of delays in
census data processing by NSIs, and ongoing negotiations about the data confidentiality agreements
required by the NSIs. The EC has expressed an interest in financing a follow-on activity, with one of the
top agenda items being completing the set of poverty maps for these countries. Croatia, which was not
included in the agreement with the EC, has expressed an interest in working with the Bank to produce a
poverty map, and this is likely to occur in 2014 with funding from the EC and the Croatian government.

This completion memo briefly summarizes the outputs from this project, describes some of the
dissemination and outreach activities, and reviews some of the lessons learned.


Summary of Outputs
Methodological Pilot Study Report
The methodological pilot study used validation methods to compare slightly different approaches to
estimating poverty for small areas. The principal comparison was between Elbers-Lanjouw-Lanjouw (ELL)
method that has been the main approach used by the World Bank and its partners for approximately the
past 15 years, and an extension to ELL proposed by Molina and Rao (2010) commonly known as
Empirical Best (EB). Under each of the ELL and EB umbrellas are a host of other assumptions and choices
which are also testable, such as how to model the random error associated with location, or how to
handle heteroskedastic errors when modeling household-level income. By testing selected variations of
ELL and EB on data for which income data were available for the entire population it was possible to see
which approaches came closer to the “true” poverty rates as measured directly by the income registry
data.

The main result of the pilot study was that all of the methods tested provide reasonable estimates of
poverty rates at the municipality level, which are the first and second Local Administrative Units (LAU 1
and LAU 2) in Denmark and Slovenia, respectively. A key criterion proposed by the European
Commission was “Of the X poorest areas identified by the income tax registry data, how many are
correctly identified by each poverty mapping method?” All of the six estimation methods tested
correctly identified 80 to 90 percent of the municipalities measured as poorest according to the income
tax data.

The rare opportunity to do a validation study also provided additional valuable insights that have helped
improve our understanding of small area poverty estimation. In particular, the study generated new
knowledge about choices concerning incorporation of survey sampling weights in regressions,
accounting for heterskedasticity in household income models, and whether the distribution of model
parameters should be estimated parametrically or via bootstrap methods.

Results4: This output contributed to deepening knowledge, and to generating innovative approaches
and solutions. It supported a critical examination of poverty mapping methodologies, including a serious
self-examination of methods used within the World Bank Group and their applicability in a European
setting, where sample designs are quite different from those found in low income countries. The
exercise benefited not only from the knowledge of technical experts in academia and European NSIs,
but also from users of this type of information in the European Commission. Beyond addressing the
primary comparison of ELL and EB methods, the pilot study has also helped spur new research and
developments in small area poverty estimation, including much greater dialogue among the various
camps involved.

Small Area Poverty Maps and Tables
The main output requested by the client (the European Commission) was the poverty maps for new EU
member states and the corresponding point estimates of the risk of poverty rates and the associated
confidence intervals. These appear in the technical reports and country briefs discussed below. The
following table summarizes the level of spatial disaggregation achieved for each of the poverty maps,
using both the NUTS/LAU classification system and the common names for the respective regions in
each country. The table also indicates the main data sources, and whether the poverty maps are based
on microdata or aggregate data.


4
 A summary of results, using the results framework from the project concept note, appears at the end of this
memo.
Table 1: Level of aggregation and data sources for poverty maps

Country     Level of poverty map                       Data sources and comments
Estonia     Municipalities, with some grouping         Microdata using 2012 EU-SILC and 2011
            of small municipalities (total of 132      Population Census
            areas, approximately corresponding
            to LAU 2)
Hungary     General Electoral Districts (total of      Microdata using 2005 EU-SILC and 2005
            174        areas,      approximately       “micro-census”. To be updated with 2011
            corresponding to LAU 1)                    data in 2014.
Latvia      Statistical regions (total of 6 areas,     Aggregate (area-level) data from 2012
            corresponding to NUTS 3)                   EU-SILC and 2011 population census. Plan to
                                                       update with microdata in 2014.
Poland   Statistical sub-regions (total of 66          Aggregate (area-level) data from 2011
         areas, corresponding to NUTS 3)               EU-SILC and 2011 population census.
Romania Counties and Bucharest (total of 42            Microdata using data from 2011 EU-SILC and
         areas, corresponding to NUTS 3)               2011 population census.
Slovakia Districts (total of 79 areas,                 Aggregate (area-level) data from 2011
         corresponding to LAU 1)                       EU-SILC and 2011 population census.
Slovenia Municipalities, with some grouping            Microdata using data from 2010 EU-SILC and
         of small municipalities (total of 195         2011 population census.
         areas, approximately corresponding
         to LAU 2)


Results: This activity helped to deepen knowledge and inform development financing. It has been widely
assumed that there is a considerable amount of spatial variation in poverty within the highly aggregated
NUTS 2 regions that are used for EU regional policies and programs. However, concrete and sufficiently
precise information about the nature of these regional disparities has been lacking. By uncovering the
heterogeneity behind aggregate averages, these results permit more accurate identification of the areas
in greatest need of development assistance, whether from EU funds or other sources. They also
complement other information on the correlates of poverty that will help inform the design of regional
policies and programs.

Technical Reports
The team prepared short technical reports for the poverty maps in each country. These are oriented
toward a statistically and econometrically inclined audience. They were specifically requested by
Eurostat as a deliverable to help them evaluate and document the technical soundness of the analytical
work, in the same vein as the “Quality Reports” that Eurostat and NSIs produce to accompany their
survey data results. For each country, the technical report describes (a) the spatial divisions in the
country and the target level for the poverty map, (b) the modeling approach, (c) the specific data
sources used, and (d) the small area estimation results, including regression results, point estimates and
confidence intervals (or standard errors) for poverty rates, and regression diagnostics.
It should be noted that the Slovenia report is still in draft form, and will be revised in June to (a) take
into account new analysis that was carried out in May 2014, and (b) revise the organization of the paper
to conform more closely with that of the reports for other countries.

Results: This output has helped to deepen knowledge and generate innovate approaches and solutions.
The technical reports document the methods used and results obtained, and demonstrate the
knowledge gains from using the small area estimation approach. The technical reports also demonstrate
the results that are achievable in less-than-ideal circumstances, such as when there is no access to
census microdata.

Country Poverty Mapping Briefs
To complement the technical reports, the team has decided to prepare a set of two-page summaries of
the poverty map results, one for each country. These were not originally specified as deliverables for the
project, but are potentially valuable vehicles for communicating the project’s findings to general
audiences that are interested in poverty and policy, but not the technical details of the estimation
process. The briefs provide information about the motivations for producing the poverty maps,
summarize some of the main results in the country, and briefly outline how the poverty maps may help
inform policies and programs.

Draft briefs for Hungary, Romania, and Slovakia are included in the output package for the decision
meeting. The team would especially appreciate guidance from the meeting on the content and
presentation of the briefs, after which briefs will be developed for countries that have poverty maps.

Results: This output is expected to inform policies and strategies, and also to deepen knowledge. So far
only one of the poverty mapping briefs has been released: it was distributed in connection with a
dissemination event in Romania, and has also been shared with senior staff at the European
Commission. In both cases it was well-received, and this form of output is expected to grab the interests
of diverse stakeholders in the EC, national and sub-national governments, and within the World Bank
Group, concisely conveying information about the distribution of poverty that is relevant to policies and
strategies across different sectors.

Innovation and Knowledge Impacts
Since the late 1990s the World Bank Group has played a pioneering role in the small area estimation of
poverty using microdata, led by cutting-edge research in DECRG and widespread empirical application of
the methodology in more than 60 countries. The methodology was also adopted by numerous
researchers and analysts outside the World Bank Group. This project presented new challenges and
opportunities to break new ground and improve the way that poverty mapping is practiced in the World
Bank and elsewhere. The Empirical Best (EB) method had been proposed in the statistical literature as
an enhancement to the Elbers-Lanjouw-Lanjouw (ELL) approach used by the World Bank. The advantage
of EB appeared to be of marginal consequence in low income countries (because sample surveys usually
cover only a small proportion of the small areas for which poverty is estimated), but potentially
significant in the context of the survey sampling schemes used in European countries. This project
provided an opportunity to rigorously test empirical applications of ELL and EB and their variants, using
unique data sets in Denmark and Slovenia to validate and compare the different approaches.
The validation study, aided by the guidance of the experts on the Steering Committee, was able to
quantify the impact of adding EB to the ELL framework. The systematic validation testing also furthered
the understanding of other elements of the poverty mapping methodology. It is not an overstatement to
say that this component of the project has helped change the way the World Bank approaches poverty
mapping. These innovations are already beginning to spread outside the World Bank, through our
engagement with the Steering Committee, counterparts in NSIs, and enhancements to the PovMap
software produced and supported by the World Bank.

Results: This activity has developed and fostered innovation in the area of small area poverty
estimation. The innovation is embedded in the small area poverty estimates based on microdata that
are produced in the outputs of this project. The innovation and knowledge spillovers are also evident in
the skills transfer that occurred with partners in NSIs and the updating of PovMap software. It has also
gained prominence in academic research around the world by catalyzing greater communication and
collaboration across different methodological “camps,” including featured sessions at prominent
academic conferences.

Updated PovMap software
In 2004 the World Bank research department developed special-purpose software, known as PovMap,
for the estimation of poverty in small areas. The main advantage of using PovMap instead of standard
statistical software is its speed and efficiency in performing hundreds of simulations on large census
data sets containing millions of observations and its handling of complex error structures. Its graphical
user interface also simplifies operations for the user, while retaining the required rigor and complexity
of the computations as background operations. PovMap is freely available from the DEC web site.

From the outset, this project supported new development and enhancements to PovMap software.
Initially this was to facilitate addressing the methodological questions posed in the pilot study, and it
continued throughout the project as computational methods were refined and enhancements were
added.

Results: This activity has generated innovative approaches and solutions. It has brought new features to
the PovMap software package, a public good that is used by analysts both inside and outside the WBG,
incorporating the latest methods (including some still in the experimental stage), adding a great deal of
new flexibility, and producing useful new regression diagnostic output.


Dissemination and Outreach
There have been several forms of dissemination and outreach, with more planned in 2014. These have
taken place in individual new EU member states and at the European Commission. The research-focused
aspects of the project have been presented at numerous academic conferences. The following is a brief
summary of the dissemination and outreach efforts that took place under this project:

       Inception presentations and meetings in individual countries: During 2012, meetings were held
        in each of the ten countries with key partners, such as NSIs and government ministries (most
        often the ministry of labor and ministry of regional development, and sometimes the ministry of
        finance). These presentations explained the objectives and structure of the project, and served
        as a springboard for discussions about how the results could be used in that country, as well as
        the practical considerations for carrying out the work.
      Preliminary results seminars in individual countries: As poverty mapping analysis took place in
        the various countries (October 2012 to May 2014), preliminary results were presented in
        seminars attended by NSI staff, and occasionally staff from relevant ministries. These served as
        an informal validation of the results, and also helped to discuss and understand the possible
        reasons for the observed patterns of poverty across the country.
      Results seminars in individual countries: These seminars were follow-ups to the preliminary
        seminars, and were convened after additional analysis was done, taking into account the
        comments received. One of the particularly noteworthy examples was the seminar in Bucharest,
        held in March 2014, which was held jointly with the local EU delegation and was well-covered by
        the media and attended by approximately 60 officials representing government ministries,
        international organizations, and bilateral development partners.
      Workshop with EC country desk officers: In April 2013 a full-day workshop was held in Brussels
        with approximately 50 country desk officers from DG Employment and DG Regional Policy. The
        workshop presented the poverty mapping results to available date, as well as related
        geo-referenced information on poverty correlates such as employment, business activity,
        education, and demographics. The focus was on interpreting the results and how to use the
        results in the EC’s programmatic work. A similar workshop was held again in March 2014, led by
        senior staff from the EC.
      High-level presentation at the EC: In October 2013 the project results were presented at a
        high-level seminar that was co-chaired by the Directors General of DG Employment and DG
        Regional Policy. Approximately 60 EC staff attended the event, which generated lively debate
        and follow-up discussions.
      Web content: The full-scale web outreach has not begun, but two examples may serve as useful
        guides for future work. One is a blog post by the ECCU5 Country Director on “What can the EU
        learn                         from                        poverty                        maps?”
        (http://blogs.worldbank.org/futuredevelopment/what-can-eu-learn-poverty-maps),             which
        frames the results in the context of the EU’s 2014-2020 financial framework. The other example
        is from Statistics Estonia, which was the first of the countries to feature the poverty mapping
        results on their web page, including incorporating the small area poverty estimates in their
        official online database (http://www.stat.ee/74507).
Future dissemination and outreach will build on these efforts, and benefit from guidance by EXT staff at
headquarters and in the country offices. Further outreach is planned in individual countries (including
events outside the capital cities), at the European Commission, and on the web. It is also planned to
feature the poverty maps in an upcoming edition of the EU11 Regular Economic Report, mostly likely
this winter’s issue.
Lessons Learned
As this is a large project involving close collaboration among the World Bank, the European Commission,
and authorities in individual European countries it should not be surprising that many of the lessons
concern relationships and organization. Although all partners share considerable common ground on
the objective of improving the well-being of poor people, substantial institutional barriers may make
working together difficult. Each organization has its own sets of rules and practices that may be
internally consistent but also incompatible with those of its external partners. In this project this
occurred from setting up the financing arrangements, carried through to resolving adequate
confidentiality safeguards to work with sensitive data, and continues with dissemination of the results in
some countries. Through good-faith negotiation it has usually been possible to accommodate the
concerns of all parties. Whenever possible, this project tried to build on existing precedent and to
establish agreements that were sufficiently general to be effective for future projects, without
reinventing the wheel. Nevertheless, the investment of time and energy required on these matters
should not be underestimated.

Related to the institutional complexity, the degree to which working arrangements, analytical
approaches, and skills transfer had to be customized in each of the countries is noteworthy. Despite
common EU objectives (e.g., income convergence) and Eurostat technical standards (e.g., the EU-SILC
survey), one size does not fit all across the new member states. The engagement with each NSI was
unique, with varying levels of staff expertise and time available to work on the project, data readiness
and access, and even NSI management confidence in the whole notion of estimating poverty risk in
small areas by “indirect” methods.

Getting traction on poverty issues can be difficult in the upper-middle and high income countries of the
new EU member states, especially among national authorities. It may be even more difficult when the
proximate initiative appears to come from Brussels and Washington rather than domestically. That said,
this project has shown that it is possible to attract the necessary attention when the information is rich
and presented in an accessible and appealing manner. In this instance, regional development—a very
active policy area at the EU, national, and subnational levels—proved to be a useful entry point in
several countries.

It may be more common knowledge than a “lesson learned,” but the hands-on and intensive
engagement of the European Commission bears noting. The Commission came to the WBG because of
its extensive experience in poverty mapping and because the EC lacked the in-house resources to
produce the poverty maps itself. Our counterparts in the Commission at all levels have been discerning
consumers of the team’s work, contributing to improvements in the team’s work throughout the
process, while remaining cognizant of the constraints imposed by the institutional barriers noted earlier.
The exchange of ideas and information has been extremely constructive, and we expect it will continue
to be so as the poverty maps are increasingly used in the EC’s operations.
Next Steps
The team and the European Commission have keen mutual interest in building on the investments made
via this project. This includes completing some outputs that were envisioned under this project, but that
were delayed because of exogenous factors. Some of this work can be undertaken within the existing
trust fund, which closes on July 31, 2014; other work would be supported by a new trust fund (that is, a
new child trust fund under the Europe 2020 programmatic trust fund) that is currently being discussed
by the Bank and the Commission.

The following activities are planned for completion under the current trust fund.

        The current draft technical report for Slovenia will be finalized, as will the poverty mapping
         briefs for all countries with completed poverty maps.
     Continued outreach and dissemination, as outlined in section 3.
The following activities have been identified in discussions with the EC as the top priorities under a new
trust fund.

       Developing a small area poverty map for Croatia. The team is working with the CMU to
        investigate the possibility of jump-starting this activity in summer 2014 through a Miscellaneous
        Reimbursable Agreement with the Government of Croatia, with subsequent support through
        the EC trust fund.
       The team will work with the NSI in Bulgaria to complete poverty maps at the municipality level
        (LAU 1), and work with the Hungary Central Statistical Office to update their poverty map using
        the 2011 population census and the 2012 EU-SILC survey.
       Completing poverty maps in the Czech Republic and Lithuania, where work up to this point has
        been stalled by the inability to come to resolve outstanding issues with data confidentiality
        agreements.
       Achieving further disaggregation of the existing poverty maps in selected countries, particularly
        Latvia.
       Using the findings from the poverty mapping analysis to develop a system for monitoring
        changes in the risk of poverty in small areas over time.


Table 2: Results matrix (from results framework in project concept note)

Intermediate            Indicators                                 Activities
Outcomes
Development               Mobilization of non-Bank                  Small area poverty maps and
financing informed         resources informed                         tables
                          Government expenditure
                           informed
Policy/strategy           Government policy/strategy                Small area poverty maps and
informed                   informed                                   tables
                          Public debate                             Country poverty mapping
                          stimulated/initiated                      briefs
Knowledge                Facilitated exchange of best             Methodological pilot study
deepened                  practice with clients                    Small area poverty maps and
                         Facilitated exchange of best              tables
                          practice with partners                   Technical reports
                                                                   Country poverty mapping
                                                                    briefs
Innovative               New innovative approach                  Methodological pilot study
approaches and            fostered                                 Technical reports
solutions generated      New innovative approach                  Changes in World Bank
                          developed                                 analytical approach to
                                                                    poverty mapping
                                                                   Updated PovMap software




Attachments (also filed in WBDocs)

      Methodological pilot study report
      Technical reports: Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia
      Poverty map briefs: Hungary, Romania, Slovakia
