Report No: ACS9609



Republic of Kazakhstan
Expanding Civil Society Engagement in EITI in
Kazakhstan
Communications and Regional Outreach


June 15, 2014




SEGOM
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA




 Standard Disclaimer:


 This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findin
 interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
 governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colo
 denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning
 legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


 Copyright Statement:


 The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation
 applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and w
 normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

 For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Cent
 Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

 All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818
 Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                         FINAL REPORT

                          Selection Number: 1079933
  Selection Title: EITI/MDTF CSO Direct Support in Kazakhstan: Priority 2 -
                      Communicating EITI in Kazakhstan.

Project: Communicating EITI in Kazakhstan
Contract #7165618

Consultants’ Organization: Decenta Foundation
Reporting period: 15 January – 25 December 2013
Objective: This Report is aimed at describing presenting the final results and impact of the
mentioned above project.

Task 1 - Preparing a communications strategy that targets general public.

1.1. Brief Report on a complex analyses of all previous experiences and activities in this
     direction.

As mentioned in the previous reports the Consultant Organization has fulfilled this task.
Within the reporting period, the Consultant Organization has fulfilled this task. There was a desk
research carried out within first two weeks of the project. This research included analyzing
experience of Kazakhstan organizations in developing a communicating strategy on EITI. First of
all Decenta studied the Action Plan of the National Stakeholders Council. This document did not
contain any clear, specific, measurable objectives and activities regarding the communications.
The next document that has been analyzed was a draft of media plan developed by two state bodies
of the national level: the Ministry of Industry and new Technologies and Ministry of Culture and
Information. As it is seen from the title of this document – this is a media plan, this means that it
can contribute to the communication strategy but hardly be considered as a strategic document. This
plan is a typical form and approach usually used by authorities in Kazakhstan. In general, this plan
provides us with the information on where (in what media) it is planned to publish articles and other
information on EITI.
The most detailed document that concerns communications is the Strategy of the Coalition “Oil
Revenues – Under Public Control!”. This Strategy includes a Section on communications that
described a factual situation and intentions in respect communications. But when we tried to find
out how the Strategy was implemented we came to a conclusion that the majority of the described
activities has never been carried out. Although as a document, this Strategy looks comprehensive
and well grounded.
Decenta has also examined the documents developed ever since the Dialogue Platform was
launched. Thus in 2011-2012 the members of the DP had several meeting aimed at developing the
strategy of further promoting EITI in Kazakhstan. The minutes of these meeting show that the DP’s
members were also going to develop a communication strategy (the minutes of the meeting held in
May 2012 in Almaty). In fact, this work has not been completed and the DP does not have its
communication strategy either.
In addition to the documents accessible in a hard copy we also studies content of the web resources
regarding EITI. Decenta has studied the following web sites: www.eiti.org/ru/Kazakhstan,
www.geology.kz, www.eitingo.kz, www.mining.kz, www.oilnews.kz, www.old.kazenergy.com. None of
the mentioned web-resources contains any information that might be considered as a
communication strategy on EITI.
In 2012 there was a project implemented by MediaNet with the support of WB and Soros-
Kazakhstan that had a goal to develop new approaches on communicating the information on EITI
to the public and all interested parties. With this purpose, MediaNet developed infographics for
simpler and easier delivering the information about EITI and the National Reports on EITI in
particular.

Conclusion: After having studied all accessible documents, Decenta can conclude that there were a
few attempts to develop communication strategy on EITI in Kazakhstan. These attempts have been
made by:
    1. Coalition of NGOs “Oil Revenues – Under Public Control!” in 2008-2012;
    2. Dialogue Platform of NGOs – in 2011-2012;
    3. National Stakeholders Council – in 2008;
    4. Working Group of the National Stakeholders' Council – in 2012;
    5. Ministry of Information and Culture with Ministry of Industry and New Technologies – in
        2013.
As a matter of fact, there was no any strategy that has been ever fully implemented. All these
strategies were reviewed and there was a question to be address – is it worth improving some of the
mentioned documents or better developing absolutely different one? After discussions there was a
decision taken to develop new document that should include good suggestions from the mentioned
variants.. Nevertheless we have used and applied some elements and suggestions from the revised
materials when developing the strategy on this project.

1.2. Holding a meeting of the Dialogue Platform members.

This activity was also completed. On the 8-9th of April there was a meeting of the DP held in
Almaty.
On the 8-9th of April there was a meeting of the DP held in Almaty. As a matter of fact this meeting
was not a part of this project and was organized by the NGO “ECHO” with the support of Soros -
Kazakhstan Foundation. Nevertheless, Decenta decided to use this opportunity to fulfill achieve the
project’s objectives. Therefore, first together with INIDI we presented our projects, its goals,
objectives, activities and expected results. On the second day of the DP’s meeting Decenta arranged
a session of the communication strategy planning. This meeting was attended by representatives of
all DP’s members: “Oil Revenues – Under Public Control!”, Young Professional of Kazakhstan,
Confederation of Akmolinskaya Region Trade Unions, Civil Alliance of Kazakhstan and
Association of NGOs of Kazakhstan. Decenta’s representative facilitated this process trying to
involve all participants into discussion. There were three key questions addressed to the
participants:
1. What do we want to tell about EITI in Kazakhstan?
2.   Who do we want to deliver this information to?
3.   What are the best ways to deliver this information?
The session combined brainstorming and general discussion. As a result, we came to general
recommendations regarding main issues about the process of EITI progress in Kazakhstan; about
the target groups, which we want to inform bout these achievements; and the methods of
communications. As the results of this meeting, we had minutes with suggestions and
recommendations on all three issues.


3.1. Interviewing of the National Stakeholders' Council members.
In accordance with the Inception Report Decenta has developed a Questionnaire for interviewing
the NSC’s members. The members of the NSC representing civil society have answered the
questions of the Questionnaire. As for the members of the NSC representing the Government – they
requested for the ToR and details of the contract concluded between Decenta and WB. They also
have articulated a concern that they are not aware of many projects and actions being implemented
in the sphere of EITI. Therefore, they expressed a hope that in the future NGOs and donors will
share with them such information. On the 13th of June there was a meeting with a representative of
the International EITI Secretariat – Dvyke Rogan in Astana, where most of the NSC attended. And
using this opportunity Decenta has started interviewing of the companies representatives. In
particular, the questionnaires were given to E.Karazhan, R.Zhampisov, M.Namazbekov. Decenta
has also approached a member of the NSC representing the Parliament – Mrs. A.Solovyova.
As a result, this activity was also fulfilled and 7 NSC's members (N.Yantsen, P.Lobachev,
A.Solovyova, R.Zhampiisov, S.Nikitinskaya, M.Namazbekov, E.Karazhan) were interviewed by
this time.

3.2. Summarizing all suggestions and developing the Communications Strategy.

After studying all previous experiences and materials developed in other countries and in
Kazakhstan Decenta started the process of developing the Communication Strategy. This document
is built on the information received from the DP’s and NSC’s members. Decenta has contacted
consultants to assist in developing this document – totally 4 experts were attracted. Besides, to
secure discussions and deliberations, to gather maximum opinions from all stakeholders Decenta
announced that all interested individuals were invited to participate in the process of the Strategy
development. As a result, we formed a group of experts who worked on paid and free basis. These
experts are:
    1. Yuriy Krivodanov, Director of NGO “Blago”, member of Working Group on
        Communications of the NSC, Karaganda;
    2. Sergey Khudyakov, Director of “Local Self-Government Institute Development”, NSC
        deputy member, Petropavlovsk”;
    3. Svetlana Ushakova, Director of “INIDI”, member of Working Group on Communications of
        the NSC, Almaty;
    4. Olesya Khalabuzar, Director of “Young Professionals of Kazakhstan”, NSC deputy member,
        Almaty;
    5. Aziya Kurmanbayeva, PWYP, Steering Committee member, Semey.
    6. Ramazan Zhampiissov, Kazenergy Association, Executive Director, NSC member,
        Moderator of Working Group on communications, Astana.
    7. Maulen Namazbekov, Kazenergy Association, Deputy Director, NSC member, Astana.

Decenta acted as a coordinator and facilitated the process of the Strategy development. As a matter
of fact we have completed a draft of this document. But some points and aspects in this draft were
arguable and disputable. When working over the Strategy we came across some tough questions
that actually were answered only partially. These questions are the following:
1.          Who is the owner of the Strategy, i.e. who is supposed to push it forward, fulfill it step
by step, to raise funds etc.?
2.          What resources are allocated or will be to finance implementation of the Strategy?
3.          Why there was no preliminary survey or needs assessment done to learn more about
expectations and necessities of all target groups and beneficiaries?

These questions made us stuck in the process of discussions and finding consensus. Finally, we
agreed that the most suitable owner of the Strategy is the NSC. But at the same time we realized
that the companies are not very much interested in this Strategy. We understand that the
Government will be interested until Kazakhstan passes successfully validation and nobody knows
what comes after. The Parliament members also do not seem very much interested. Thus, only
NGOs reveal real interest, enthusiasm and commitment. Therefore, some consultants offered the
Dialogue Platform as the most possible owner.
The issue of resources is also a complicated one. We know that some resources are allocated but
there was no guarantee that the Government will be financing the activities of the Strategy.
All experts agreed that a survey should have been conducted. Because we are trying to build
something having very limited and not clear information about the ground. This means that no one
ever asked what the interests and expectations of the companies, citizens, officials and other
stakeholders were.
Anyway, we agreed that under the present conditions we have to complete the Strategy meeting the
ToR, factual situation in the country and operating with the real resources. Therefore have decided
to finish up with the process of the Strategy development. And what concerns the mentioned above
questions we propose that: The owner of the Strategy will be the NSC; we will be planning only the
most likely sources of funding; if there is an opportunity, our group will suggest conducting a
survey on needs, expectations and necessities of the target groups.
On the 20th of November there was a meeting of the NSC where S.Gulyayev who represents NGOs
and Decenta offered including the Communication Strategy into the Working Plan of the Council
for 2014-2016. And this suggestion was agreed by the members. As a result, in the Minutes #44,
paragraph 2.1. there is a resolution to include the Communication Strategy into the Working Plan.
And the draft Working Plan that is going to be approved by the end of 2013 contains paragraph
6.6.1. – Approving the Communication Strategy by February 2014. Therefore, this task is fully
completed.
The Strategy can be found on the web-site of the Geology Committee:
http://geology.gov.kz/ru/eiti/communication-strategy

Task 2 - Developing communications materials, as outlined in the communications strategy.

This task was also completed. Decenta in accordance with the Communication Strategy has
developed three materials: a booklet and two video films. As it was planed – the booklet containss
brief information on profits that a region and its citizens benefit from EITI. As an example there
was taken Pavlodar region where 9 extracting companies operate. We have found information
about: natural resources that the companies extract (coal, gold, copper), payments that the
companies paid to the national budget and local budget in 2011 (as it was stated in the National
Report - 2011), percentage of these payment in the local budget, number of social objects that could
be constructed using this money (kindergartens, schools, roads), amounts of social investments
spent by the companies in 2011. This booklet was presented to the participants of EITI School,
members of NGOs, media and all of them have found it as a good, simple instrument of information
delivery. There were printed 500 copies of the pamphlet for distribution and disseminating among
all interested parties. An electronic version of the booklet was enclosed to the Interim Report #3.
Decenta has also created short video (http://decenta.kz/projects/index.php?id=128) containing same
information as the booklet but in a form of video and inforgaphics. This video was demonstrated
during the Eurasian Regional Seminar on EITI Standard 2013 in Batumi, September 20-21, 2013.
The participants expressed their interest and approved the idea and approach. Than it was
demonstrated to the participants of the seminar on new EITI Standards in October 2013 in Astana.
In November the video was showed to the participants of the seminars held by INIDI Foundation in
Aktobe and Uralsk. The video was also posted to the web site of the Geology Committee of the
Ministry of Industry and New Technologies ( http://geology.gov.kz/ru/eiti/public-debate). As far as
we know this material is widely used now by many groups of interested stakeholders

Finally, Decenta developed a second video that is about implementing EITI in Kazakhstan in
general. The film is accessible here:
 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gbZEKov9f1c&feature=youtu.be.
Thus by this time Decenta has designed and produced three materials. The materials are very easy
to be adapted by any other region of Kazakhstan, so they might be used as templates.


Task 3 - Conducting EITI communication and outreach activities.

On 09-11 September 2013 Decenta Foundation held in Pavlodar EITI School that was on of the
core activities of the Project. As it was planned there was made an announcement – Call for Letters
of Interest to participate in the School. This announcement was sent to all coalitions and
associations that work in the sphere of EITI, Decenta also used resources of its partners in the
target regions, besides the announcement was sent through the biggest and most famous system of
e-newsletters – [PROF] that has more than 15000 subscribers. As a result there were 28 letters of
interest applied. Unfortunately some of the participants could not attend the School due to their
health condition and they refused just a day before the School so that it was not possible already to
invite somebody else. It should be also highlighted that the theme of EITI is not yet very much
interested for NGOs and CSOs and this can be seen by the number of applications.
        The participants of the School were representatives of NGOs, media, business and
universities. These people were from Atyrau, Mangistau, Western-Kazakhstan, Aktobe, Southern-
Kazakhstan, Karaganda, Eastern-Kazakhstan and Pavlodar regions. In general these were young
representatives of NGOs. Totally 24 people attended the School, 13 people were representatives of
Pavlodar region and 11 people – other regions.
        The School Program took 3 days and included the following components:
     General Information on EITI, its history, participation of Kazakhstan in the Initiative, stages
        of its development.
    2. The Dialogue Platform and its members. .
    3. Validation: meaning, principles, experience of Kazakhstan.
    4. National EITI Reports: development, principles, practice.
    5. The National Stakeholders' Council: functions, competence and powers, principles.
    6. Social payments of companies, opportunities for civil society to participate and influence the
        process of planning and spending.

       One of the eligibility criteria for participants was absence of experience in EITI sphere and
seminars in particular, thus the majority of the participants had just very general knowledge of EITI.
At the same time there was a real demand to obtain information on this subject. The participants
asked a lot of serious and tough questions on the theme, they also very actively used Internet
resources to find information themselves. In particular there were articulated the following
questions:
     Who pays for the work of a company that develops the national EITI reports? If the
       Government pays – is not it trying to get the results that it wants to?
     What is the way to contract a company that develops the national reports?
    8. What happens if in the reports any discrepancies found? Who and what measures takes?
    9. Who takes decisions on what objects should be constructed in the regions at the expenses of
       the companies' social payments? Etc.

     Decenta contracted as trainers:
     N.Yantsen (Tax Culture Foundation, member of NSC, Almaty);
     S.Ushakova (INIDI Foundation, Almaty);
     O.Chernyshov (Institute of Analysis and Forecasting of Eastern-Kazakhstan Region, Ust-
Kamenogorsk);
       E.Jantureeva (Secretariat of EITI in Kazakhstan, Committee of Geology at the Ministry of
Industry and New Technologies, Astana).

        The first two days of the School were more theoretical. The participants were presented
information about EITI, how Kazakhstan follows the rules and standard of the Initiative, hoe the
NSC develops and takes decisions, what problems and challenges are faced when decisions are
making. There were specifically explained that the NSC includes all interested parties and this
secures protection and promoting interests of all stakeholders, and this is very democratic way of
decision-making. But at the same time this approach is a very difficult and time-consuming because
it requires finding consensus on any decision.
        It is remarkable that the trainers had their own experience of membership in the NSC and
this allowed them using real cases from their practice and this made the training materials
maximum useful for the participants. At the end of the first day the participants were offered a
business role-playing game, that was aimed at training skills of developing decisions by different
stakeholders. Each group had their own objective/mission that was absolutely opposite to the
objectives of other groups and the task was to find a solution and come to consensus. This exercise
allowed to the participants to feel how the process of discussions and decision-making is usually
organized in the NSC.
        The session held by E.Jantureeva was very useful as she delivered to the participants
information about EITI from the point of view of an official, she also explained how the Secretariat
works, the role of the NSC. Mrs.Jantureeva provided the participants with very detailed information
about extracting sector in Kazakhstan, and described the process of validation that took place in
2013.
        O.Chernyshov told about the experience of Eastern-Kazakhstan region and how civil society
and public influence social payments of extracting and industrial companies. His core message was
about a necessity to use professional approaches when communicating to the companies. In
particular he told about the role of data obtained as a result of social researches held in the region.
        The final day of the School contained a very important practical part of the Program when
the participants were offered to make analysis of opportunities and define ways of promoting EITI
in the regions (as all participants mentioned that the level of awareness about EITI in the regions
was very poor). As a continuation of this work the Communication Strategy was presented to the
participants. The task was to review the Strategy in a critical way and propose their comments and
recommendations. But as a matter of fact the document did not provoke any criticism, there were
just some opinions and recommendations expressed:
      The Strategy looks like a document of good quality and as a quite applicable tool;
      The Strategy is a ready Guidelines to be used;
      As a recommendation – probably the abbreviation EITI should not be used at all when
        communicating to citizens because people do not care about what it is but just want to know
        what they will profit from it;
      Probably there is a necessity to tell to the population about experience of public councils (in
        Eastern-Kazakhstan and Mangistau regions);
      A lot of recommendations were expressed in respect working with media: as mass media are
        hunting for sensations – the materials should be presented as exclusive unique information;
      As instruments for promoting EITI there were recommended debates and such a platform as
        Youth Forum where it could be possible to arrange a separate session on EITI. And even
        more specifically the participants mentioned Zhascamp that is going to be held in Almaty on
        14 October, 2013$
      It is recommended to more widely use social networks (Facebook in particular), this will
        bring thousands of subscribers;
      It was also highlighted the necessity and importance of having full-time press-secretary for
        the NSC who should be first of all an analyst, able of working with information for definite
        target audiences;
    There was recommendation to use approach applied by some TV channels – short messages
     containing inphorgaphics, something like “EITI in figures;

        And at the end the participants were shown drafts of presentation materials – booklet and
video. The materials were approved both as ideas and as implementation. The participants agreed
that the materials could be used as templates for all other regions.

       The feedback of the participants:
Aitbayev Nurbek (Uralsk): Proposed to create an account on Facebook and volunteered to act as a
moderator.
Evgeniy Anisimov (Aktau): Criticized the idea with Facebook and proposed to establish a google-
group for the School participants.
Vera Kurbanova (Atyrau): Said that she was going to use EITI theme when organizing debate
tournaments, also was going to share her impressions about the School with her classmates and
teachers at University.
Sergey Anisimov (Aktau): Has given a high mark for the trainers' work and logistics of the event.
Marina Tsygankova (Aktobe: Was intending to use the knowledge and materials at the University,
Department of Ecology.

       As promised, the participants created an account on Facebook: EITI Казакстан.

       In general the participants expressed appreciation to the trainers and Decenta for the
opportunity to attend the School and for new knowledge. They also emphasized importance of
promoting EITI in the regions and using the mechanism of public councils.

      Thus all activities planned were successfully implemented. Among other results and
outcomes of the project Decenta would like to mention the following:
       In October 2013 there was held the 5th National EITI Conference in Astana. Decenta was
          responsible to arrange participation in the Conference for selected representatives of
          NGOs and CSOs. And we want to highlight that 8 people who participated in the EITI
          School also applied their Letters of Interest to participate in the Conference. And 5
          people were invited to attend the Conference.
       Participants of the School created accounts on Facebook – EITI Kazakhstan, and
          regularly post their publications.
       Materials of EITI School and video developed by Decenta were posted on the site of the
          Geology Committee that facilitates the activity of EITI Kazakhstan Secretariat. The
          Secretariat also invited NGOs to post their publications on the page of the site named
          Public Debates.
       The Communication Strategy raised interest of the NSC’s members and they agreed to
          incorporate it into the Working Plan. Therefore, the Strategy is going to be reviewed and
          approved in early 2014. The Strategy is present on the website of the Geology
          Committee.
       The information presented in the pamphlet attracted the attention of local journalist –
          Alexander Baranov, who used the data from the National Report 2011 and the pamphlet
          for his article about social payments/investments of ENRC.
       Representatives of GIZ in Kazakhstan revealed their interest towards the presentation
          materials and expressed an idea for future cooperation in communicating EITI
          information to the citizens of Eastern Kazakhstan region.

As a conclusion, Decenta would like to highlight that the target audience demanded this project. A
group of stakeholders benefited from this project: the EITI Kazakhstan Secretary, National Council
of Stakeholders, NGOs, and students. The materials produced raise an interest of any audience.
There are no any suggestions regarding improvement of the program but there is necessity to
continue this activity in the future. Kazakhstan at present is entering the post-validation period and
needs to adapt all procedures to the new EITI Standards and Regulations. This is going to demand
coherent and comprehensive communication activities, informing all interested parties on EITI,
getting feedback, improving the process of communicating, delivering this information to each
region and the audiences identified in the Strategy.

   Decenta Foundation
   General Director

   Sergey Gulyayev
Final Program Report


 Contract #:                         716517

 Grant Amount:                       $ 44 920,00

 Name of the contractor:             INIDI, Public Foundation


 Project Title:                      “National and Regional Capacity Building of Civil Society
                                     And Their Engagement in EITI Processes in the Republic of
                                     Kazakhstan”
                                     funded by the World Bank

 Project Timeframes:                 January 15, 2013 – December 30, 2013

 Reporting Period:                   January 15, 2013 – December 30, 2013


1) Summary of activities conducted under the present project



       In compliance with the approved project action plan, the following activities have been
conducted in the course of the project:




   1. On April 8-9, 2013 the project was publicly presented at the meeting of the Dialogue
      Platform of Associations of NGOS on the Extracting Industries Transparency Initiative
      (DP of ANGOs on the EITI). Attachment – Project presentation.


As a result, the project action plan was approved by the representatives of the DP of ANGOs on the
EITI, and ANGOs’ Coordinators have agreed to provide informational assistance among members
of their associations.
Representatives of international organizations Eurasia Public Foundation and Soros Foundation
Kazakhstan have attended the meeting as invited guests. They also expressed interest in the project.

    2. Project implementing partners in the regions have been identified among the most
         sustainable and competent NGOs in the project target regions.
Contracts with the regional coordinators (RCs) have been signed, covering the following project
activities and obligations on creation the EITI of RCs:
          Set up communications between the regional NGOs/CSOs and project team in Almaty;
          Organize 2 (two) training events on the project themes;
          Conduct at least 6 (six) meetings of NGOs to discuss aspects of project implementation in
         the target regions;
          Build interactions/cooperation among the regional CSOs to organize joint activities on
         creation of the RPCs and SIPs monitoring;
        Provide detailed information on the meetings;
        Conduct final media conference in their home locations at the close-out stage of the pro-
       ject.

After signing the contracts, all RCs have successfully accomplished the first obligations on arrang-
ing the first training round in their home regions. Training announces were distributed, applications
collected and CSOs representatives were selected jointly with the central project office staff in Al-
maty.

Regional project partners:
Aktobe – Support Center for Women, Public Association, Aigul Duysenova; phone: +7 7132 54 67
68, mobile: +7 701 494 44 54, email: daigul2007@yandex.ru;
Uralsk – Zaman, Association of Producers, Aigul Turkina; mobile: +7 701 635 78 01, email: a-
turkina@yandex.ru
Kyzylorda – Center for Youth Problems, Bayan Egizbayeva; mobile: +7 777 961 08 96, email:
egizbaeva.bayan@mail.ru.


   3. Preparatory arrangements for the first training round in the project target regions. The
      following activities/actions have been accomplished with this purpose:


     Trainers have been identified on the bases of required experience and professional training
        background in the field of EITI implementation. Определена тренерская команда на
        основе необходимого опыта по проведению тренингов по ИПДО. The following experts
        were selected as trainers:
Natalia Yantsen – the Director of Formation of Tax Culture, Public Association. Mrs. Yantsen
possesses more than 7-years experience conducting trainings on the EITI and have professional
background in financial management and taxation; she is a member of the National Council of
Stakeholders on the EITI (NCS on the EITI);
Svetlana Ushakova – the Director of INIDI, Public Foundation. Mrs. Ushakova has more than 9
years of experience conducting trainings on the EITI, 15 years of experience conducting trainings
on various themes; she is a highly qualified expert/consultant in institutional development,
monitoring and evaluation, advocacy and gender-related issues.

    Training module for the first training round in the regions was designed; presentations and
     handouts have been developed and produced. During the preparatory stage, the project team
     used materials, developed by NGOs under the project of Soros Foundation Kazakhstan (
     “Passion according to a barrel” and “Money to nowhere” films, infographics on the history
     of EITI implementation in the Republic of Kazakhstan, reports of the Coalition “Oil
     revenues – under public oversight”, and materials from the www.eiti.org website (please
     refer to the Attachments folder).



   4. First training round

The first round of trainings envisaged the following outcomes:
    Presenting information and training on the EITI and results of EITI implementation in
        Kazakhstan;
    Creation of conditions/basis for monitoring of regional socially important projects (SIPs)
     under the EITI through creation of resource centers (RCs), dialogue platforms (DPs) and
     regional public councils (RPCs).

Results of the first training round:

City            Date                   Number of      Decisions made
                                       participants
Kyzylorda       June 27 – 28,          28             The RPC on sustainable development was
                2013                                  created;
                                                      Decision to conduct SIP monitoring was
                                                      made;
                                                      Draft work plan of the Public Council on SIP
                                                      monitoring was developed;
                                                      Seminar participants decided to agree and
                                                      approve the work plan on SIP monitoring at
                                                      the next meeting of the RPC.

Aktobe          July 3 – 4, 2013       24             Initiative group of 15 CSOs representatives
                                                      was created;
                                                      Decision to conduct SIP monitoring was
                                                      made;
                                                      Draft work plan of the Public Council on SIP
                                                      monitoring was developed;
                                                      Seminar participants decided to agree and
                                                      approve the work plan on SIP monitoring at
                                                      the next meeting of the RPC.

Uralsk          July 11-12, 2013       24             Initiative group of 10 CSOs representatives
                                                      was created;
                                                      Decision to conduct SIP monitoring was
                                                      made;
                                                      Draft work plan of the Public Council on SIP
                                                      monitoring was developed;
                                                      Seminar participants decided to agree and
                                                      approve the work plan on SIP monitoring at
                                                      the next meeting of the RPC.


During the seminar, the participants of all training events were presented with the DP mechanism
for interaction of CSOs.
The participants agreed that quality, efficient and equitable interaction of CSOs with each other is
the key to success in SIP monitoring, as it involves promotion of an agreed, consolidated position
and it's lobbying in relationships with extracting companies and local authorities.
To develop their own rules of interaction between CSOs, the seminar participants were presented
with the Regulation on the DP of ANGOs on EITI in Kazakhstan to be used as an example.


   5. Meetings of the initiative groups on work plans in the regions

As a result of the communications and meetings between the regional NGOs, the initiatives groups
were created, work plans on further EITI implementation and public monitoring of regional SIPs
were designed, and all trained NGOs are now motivated and educated to realize their initiatives and
strengthen public participation.
Another valuable outcome is raised interest of the state representatives towards cooperation with
CSOs and media. That creates favourable background for effective cooperation between the stake-
holders and following joint work on SIP monitoring.

In the post-training period meetings of CSOs - members of the initiative groups - have been held on
the basis of Resource Centers in the project regions. Participants discussed action plans for SIPs
monitoring and mechanisms for better information dissemination among the constituency, stake-
holders, and media.

At least 2 meetings of initiative groups have been conducted in each project region. Key messages
included, but were not limited to the following:
    - Specific features of the regional aspects of the EITI implementation;
    - Effective instruments of SIPs monitoring and public participation;
    - Establishment of Public Councils and communications with media and stakeholders;
    - Opportunities for cooperation with government actors and extractive companies, etc.

The main result was updated work plans. These plans were used for further activities and during the
second training round for further improvement and refinement.



   6. Second training round

 INIDI conducted the second round of EITI seminars, training participants in public monitoring
methods, best international practices, development of indicators, data collection and analysis, EITI
new standards and regulations. The goals of the second round of EITI training were to promote and
strengthen EITI implementation in the target regions, to extend public participation in monitoring of
social and infrastructure projects (SIPs), and raise awareness of stakeholders on new EITI rules and
standards as an issue of national concern.
Two trainers were identified in consistence with professional requirements; and corresponding
agreements were signed. The first trainer, Sergei Gulyayev, representing Decenta, PF, is a member
of the National Council of Stakeholders on the EITI. His duties include but are not limited to
development of training module and information section on the EITI new rules and requirements,
adopted in May 2013. The second trainer, Oleg Chugunkov, representative of the Institute of
Analysis and Forecasting of the Eastern Kazakhstan Region, LLC, is responsible for design of the
section on Public Council practice on the example of the Eastern Kazakhstan Region, including
mechanisms of social and infrastructure projects monitoring. Svetlana Ushakova, who is currently
the leading EITI expert in Kazakhstan, has designed all other training modules.

In cooperation with invited, the training module and agenda were developed, integrating feedback
of the first training round participants (please refer to the Attachments folder).

Second round of trainings included the following events/dates:
Kyzylorda – October 13-14, 2013
Aktobe - October 21-22, 2013
Uralsk - October 24-25, 2013

These seminars were key events in the framework of the second training round. Regional
Coordinators were involved in organization of the events in Kyzylorda, Aktobe and Uralsk, which
attracted 24, 24 and 19 participants respectively from different backgrounds.
The core objectives of the trainings were to give participants skills and knowledge in public
monitoring of SIPs; introduce trainees to the best international practice and its applicability in
Kazakhstan; present instruments for public monitoring planning (required resources, preparations
and planning process); train target audience on development of indicators, data collection methods,
tools for analysis; provide detailed overview of EITI new standards and opportunities for civil
society organizations (CSOs) under the framework of these standards.
The organizers of the events were dedicated to contribute to the development of trainees’ advocacy
campaigning skills, provide comprehensive EITI implementation tools and best practices of SIPs
public monitoring to the representatives of CSOs, media, civil servants and civic activists, and to
share international experience in strengthening transparency and accountability of extracting
industry. Also further regional activities on the EITI implementation were discussed and strategic
planning for future activities in SIPs public monitoring was done.

Training sessions in all three cities attracted representatives of key state agencies. This fact
demonstrates raising interest of several state bodies in quality and accurate implementation of new
EITI rules and procedures in the country. The organizers’ assumption that EITI implementation and
public monitoring skills would be very important for all sectors of civil society was confirmed by
the majority of trainees in their evaluations of the events.

Some of the sessions were video-recorded to be utilized by trainees as an information resource, to
be shared with other stakeholders that couldn’t participate in the trainings, and also to be posted on
the Internet for wide audience (website of the Dialogue Platform of ANGOs on EITI, web-resource
of the Ministry of Industry and New Technologies, other thematic websites, social networks,
Youtube, etc.)

The issue of support to the RPCs will also be raised with the National Council of Stakeholders on
the EITI to provide further support to regional initiatives and promote multiplication of the best
practices nationwide. Within the National Council it is planned to initiate adoption of the relevant
legislative regulation on the state support of RPCs at regional level.

EITI training program was developed and approved at the regional focus groups meetings.
Monitoring plan and post-training reporting forms were designed. All regional project partners were
motivated to carry out informational and educational activities in the framework of the project.
Regional CSOs and state bodies were informed about the following informational events on EITI
implementation in development of civil initiatives for raising transparency of extracting industries
at the regional level.




   7.    Situation analysis ( social problems research in Kyzylorda)

While the project didn’t include the task for the regional resource centers to conduct need
assessment in the regions as it would require additional funds, the group of CSOs in Kyzylorda has
carried out such research.

It has to be highlighted that Kyzylorda initiative group almost right after the first training has been
restructured into the Public Chamber (PC). Members have designed the PC Regulations, official
chart, etc. Experience of the Coalition “Oil revenues – under public oversight” and the DP of
ANGOs on the EITI was taken as an example for the newly established PC. The Chamber was
created in the form of association of local CSOs with the main goal to promote public monitoring of
the state agencies and business structures in the region.

The PC has conducted the research of social apprehensive zones in Kyzylorda and neighboring
areas. To do that, financial support from the Soros Foundation Kazakhstan has been used. At this
stage INIDI, PF has provided constant consulting support to the Kyzylorda PC.

The overall goal of the research was to develop criteria and recommendations on SIPs efficiency
assessment in the target region. 614 respondents were involved in the study. The research sample
included age, gender and ethnic considerations; revenue and education level were also taken into
account at the stage of data analysis. To make the research more precise, logical grouping method
was utilized.

Key findings and recommendation of the research

      Public opinion survey has disclosed deep public concern about various social, economic and
       political issues.
      The research identified core challenges for city inhabitants. These matters differ by
       relevancy and acuity level. Social program analysis has to consider decision-making level
       for each and every issue.
      Issues of advance on municipal services and poor ecological conditions could force people
       to express discontent more actively.

Recommendations on effective monitoring of social projects/programs and raising citizen
participation:

    Civil society has to be more involved in decision-making at local level. As one of the
     alternative solutions, CSOs and civic activists could develop social programs for local
     government and extracting companies;
    Public participation in decision-making should be synchronized with the process of
     extracting companies’ priorities identification to consider public needs and demand to larger
     extent and thereby increase efficiency of social projects/programs at local level;
    Местное население должно активнее привлекаться местными исполнительными и
     представительными органами через механизм «обратной связи»;
    CSOs have to be consistently engaged in social projects/programs monitoring and evaluation
     by signing memorandums and legal documents between the stakeholders: executive and
     representative local government bodies, extracting companies and CSOs (civil society);
    Social situation is a dynamic process, so social apprehensive zones have to be monitored on
     a on-going basis;
    The following monitoring scheme was proposed: analogous sociological research - every
     other year; public compliance assessment of implemented projects, their social dimension
     and efficiency (primarily, towards target groups);
    It seems to be more effective to conduct such monitoring of different target groups
     separately. In this case it would be possible to design particular research instruments and get
     more detailed picture of social apprehensive and expectations zones;
    Social apprehensive zones include not only existing challenges but also their reflection in
     public opinion of the citizens. That is the reason to widely cover social projects/programs
     implementations in the media. Full text of the research is in the Attachments folder.
   8. Final media conferences


At the close-out stage of the project, the following media conferences have been conducted in the
target cities:
Aktobe – December 20, 2013
Uralsk – December 21, 2013
Kyzylorda – December 27, 2013

Each media event attracted from 7 to 10 local media representatives. That could be considered as a
very good indicator, as there are not so many local regional media in the country (in Kazakhstan
government does not pun much emphasis on local independent media, especially in the regions) and
media events were conducted in holiday season (when media prefer not to cover social and political
themes). Lists of media representatives are in the Attachments folder.

EITI is rather new and under-developed theme, so journalists mainly asked general questions about
the nature and concept of the EITI, implementation in Kazakhstan, experience of other regions in
the country, etc. All media expressed interest and willingness to follow the progress and participate
in future events.
“Money to nowhere” film was also demonstrated at media events. Feedback from journalists
demonstrated the fact that some of them do not know about allocations of extracting companies’
funds to the regional budget. Information on several SIPs was presented. Press-kit also included
press-releases (please refer to the Attachments folder) and CDs with full versions of the 2010 and
2011 EITI National Reports.

In Kyzylorda, the initiative group has developed work plan for public monitoring of SIPs and EITI
implementation in the region, and have planned further steps on promotion and strengthening public
monitoring and participation in SIPs design and realization in the region. The abovementioned
needs assessment (the research) was one of the milestones of this work plan.

Uralsk initiative group has also designed a work plan, but currently the group is still at preparatory
stage; it is expected that planned activities would start in 2014.

In Aktobe, representatives of media and CSOs have developed tentative work plan embracing one-
month collection of information and design of recommendation for Oblast Akim on SIPs allocation.
Media and CSOs united their efforts to create a platform for regional cooperation with government
bodies. The work plan included the following:
1. Prepare statistical data on regional budget allocations (amounts and actual volume, beneficiaries
and organizations);
2. Make an inquiry to the Budget Planning Department on purposes and volumes of subsoil users’
allocations to non-budgetary organizations;
3. Send a request to 14 companies on their SIPs allocations.

As the media conferences were held at the end of 2013, media materials will be released in 2014 as
such publications require more thorough preparations. Therefore, it should be highlighted that
regional media conferences have raised interest of media to the EITI, SIPs and civil participation in
this fields.


2) Knowledge management
At the start-up, project team has presented the present project and key components of its
implementation to the members of the DP of ANGOs on the EITI through e-mail distribution.
Coordinators of coalitions and associations of NGOs have also informed their constituency about
the project. Information has been also forwarded to non-member NGOs: Azamattyk Kurultai and
Aikyndyk. Therefore NGOs engaged in EITI implementation in Kazakhstan j=have been informed
about the project. Wider range of NGOs and civil leaders (more than 10 000 respondents) has also
got information through e-mail distribution lists of the Young Professionals Society of Kazakhstan
(YPSK).

In the course of the project (upon completion of each project stage and training round) brief
information was distributed through e-mail distribution lists of the YPSK.

Upon completion of the project, all information will be made available on the official website on
the EITI implementation in Kazakhstan, and website of the Ministry of Industry and New
Technologies under the “Public Debates” section.

In addition to all planned informational events, the project team has recorded the second round
training session. The record will be edited, processed and posted on YouTube open to public. That
was made upon numerous requests from many CSOs in the target regions and from other locations,
which were not able to attend training sessions. We hope to at least partly satisfy CSOs’ training
needs in the sphere of the EITI implementation in Kazakhstan.

Press-clipping on all publications made on the basis of project activities, is enclosed to the present
report (Attachment “Press-clipping”).

It was also decided to create an e-mail distribution list in order to strengthen cooperation among the
trainees and promote their further joint initiatives aimed at better EITI implementation at the
regional level.
        Training participants are discussing long term plans to create a network of NGOs on EITI
implementation at the regional level. It is assumed that the network of NGOs will be established in
2014. The main focus of the network will be made at monitoring of government and extracting
companies’ financial expenditures, as well as other related issues.




3) Recommendations and lessons learned

    It is necessary to further strengthen the capacity of NGOs in the regions of EITI
     implementation at the regional level, especially in the field of public participation, financial
     monitoring and public needs assessment;
    Regional NGOs are very fragmented and need to focus on uniting their efforts, enhance
     skills of joint work, and develop common strategic and tactical decisions. This is the basis
     for successful interaction with the government and real public participation in decision-
     making;
    Pool of trainers on the EITI is very limited in Kazakhstan. There are no trainers capable of
     conducting training in Kazakh language. This impediment limits the scope of regional
  NGOs, as sub-national greatest need is learning in Kazakh language. That is necessary to
  train a pool of trainers on EITI including Kazakh-speaking experts;
 There is a greater need for wider informational campaign on opportunities of public
  monitoring and public participation in the decision-making through the EITI mechanism.


The present project proves to have a great impact in current national conditions. Upon
publication of the National Report with segregated data on social infrastructure projects,
favourable conditions for public monitoring were created. The main challenge for civil society
in Kazakhstan is that regional CSOs did not have tools and effective instruments to access
information on SIPs funded by the extracting companies. Therefore, project activities have
greatly contributed to raising awareness of regional stakeholders and provided comprehensive
training on public monitoring of SIPs. Regional communities face crucial need in high quality
training on EITI implementation and utilization of the latest international mechanisms for
effective public monitoring and follow-on activities. Results of the second training round
demonstrate high importance and positive impact in view of EITI implementation at the
regional level.



4) Conclusions


Following the training, Regional Coordinators in Uralsk organized a meeting with the Advisor
to Akim oft he city, where plans of local CSOs for SIPs public monitoring were presented. The
Advisor expressed his interest in the initiatives and positively evaluated public activities in the
thematic area.

In Kyzylorda, training results were presented at “Sustainable development. Civil society –
practices and cooperation prospects” conference, attended by the Deputy Akim of the Region,
representatives of Maslikhat and business structures. Stakeholders demonstrated positive
attitude towards new initiatives and expressed willingness to cooperate and provide necessary
support to the regional project implementation team.

It can be stated with confidence that the training courses were successfully completed and
highly evaluated by participants. The trainer’ perfomance was very professional and well-
received by the audience. Practical sessions were evaluated as the key ones; and participants
expressed their willingness to realize action plans using tools and methods presented during
training sessions. Currently, the designed action plans are being discussed in the regions with
key state agencies and extracting enterprises, and will be submitted to the project office shortly.

As a result of the EITI implementation, fractal information on SIPs is public. Information on
funds allocation (name of a company and amount of funds allocated in the framework of SIPs)
is shared in the National Reports on the EITI implementation in Kazakhstan (2010 and 2011).
The present project was aimed at training NGOs on SIP monitoring. As the result of project
activities, all NGOs engaged in the initiative (about 20-25 NGOs in each target region) have
been trained in SIP monitoring and given effective instruments in public participation, needs
assessment and public monitoring of SIPs with the goal to strengthen public engagement in oil
revenues distribution and decision-making. Trainees obtained comprehensive knowledge and
skills on step-by-step procedures and mechanisms of SIP monitoring, presented with detailed
information on the EITI concept and standards, ways of public involvement and citizen
participation.
Thus, we foresee that trained groups of NGOs would initiate SIP monitoring and utilize newly
gained knowledge and skills. The main impact is initiative groups becoming more interested
and motivated towards initiation and active participation in public monitoring of SIPs. The
group in Kyzylorda was one of the best examples of successful project activities, as they
already have conducted needs assessment (the research mentioned in the final report) and are
now ready to initiate SIP monitoring.

Final conclusion of the project is that all target beneficiaries and stakeholders have expressed
ultimate interest in the project findings and achievements and strive to further continue the
progress of the present initiative. It has been proved that the project brought significant impact
towards better EITI implementation in Kazakhstan with respect to full-fledged promotion of the
needs and demands of civil society, and, furthermost, improvement of living standards
countrywide.
