 Report No: ACS9460




 West Bank and Gaza
 Quality of Teaching in PA School
 Learning from Local Practices: Improving Student Performance in
 West Bank and Gaza




 June 12, 2014




 MNSHE

 MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:




This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                             2
P143564 Final Report




Learning from Local Practices:
Improving Student Performance in West
Bank and Gaza




Noah Yarrow, Husein Abdul-Hamid, Manal Quota and Ernesto Cuadra
Human Development Sector
MNSHD
Middle East and North Africa Region




                                       3
                                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... 5
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ 6
CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................................... 7
KEY FINDINGS ........................................................................................................................... 8
   I. METHODOLOGY .................................................................................................................... 9
   II. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SCHOOL PERFORMANCE IN THE PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES.......... 12
   III. HOW DO TEACHER CLASSROOM PRACTICES VARY ACROSS HIGH AND LOW-PERFORMING
   CLASSROOMS? ............................................................................................................................ 18
   IV. SCHOOL LEADERSHIP, TEACHERS AND SCHOOL FACILITIES AND THEIR INFLUENCES ON
   STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES ................................................................................................. 24
   V. CONCLUSION: POLICY IMPLICATIONS AND NEXT STEPS ....................................................... 31
ANNEX 1 – LOGISTIC AND FACTOR ANALYSIS RESULTS ......................................... 35
ANNEX 2 MODELS OF TEACHER LEARNING AND BEHAVIORAL CHANGE ........ 42




                                                                      4
Executive Summary
1.      We use the positive deviance approach to identify classrooms in the Palestinian territories
with above average student performance as measured by TIMSS and national assessments. We
investigate teacher classroom practices and school management practices through classroom
observations and survey data collection. When comparing high-performing and low-performing
classrooms, we find important differences in both how teachers use their time, and how schools
are run. Specifically, more effective teachers tend to use more student discussion in the
classroom, have a higher proportion of students engaged in learning, receive greater support and
conduct more outreach to parents. Effective management practices included contributions to the
school culture, school facilities and the school mission.1 Overall, we found statistically
significant relationships between classroom performance and the following parameters: teacher
accountability, school culture2, parental engagement, school facilities, school mission and
student recognition, student involvement and student-centered pedagogy3.
2.      Based on these findings, the team calls for a renewed focus on teachers, instructional
practice and monitoring of student learning outcomes in the upcoming Education Sector
Development Plan. Specifically, assistance to low-performing schools could include support
programs anchored on nearby schools that serve similar students with higher results. Peer
learning programs could support lower-performing classrooms to improve, while additional
support can be provided through training programs, school management and the teacher
supervisors. These recommendations are similar to those in the companion report from the
MoEHE.
3.      The purpose of the study is to provide timely information to the MoEHE for the
development of the Education Strategy 2014-2018, a draft of which was published in January
2014. It was not possible to collect student-level data or more detailed information on teacher
practices. Therefore, the conclusions of the study are correlational links between teacher
practices and learning impacts. Additional, in-depth investigations of specific teacher practices at
different grade levels, for different subjects, and for different student genders are of interest to
policy makers in the Palestinian Territories.




1
  Please see Annex 1, Logistic and Factor Analysis Results for a complete definition and description.
2
  As defined in the factor analysis (see Annex 1).
3
  As defined in the factor analysis (see Annex 1).


                                                                5
Introduction
4.     The motivation for this study is to contribute to the preparation of the new Palestinian
Education Strategy by shedding light on the school and classroom level factors that influence
student learning, and to identify good practices that can be generalized from high-performing
classrooms to those that need improvement. While most Palestinian children are in school,
performance on assessments indicates that many of them are not learning as much as they could.
This represents not only inefficiency in the use of public resources, but also a lost opportunity for
individual students and the society as a whole. The current study was carried out by the
Assessment and Evaluation Department (AED) of the Palestinian Ministry of Education and
Higher Education (MoEHE) with technical and financial support from the World Bank. The
analysis presented in this paper was prepared by the World Bank team as a complement to a
previous paper prepared by a team of experts from AED.4
5.      A broad base of research shows that teacher quality is a significant determinant of student
learning. Income, health, parent education and other factors contribute to learning outcomes, but
the single most important school-based determinant of student learning is teacher quality (e.g.
Hanushek, 2010 and Rivken et al., 2005). This study was designed to enable the MoEHE to
better understand the factors behind low levels of student learning and to identify the better
practices that lie behind the performance of positive outliers, or ‘positive deviants.’ Combined
with practices form other contexts that have a strong evidence base, this study will inform
MoEHE policy and investment choices to improve student learning outcomes through a program
of school management and classroom teaching change built on locally based success.
6.      For the purposes of this study, schools were classified by student performance in TIMSS
2011 and the 2012 Palestinian national exams. Classroom and school-based tools were then used
to gather information from both high and low-performing schools. A total of 122 public, private
and United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools were surveyed using four different instruments: (i) Stallings classroom
observations; (ii) school leadership survey; (iii) teacher survey; and, (iv) school facilities survey,
which are all provided in Annex 1.
7.      The study follows the positive deviance approach, which favors local problem solving
and local research (Zeitlin et al., 1990, Marsh et al., 2004, Pascale et al. 2010). Positive deviance
is the observation that some individuals in a population will implement certain practices and
consequently experience better outcomes than other members of the population with similar
resources (following Berggren and Ray, 2002 in Marsh et al., 2004). This approach is used here
to address the challenges of improving student learning in the Palestinian education system. By
gathering local evidence to increase the knowledge base, the team seeks to enable a dialogue and
public debate both at the level of policy makers and of practitioners. The working hypothesis is
‘better practices’ taken from local contexts are more easily transferred and have a higher

4
  Under Secretary of General Education Dr. Basri Saleh and the AED Team Dr. Mohammed Matar, Dr. Sahar Ouda, Mr. Khalid
Bsharat, Ms. Sajeda Atallah, Mr. Waheed Qutnah, Mr. Samer Alkhatib, Mr. Khalid Dian and Mr. Admad Abu Obaid, including
data collected by Dr. Samir Safi and Dr. Eid Dahadha “Lessons Learned from High Achieving Schools in Palestine” (MoEHE
2013). The authors would also like to thank Halsey Rogers, Yyannu Cruz Aguayo, Brian Blankespoor and Emma Paulette Etori
for their comments and contributions.


                                                            6
likelihood of implementation than those originating exclusively from outside the Palestinian
context. Examining this proposition constitutes the next step of the investigation.

Context
8.      Education is highly valued across the Palestinian Territories. School aged children as
well as parents eagerly express their commitment to education despite economic and other
constraints. This is reflected in the rates of enrollment, 94.4 percent for primary and 82.8 percent
secondary (Gross Enrollment Ratio, Total, 2012, World DataBank). However, achieving access
to schooling is only one step in the process of creating an educated and productive population
able to effectively survive in a highly complicated political climate. Despite high enrolment
rates and educational expenditures of approximately 4.9 percent of GDP (Caussen et. al, 2013)5,
results from national and international assessments indicate that student learning outcomes in the
Palestinian Territories are modest when compared to other countries with similar per-capita GDP
(figure 1). Almost half the student population does not meet the “low” international benchmark
in TIMSS and only 69.6 percent of students pass the high school Tawjihi exam6. Low student
learning outcomes can be addressed both by increasing average student performance and by
decreasing the achievement gap between students. This study focuses on quality instruction and
learning, an important aspect of effective education reform.




Data from EdStats in current USD, except for Palestinian GDP per capita, which comes from the Palestine Central
Bureau of Statistics; in order to improve visibility, not all countries are labelled

5
  Claussen et al. also report that education accounts for 15.7 percent of total public expenditure in 2012, at approximately $680
USD per student per year
6
  UNESCO, World Data on Education, 7th edition 2010/2011 retrieved on 28 April 2014,
http://www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/WDE/2010/pdf-versions/Palestine.pdf.


                                                                 7
Key Findings
9.      Using the positive deviance methodology, we find that classroom teaching practices and
school leadership activities are strong differentiators that are correlated to different levels of
student learning at the classroom level. Teachers in high-performing classrooms use a different
mix of instructional practices and are managed differently than teachers in low-performing
classrooms. In terms of instructional practice, while time devoted to instruction was very high
across Palestinian classrooms compared to international standards, differences in the type and
quality of activities by classroom performance were identified. Higher performing classrooms
have, among other things: (i) more interactive learning and less teacher-focused lecturing, for
example more interactions during class discussions, questions and answers etc., (ii) lower levels
of unengaged students than low-performing classrooms, (iii) teachers with greater levels of
lesson planning and observable motivation, and (iv) a higher level of utilization of classroom
resources such as visual aids, learning materials and ICT. It is also important to note that the
majority of low-performing classrooms were composed of all male students.

10.     Analyzing the data using the Principal Components Method, we find the strongest
differentiators7 associated with student achievement is the level of student participation in the
classroom (significant at 0.016), along with other factors such as student centered pedagogy
(significant at 0.002) and school culture (significant at 0.001) (Annex 1). For example, having a
high proportion of uninvolved students in a classroom reduces the chance of being a high-
performing classroom by 98 percent. Relatedly, employing a high proportion of student-centered
pedagogy including discussion and debates more than doubles the chance of being a high-
performing classroom. Classrooms in schools with a strong and positive school culture that
includes high teacher expectations of student performance and parent participation more than
doubles the probability of being a high-performing classroom, based on results from the
Principal Components analysis. Please see Annex 1 for details.
11.     We use these findings to provide evidence from Palestinian data for a series of policy
recommendations and actions: i) classroom pedagogic changes to improve student learning
outcomes, particularly the use of active discussions focused on student engagement and
participation; ii) school leadership focused on student learning, teacher support and parent
engagement and not only administrative management; and iii) related policy interventions to re-
enforce the Ministry’s goals of providing quality education to all citizens. Sharing of practices
between teachers and schools could occur, as many tools to improve Palestinian student
performance are known and used in a few high-performing Palestinian classrooms. When these
existing local “positive deviant” practices are combined with what has been shown to be
effective in other contexts, it is plausible that student learning can improve as measured by both
national and international assessments without large increases in educational funding levels.




7
 Based on the value of the standardized coefficients for those variables with statistical significance in the logistic regression;
Annex 1.


                                                                  8
  I.   Methodology

12.     The positive deviance approach originated in the context of nutrition, but is now used in
many other domains (Pascale and Sternin, 2005). The methodology focuses on identifying
individuals (in this case, teachers) who get above average results with the same inputs as other
members of the group being observed (Marsh et al., 2004). Logical deductions are then used to
select the most probable practices that account for the better-than-average success rate. We have
adapted this methodology here and added a second layer of analysis that involves grouping
different practices into categories for which we do find statistical significance. We consciously
chose this approach in an effort to anticipate the challenges of scale-up and transmission of likely
successful behaviors, while recognizing the outcome has more limited scientific validity than
other possible approaches.
13.     Classroom performance was differentiated based on students’ average achievement on
the 2011 international assessment (TIMSS 2011) and 2012 Palestine National Assessment at the
classroom level. TIMSS is taken by a nationally representative sample of classrooms in each
participating country. Individual classrooms that performed at or above the second TIMSS
international benchmark (schools achieving an average score of 475 or higher) or equivalent
level in the national assessment were selected as top performers. Classrooms performing at an
average of half a standard deviation or greater below TIMSS lowest international benchmark
(lower than an average of 350) or in the bottom 20 percent in terms of performance in math,
science, or Arabic language in the National Assessment were identified as low performing.
14.     Using this criterion, a total of 122 schools were selected to study classroom instructional
practices, school leadership, teacher’s conditions and perceptions, and school environment. Of
these schools, 78 were identified as high-performing schools and 44 were identified as low-
performing schools, of about 150 schools which participated in TIMSS. Ninety of the schools
selected for our study are located in the West Bank while 32 are located in Gaza. Table 1 shows
the general sample characteristics:

                  Table 1: School Sample Characteristics (add more details)
  School Type                    Number of Classrooms         Percentage of total
  Private                        22                           18
  Public                         84                           69
  UNRWA                          16                           13
  Total sample                   122                          100

15.     Classroom teacher practices were observed using the Stallings classroom observation
methodology at each school in the sample. The subjects observed included Math, Science and
Arabic at the 4th, 8th and 10th grade levels. Each teacher who taught a class in the tested subject at
a sampled school was observed once. In the case of the 8th grade, this was the same teacher who
completed the TIMSS 2011 questionnaire. In the case of 4th and 10th grades, these were teachers
of classes that participated in the national exams.
16.    Based on research pointing to the centrality of teachers in determining student learning
outcomes (e.g. Hanushek & Rivkin, 2010; Rockoff, 2004), the current study collected data using
the Stallings classroom observation tool (Table 2). This low-inference instrument generates
                                                  9
information about teacher and student time use that are directly comparable across different
types of schools and country contexts. Classroom observers can be trained in about a week’s
time to achieve a 0.8 or higher level of inter-rater reliability (Bruns et al. 2014). The tool
captures basic information about how teachers are teaching in classrooms and what the students
and teachers are doing, but it does not capture micro-level information about what is being
taught. The time-based survey method provides information about how teachers use class time
in a math class, for example, but does not capture information on the level of mathematics
taught, the difficulty of questions asked during student discussions or the strength or weakness of
student responses. The amount of time spent on academic activities is likely a necessary but
insufficient factor to explain the complex relationship between teacher classroom practices and
student learning. The quality of the use of that time is also important, as we will see below.

    Table 2: Stalling Observation Instrument Categories for Teacher and Student Time Use
                 Use of Time         Specific Practice
                                     Read Aloud
                   Academic
                   Activities        Demonstration/Lecture
                                     Student Discussion/Question and Answer
                                     Practice and Drill
                                     Classwork/Assignment
                                     Copying
                                     Verbal Instruction
                 Classroom
                 Management          Student Social Interaction
                                     Students Uninvolved
                                     Discipline
                                     Classroom Organization
                                     Administrative Tasks
                 Teacher
                                     Teacher Social Interaction or Teacher Uninvolved
                 Off-Task            Teacher Out of Room


17.     The Stallings observation instrument8 contains three sections of which only the
Classroom Snapshot was used for reasons of time and cost. The Classroom Snapshot consists of:
(i) identification of classrooms, number of adults and students present, the duration of the class,
the grade level, and the subject taught; (ii) classroom observations during class time to obtain
information on how the teacher spends his or her time and with whom, how the aides spend their
time and with whom, and the activities that occur in the classroom, and (iii) classification of the
different groupings of students during the class (single, pairs, small groups, large groups, whole
class etc). The tool consists of a series of frames in which each behavior/interaction is recorded
in four categories of: who, to whom, what, and how.
18.    The classroom snapshot data was recorded ten times during a given class period by a
trained observer who was not aware of the performance ranking of the classroom being


8
 The description of the Stallings method is adapted from the “Stallings Observation System” manual retrieved on
www.personal.psu.edu/wuh113/blogs/.../SOS_Manual-New.doc‎      . Retrieved 26 December 2013.


                                                             10
observed. The schools were informed that they would be visited, but the date and classroom to
be visited were not disclosed in advance.
19.    The assessment of school leadership was done using an adapted and translated version of
the OECD leadership toolkit and the TALIS school director questionnaire, as well as questions
from TIMSS 2011 to create a context-sensitive school leadership assessment.9 This modified
tool was subjected to an expert review by Ministry staff and then piloted at three schools prior to
implementation (see Annex 1).
20.    The tool to investigate teacher perceptions are based on the World Bank SABER-
Teachers framework and TIMSS instruments.10 Teachers were asked questions of their
perceptions related to the main teachers’ policy areas: leadership, qualifications, training and
development, motivation, and support level. Data was also collected on working conditions and
school facilities informed by the SABER and TIMSS survey instruments as well as specific
items from the School Snapshot of Management Effectiveness11. Student and parent interviews
were not conducted as part of the study for reasons of cost.
21.    Two teams of researchers, deployed in Gaza and the West Bank, were trained on the use
of the Stallings observation and the three survey instruments to conduct the field work. The
surveys were administered through the face-to-face interviews. Data was collected during the
months of March and April in the second term of school year 2012/2013. Data was cleaned by
AED and preliminary analysis was conducted by AED staff with support from World Bank staff.
22.     In order to identify factors to differentiate schools, data on teachers, school leadership,
and school infrastructure were first analyzed using the Principal Components method (following
Filmer 2001, among others). Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is used for two objectives:
(1) reducing the number of variables comprising the questionnaire while retaining the variability
in the data and (2) identifying hidden patterns in the data and classifying them based on the
amount of the information that can be attributed to them. For the purposes of this calculation, we
take all principal components to be orthogonal. The data is modeled as in equation (1):
                                     f(x)=b1 F1+b2F2+b3 F3+b4 F4 …. (1)
              where b represents different factor loadings and F represents the factor scores

23.     We used the Principal Components methodology to identify factors that explained
variation in the data of each instrument (classroom observation, school director interview,
teacher interview, facilities survey). Each factor was composed of several items from the specific
instrument, selected based on similarities to each other and their overall contribution to the
variation in the data set from the instrument. We then selected the five factors that contributed

9
  The OECD toolkit can be consulted at: http://www.oecd.org/education/school/44339174.pdf. Retrieved on 26 December 2013,
the TALIS Principal Questionnaire at http://www.oecd.org/edu/school/43081362.pdf. Retrieved on 17 January 2014, and the
TIMSS School Questionnaire at https://nces.ed.gov/timss/pdf/T11_Gr8_SchQ_USA_final.pdf. Retrieved on 17 January 2014.
10
   SABER-Teachers
http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/TCH/Rubrics_Teachers.pdf. Retrieved on
January 17, 2014.
TIMSS http://timssandpirls.bc.edu/timss2011/downloads/T11_TQM_8.pdf. Retrieved on January 17, 2014
11
   Snapshot for School Management Effectiveness
https://www.eddataglobal.org/documents/index.cfm?fuseaction=pubDetail&id=353. Retrieved on January 17, 2014


                                                           11
the most to that instrument as a way of summarizing the elements of the instruments with the
highest explanatory power. Essentially, it is splitting the variation into separate parts and then
ranking the parts by importance for each instrument.
24.    Once the principal factors were identified, logistic regression was used to identify the
magnitude of the potential explanatory power that each of the factors have on determining how
low-performing classroom could move to the high-performing category.

                  Logit(p)= log(    )= β0+β1X1+ β2X2+ β3X3+ β4X4+ β5X5…(2)
                where p is the probability of being a high-performing classroom

25.    The coefficient Exp(β) from the logistic regression quantifies the positive or negative
probability that a given characteristic will be found in a high-performing classroom. For
example, the value of Exp(β) is 3.41 for interaction in the classroom. This means that high-
performing classrooms are 3.4 times more likely to have a high level of interaction than low-
performing classrooms.
26.     There are a number of limitations to our study. One is that teachers were observed only
once, and only one teacher per school was observed. There is no estimation of changes in
individual teacher behavior across time (good days vs. bad days) or variation of teacher practices
within a school. Since this study focuses primarily on classroom level dynamics, we don’t
consider the lack of school-wide data as a major constraint. Another limitation of the study is
that student-level data and the motivational factors for teacher classroom practices were not
collected (e.g. why does one teacher use lecture almost exclusively and another use primarily
student discussion?). Understanding behavioral motivations would support attempts at
influencing them. For example, does the teacher not know how to engage students in a
discussion, or do they believe that discussion is an ineffective pedagogic practice? In terms of
student-level information, we expect that students are not assigned completely randomly to
teachers or schools and that this has some influence on both teacher practice and student
performance. We do not have student-level data that would allow a comparison of students to
ensure that high and low-performing classrooms are fully comparable. Another significant
limitation is the lack of information about the quality of specific teacher practices. Teacher A
lectured for the majority of the classroom time, but was the lecture relevant to the curriculum,
was it well presented, was it content information rich? Teacher B used student dialogue and
discussion, but was this a high-quality discussion about a relevant topic? The qualitative nature
of the activities is important, since it may mask important links to student learning. This study
was conducted to respond to the need of the Ministry for real-time information about teacher
classroom practices and so it was not possible to gather information on all optimal variables
which limited further econometric analysis at the student and within school related variables.

II.    General overview of school performance in the Palestinian Territories
27.    Student performance in the Palestinian Territories showed improvement between 2007
and 2011 as measured by the respective rounds of TIMSS. Despite this improvement, the
performance level of Palestinian students lags behind some of their peers in the MENA region
and significantly below the internationally constructed average. Analysis of the variation of
learning outcomes across schools in the Palestinian Territories has uncovered classroom

                                               12
practices that are associated with higher student learning. However, those are limited to a modest
number of schools, and instead, a large number of students in the Palestinian Territories have
poor learning outcomes. For example, in eighth grade math, about 48 percent of students scored
less than the “low” benchmark and only around 7 percent performed at the “high” or “advanced”
TIMSS 2011 benchmarks.12
28.     Many countries perform poorly on TIMSS and other international exams, particularly
developing and lower and middle income countries. Putting aside the Palestinian’s relative
performance, let us consider absolute performance. The “low” benchmark, which almost half of
Palestinian students did not meet, is “Students have some knowledge of whole numbers and
decimals, operations, and basic graphs.” (TIMSS 2011). An example question on 8th grade math
on TIMSS is:

       42.65 +5.748 = _____


29.    A bare majority of Palestinian students (56 percent) got this question correct. A more
challenging question asking students to create a chart showing the favorite sports of a group of
people was answered correctly by only 30 percent of students. The comparisons to other
countries are helpful to situate performance in an economic and developmental context, but
ultimately the Palestinian Territories needs to significantly improve the absolute level of student
achievement.
30.     Student learning outcomes in the Palestinian Territories can be characterized along three
dimensions: (i) performance level: overall low student learning levels when compared to
international averages; (ii) equity: high variation in student learning outcomes between schools;
and (iii) variation over time: fluctuations in test scores between different administrations of
TIMSS.
31.     Performance level: Poor student performance in the Palestinian territories is a persistent
issue. Although Palestinian students improved their learning outcomes between 2007 and 2011
as measured by TIMSS, eighth grade Palestinian students performed below the international
standardized average of 500 and below the 2011 participating countries’ averages in science
(473) and math (462). Student outcomes in the Palestinian Territories are at or below the lowest
International Benchmark in math and science,13 which puts them at a level of performance
comparable to Syria, Qatar, Oman and Saudi Arabia. MENA countries such as Jordan, Lebanon
and the UAE have higher student performance, yet they also do not reach the average
international benchmark.



12
   The TIMSS low benchmark measure students who are able to show some knowledge of whole numbers and decimals,
operations and basic graphs. Student that reach the TIMSS high benchmark are able to apply knowledge and understanding in a
variety of relatively complex situations while those in the advanced level are able to reason, draw conclusions, make
generalizations and solve linear equations.
13
   TIMSS defines the Low International Benchmark in science as students are: capable of recognizing some basic facts from life
and physical science. In math it is defined as: students have some knowledge of numbers and decimals, operations, and basic
graphs.


                                                             13
32.     Equity: Another issue faced by the MoEHE in the Palestinian Territories is high levels of
variance in student performance, a type of score dispersion, which raises serious concern as it
indicates a lack of equity of outcomes among students. Education is potentially an equalizing
force, allowing all students access to similar levels of achievement. However, students often
begin school with inequitable levels of achievement,14 and these differences can be either
augmented or lessened by the school system. In the Palestinian Territories, the magnitude of
difference between the top 10 percent and the lowest 10 percent in prior years were large for
both math and science student scores and are large compared both within the region and
internationally (see Graph 1).
                                                                                     Graph 1 – Score Dispersion TIMSS 2007 Science

                                                               350
                                                                                                                                                   High Dispersion &
                                                                         Qatar   High Dispersion &                                                 High Scores
     Difference in mean score between top and low 10 percent




                                                                                 Low Scores
                                                               300                                         Palestinian Territories

                                                                     Ghana
                                                                                                                                                                         Singapore
                                                                                                           Egypt
                                                               250                  Botswana


                                                                                                                             Romania        Malaysia

                                                               200                                        Saudi
                                                                                                          Arabia                                                     Japan
                                                                                                                                                                      Korea
                                                                                               El
                                                                                               Salvador
                                                               150



                                                               100
                                                                           Low Dispersion &
                                                                                                                                                             Low Dispersion &
                                                                           Low Scores
                                                                                                                                                             High Scores
                                                               50
                                                                     300             350                     400                     450               500         550               600
                                                                                                                               Mean score




14
   In 2011 only 38% of eligible students attended some form of preschool in the Palestinian Territories (PT) and most of them
attended private institutions staffed by inexperienced teachers with only secondary education credentials. The MoEHE only runs
3 preschools in the PT while the private sector runs the rest (1,132). ANERA, 2013.


                                                                                                                               14
33.    Equity can be conceived of as the absolute difference in performance and the distribution
of students between the two extremes. Eighth grade math results for TIMSS 2011 show that
about 48 percent of students score “below the low” benchmark and about 7 percent perform at
                                        the “high” or “advanced” benchmark (Graph 2). In 8th
                                        grade science about 41 percent of students score
                                        “below the low” benchmark, 27 percent score at the
                                        “low” benchmark, 23 percent at the “intermediate,” and
                                        only 10 percent at the “high” and “advanced”
                                        international benchmark. It is of concern that almost
                                        half of the student population is performing at “below
                                        the low” international benchmark. This suggests that
                                        high-performing schools are exceptions and that the
                                        majority of students in the Palestinian territories are
                                        participating in an education system that is not
                                        equipping them with the needed knowledge and skills
                                        to compete and in perform in the labor market or to
                                        participate and contribute to local and national
                                        institutions.
                                            34.    Other countries in the region have similar
                                            equity challenges. For example, in Jordan, 45 percent
                                            of students scored “below the low” benchmark and 6
percent at the “high,” none reached the “advanced” benchmark. In Lebanon, the figures were 27
percent for the “below the low” benchmark, and a combined 9 percent reached the “high” and
“advanced” benchmark. This contrasts with high-performing education systems that produce
students who perform at the advanced or high benchmarks, and have schools with much less
variation in their ability to produce high achieving students.
35.     Variation over time: The examination of Palestinian TIMSS results on three different
rounds of student assessment shows large fluctuations on test results between each round (Figure
2). In TIMSS 2003, the performance of 8th grade Palestinian students in science was among the
highest in MENA (average 435 points). However, the performance on 8th grade math (average
390 points) put Palestinian student performance second to the bottom of the range. On TIMMS
2007, outcomes of Palestinian students went down in both 8th grade subjects, decreasing to an
average score of 404 in science and 367 in math. In 2011, Palestinian student achievement levels
went up to an average of 420 in science and 404 in math. While some variation is expected, and
indeed improvements are hoped for as a result of different interventions, this level of variation is
considered high.




                                                15
                                       Figure 2: Palestinian student's mean
                                           performance in eighth grade

                                450

                                400

                                350

                                300
                                               2003            2007                2011

                                                       Math           Science




                     Figure 3: TIMSS: Mean performance on the mathematics scale
                                       for eighth grade students
             500
             400
             300
             200
             100
               0
                   Bahrain Algeria   Egypt,   Jordan Lebanon Oman   Qatar    Saudi     Syrian Tunisia United West
                                      Arab                                   Arabia     Arab           Arab    Bank
                                      Rep.                                            Republic        Emirates and
                                                                                                               Gaza

                                                    2003      2007          2011


36.     While student socio-economic status plays a role in learning outcomes, it is not
determinative. The study sample was stratified based on urban and rural school locations, which
are reflective of poverty levels and socioeconomic status. This stratification reduces the chances
that measured differences in student performance are due to socioeconomic status rather than
school-based factors. In addition, low and high performing schools were selected across the
strata and across districts on population size and number of schools.
37.     For reasons of time and cost, this study did not gather information from individual
students and parents to control for socio-economic status. We did ask School Directors to rate the
poverty level of their students using the same methodology as TIMSS 2011. Using this
subjective measure, there is only a very modest change in the values and significance level of our
findings (Annex 1). Further, a related analysis of the macro factors influencing student
performance in Jordan and the Palestinian Territories shows that contrary to expectations, socio-
economic factors do not play a determinative role in student achievement and can be overcome
with effective instructional practices and school support (Patrinos et al, forthcoming).



                                                              16
38.     To further isolate the role that income plays in student achievement for this sample, we
have mapped 104 of the 120 schools for which GIS data was available on a poverty map of West
Bank and Gaza, using data published in “Seeing Is Believing: Poverty in the Palestinian
Territories” (World Bank, 2014) (Figure 4). As can be seen from the map, there is a dispersion of
classrooms, with some high-performing classrooms in high-poverty areas and some low-
performing classrooms in low-poverty areas, and vice-versa. While student-assignment to
individual teachers and classrooms is likely to be non-random and there may be student income
variations between schools in a given locality, the map provides additional evidence for the
importance of teachers and schools in determining student learning outcomes in addition to
economic considerations.

                                             Figure 4: School Mapping




The locations of schools with high performing classrooms are represented by half-darkened circles; schools with low performing
classrooms are represented by darkened squares within a square. The “Poverty Headcount Rate” or HCR is the proportion of
individuals in each locality belonging to households that are poor. Higher concentrations are in darker colors.



                                                             17
III.         How do teacher classroom practices vary across high and low-performing
             classrooms?

39.     While there are many important non-school components to student achievement, the
overall quality of a country’s education system cannot exceed the quality of its teachers .15 There
is a strong body of evidence for teachers as the most important school-based factor for student
learning. Teacher classroom practices are a determinant factor in how and how much student
learning takes place. Results from a range of studies indicate that students tend to perform better
when their teachers spend more class time on subject matter related academic activities and when
teachers are able to keep them engaged in these activities as compared to teachers who do not
(e.g. Kane, et al. 2010; Lavy 2012; OECD 2012; Stallings 1985, World Bank 2010). These
findings align well with the intuitive conclusion that in order to learn in school, students and
teachers must be engaged in meaningful learning processes.

       (i)      Putting Palestinian teacher time use into context: regional comparisons
40.      Overall, Palestinian classroom time-on-task compares very favorably to other non-
MENA countries for which data is available (Figure 5). Indeed, at 90 percent across all types of
schools surveyed, Palestinian teachers have the highest proportion of time devoted to academic
activities recorded in the Stallings observation literature reviewed by the team. The total average
teacher time dedicated to social interactions or time outside the classroom was one percent.
However, these results are less exceptional when compared with other similar observations
carried out in the region. For example, in Jordan, authors found that teachers were off task just
over 5 percent of the time, and in Morocco the figure was slightly lower, with both reporting that
“at almost no time were teachers observed to be outside the classroom.”16 Relatedly, Abadzi
reports teacher engagement in a sample of classrooms for an average of 87 percent of the class
time in Tunisia and 83 percent in Morocco (Abadzi 2009).




15
   Original quote: “The quality of an education system cannot exceed the quality of its teachers,” from an un -named South
Korean education official quoted in Barber and Mourshed, 2007
16
   Student Performance in Reading and Mathematics, Pedagogic Practice, and School Management in Jordan, RTI 2012 and
Student Performance in Reading and Mathematics, Pedagogic Practice, and School Management in Doukkala Abda, Morocco,
RTI 2012.


                                                           18
                                                              Figure 5: Classroom Time-on-Task17

                                          100%     90%
            Percent of Total Class Time    90%                                                                                   85%
                                           80%
                                           70%                                                64%        64%          65%
                                                                                    61%
                                           60%               52%        55%
                                           50%
                                                               39%
                                           40%                            32%
                                                                                      28%         27%                   25%
                                           30%                                                              24%
                                           20%                                13%                                                  15%
                                                       9%          9%                     11%        10%        12%         9%
                                           10%          1%                                                                             0%
                                            0%
                                                   Palestine Mexico      Peru       Jamaica     Brazil   Honduras Colombia Stallings
                                                              D.F.                                                           Good
                                                                                                                            Practice
                                                                                                                           Indicator
                                                 Academic Activities      Classroom Management                 Teacher Off-Task


41.     The Hawthorne effect, whereby individuals perform better when they are being observed,
likely contributes to these high results. However, the amount of academic time use found in the
results for the Palestinian Territories and other countries in the region is so much greater than
those for other observations that were also subject to the Hawthorne effect as to suggest a true
underlying difference. These results indicate that teachers in the Palestinian Territories and other
countries in the region are focused on instruction despite modest levels of student achievement,
and lead us to examine what instructional practices are used.

     (ii)                                 International Comparisons
42.     The Stallings data from the Palestinian Territories can be interpreted in the context of
other data recently published from Latin America (Bruns et al. 2014) and elsewhere. This is
primarily a comparison of convenience, since while Stallings and related tools are widely used to
observe teacher classroom practices around the globe, there are relatively few countries that have
publically available data for comparison. Palestinian scores on TIMSS 8th Grade Math exceed
those of several Latin American countries included in the Bruns data set. For example,
Palestinian students achieved an average score of 404 on the 8th Grade Math section of TIMSS
2011, while Hondurans achieved an average score of 338,18 putting Honduras approximately 2/3
of a standard deviation below the Palestinian Territories, despite the fact that the two countries’
GDP per capita are very similar. Colombian students achieved a score of 380 on TIMSS 8th
Grade Math in 2007, well below the Palestinian 2011 score, while its GDP per capita is almost
three times larger.19 These differences in international student achievement correlate with

17
   The “Good Practice Indicator” is a constructed benchmark for the United States – Bruns, Filmer and Patrinos 2011
18
   In this instance 9th graders were tested in Honduras, putting them at a slight advantage in comparison to Palestinian students.
19
   Colombia and Honduras have 2011 per capita GDP of $7,149 and $2,262, respectively, in current USD (WorldBank DataBank
2014), while Palestinian GDP per capita is $2,489 in current dollars, according to the Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics
(2014).


                                                                                     19
differences in teacher classroom practices: the average amount of time spent on instruction by
Palestinian Authority teachers exceeded all available measurements for countries in Latin
America as well as the best practices guidelines, which likely explains a portion of why
Palestinian students performed better than Latin American countries that participated in TIMSS.
What we seek to uncover is given the magnitude of the difference in class time use, why aren’t
Palestinian students doing even better?
43.     The graph below (Figure 6) disagregates total classroom time off task into three
components: (i) teacher social interaction with students, where the teachers are interacting with
students about non-instructional issues; (ii) teacher social interactions with other staff or visitors;
and, (iii) teacher absence from the classroom during class time. While the relatively high use of
classroom time for instructional activities is consistent across low and high perfroming schools
in the Palestinian context, a large variance in terms of student performance was observed. The
key question examined below is wheather teachers in schools with higher levels of student
performance use time allocated to teaching differently than those in schools with lower levels of
student performance, and if so, how.

                 Figure 6: International Comparison Teacher Time-on-Task

                          14%
                          13%                                 Teacher out of
                          12%                                 the Room
                          11%
                          10%
                           9%                                 Teacher Social
                           8%                                 Interaction or
                           7%                                 Uninvolved
                           6%                                 Teacher Social
                           5%                                 Interaction with
                           4%                                 Students
                           3%
                           2%
                           1%
                           0%
                                 Palestine



                                     Brazil

                                 Honduras
                                  Jamaica
                                 Colombia




                                      Peru
                                Mexico D.F.




   (iii)   Successful Practices within the Palestinian context
44.     Not surprisingly, some of the variance in student performance is correlated with
differences in observed teacher classroom practices. For example, in high-performing public
school classrooms observed for this study, teachers dedicate 34 percent of class instructional
time to the “discussion/debate/question and answer” category on average, while in low-
performing public school classrooms the student discussion category is 19 percent (Figures 7 and
8). The average non-participation of students is 11 percent in high-performing public school


                                                  20
classrooms and 20 percent in low-performing public school classrooms. These and other teacher
mediated factors, including the allocation time to the “practice and drill” category are correlated
to and likely contribute to the variation in student achievement. Teachers who invest more
classroom time in student discussion and are able to engage more of the students are, on average,
more likely to have higher achieving students. This is true for the grade four data presented
below in Figures 7 and 8, and some of the trends hold true for higher grades for which Stallings
data was collected. However, it is not simply that teacher-centered approaches are ‘bad’ and
student discussions and other student-centered approaches are ‘good’ in terms of raising student
performance. Rather, it appears from this evidence at the 4th grade level that a mix of
instructional practices biased in favor of student discussions and interaction is likely to produce
the highest learning outcomes. We find support for this conclusion in other research which finds
involving students in the class and in the construction of knowledge is associated with higher
levels of learning, though the evidence is limited. The use of discussion as an instructional tool
for science has been examined in other educational contexts (e.g. Newton et al. 2010, World
Bank 2010), but there is very little evidence to show what types of discusions are the most
effective in raising student achievement in different grades and subjects.

       Figure 7: Teacher Classroom
                                                   Figure 8: Teacher Classroom Activities Low
     Activities High Performing Public
                                                           Performing Public Grade 4
                  Grade 4




                                                                                    Reading, listening,
                                                                                    repetition
             14%                                        14%
                                                                                    Discussion
                              32%                                    33%
    11%
                                            20%                                     Tasks and chores

      10%                                                                           Non-participation

                                                       15%
                                                                 19%                Classroom
                                                                                    Management
                    34%




45.    The pattern of greater class time devoted to discussion and related activities in higher
performing classrooms applies to higher grades in public schools as well (Figures 9, 10). For
grade 10, teachers in low-performing classrooms use this approach 18 percent of the time, while
teachers in high-performing classrooms use discussion 34 percent of the time. However, there is
a convergence in student non-participation between low and high peforming classrooms at rates
lower than either category at grade four; teachers in high and low-performing classrooms have an
average student non-participation rate of 5 and 6 percent in grade 10, respectively.


                                                  21
     Figure 9: Teacher Classroom Activities                                                 Figure 10: Teacher Classroom Activities High
         Low Performing Public School                                                              Performing Public School G10
                 Classrooms G10
                                                                                                                                           Reading, listening,
                                                                                             5%
            7%                                                                                          6%                                 repetition
      6%
                                                                                                                                           Discussion
                                                                                                                        35%
                       47%                                                                 20%                                             Tasks and chores
      22%

                                                                                                                                           Non-participation
           18%

                                                                                                        34%                                Classroom
                                                                                                                                           Management



46.     When the data is disagregated by subject, the differences for student non-participation
and discussion variable become very large for Arabic, but not so for the other subjects. There
are large observable differences in teacher classroom practices in Arabic language instruction
across grades 4, 8 and 10, particularly in the amount of discussion (Figure 11). One
interpretation of these trends is that greater use of discussion-based pedagogic approaches may
decrease both student non-participation and decrease the amount of time required for classroom
management.
                              Figure 11: Teacher Classroom Activities Arabic Instruction

                 40%
                                                                                                                Low-performing
                                                                                                              Low                classroom
                                                                                                                  Performing Public   School
                 35%                                                                                          Arabic Instruction
                                                                                                                Arabic (public school)
                                                                                                              High Performing Public
                                                                                                                High-performing        School
                                                                                                                                  classroom
                 30%
                                                                                                              Arabic Instruction
                                                                                                                Arabic (public school)
                 25%


                 20%


                 15%


                 10%


                 5%


                 0%
                       Reading, listening,   Discussion   Tasks and    Non-participation    Classroom
                          repetition                      activities                       Management




47.     The use of discussion as a pedagogic tool is correlated with higher peformance in Arabic
classes across grades, but this does not hold true for other subjects, as there is much less
variation in the allocation of teaching time between high and low-performing classrooms in the
two other subjects examined, Science and Math (Figures 12 and 13). The reason for this is
unclear and the directionality of some of the differences is the opposite of expected (discussion
in science), while the magnitude of difference remains small. This finding may be related to the

                                                                                   22
complexity and specificity of teaching, where certain pedagogic approaches are effective for
specific subjects but may be less effective for other subjects and may vary in effectiveness by
grade. For example, high quality science instruction is assumed to include a significant protion
laboratory and other practical work. An alternative explanatory factor could be lack of teacher
mastery of content,20 a concern particularly in higher grades, though this study did not gather
data on teacher subject knowledge. It is also possible that since Palestinian scores on national
and international assessments are on average lower for math and science than Arabic, it may be
that math and science are taught ineffectively even in the relatively high-performing classrooms.
Finally, while not captured with these instruments, the quality of the discussion or other
pedagogic activity is likely important in addition to the absolute quantity of that activity (World
Bank 2010, among others). Put another way, low-quality discussions are likely to have as little
impact on student learning as low-quality teacher-centered lectures; high quality lectures are
likely preferable to low-quality student-centered discussions.

48.     Other research in the region has found teacher-centered pedagogy to be prevalent. For
example, when looking at UNWRA schools in West Bank, Gaza and Jordan, Hardman (2013)
found that teaching practice was “largely teacher-fronted talk made up of teacher explanation,
teacher-led recitation, cued elicitations and use of chalk/white board.” Elementary teachers were
observed using predominantly teacher-centered lecture approaches, rarely asked open ended
questions and only seven percent of observed teachers consistently provided feedback to students
on oral responses (Hardman, 2013).
Figure 12: Teacher Classroom Activities Math                  Figure 13: Teacher Classroom Activities Science

           Low                                                           Low              PublicSchool
                                                                              Performing Public
            Low Performing  Public
                Perfoming Public   School
                                 School     Math
                                        Classroom                      Low  Performing           School Science
          Instruction                                                    Classroom
                                                                       Instruction  (Science)
            (Math)
           High Performing Public School Classroom                       High Performing Public School
           High Performing Public School Math                          High  Performing Public School Science
                                                                         Classroom (Science)
            (Math)
          Instruction                                                  Instruction
             40%                                                          60%
             35%                                                          50%
             30%
             25%                                                          40%
             20%                                                          30%
             15%                                                          20%
             10%
              5%                                                          10%
              0%                                                           0%




20
   Marshall & Sorto, 2012; Hanushek and Rivkin, 2006, Hill, Rowan, and Ball, 2005; Eide, Goldhaber, and Brewer, 2004;
Metzler & Woessman, 2012 all find positive relationships between teacher subject knowledge and student performance, however,
the size of this impact is generally less than 0.1 SD in student scores


                                                            23
49.     In summary, although almost all Palestinian teachers teach during class time, the use of
this time varies widely. There are large differences in the amount of time teachers allocate to
discussion, and in the levels of student engagement, particularly in the lower grades. Some of
these differences persist in upper grades, particularly in Arabic pedagogy. In the next section we
expand our view beyond the classroom to examine the context in which teachers teach and how
they are managed and supported.

IV.    School leadership, teachers and school facilities and their influences on
       student learning outcomes

50.      There is a growing body of evidence on the impact and importance of school leadership
(e.g. Grissom et al. 2013, Bruns et al. 2011). Using a survey tool, we investigated the
perceptions and practices of school leaders and teachers across the domains of teacher
interactions, preparedness, satisfaction and support by Supervisors and School Directors as well
as the availability of learning materials and the quality of school facilities. In interpreting the
results, we are mindful of the potential for reverse-causality and self-reinforcing relationships.

       (a) Teacher interactions

51.     For the purposes of this study, teacher interaction encompasses three elements: i) teacher
interactions with parents, ii) interactions between teachers, and iii) teacher interactions with
students. When comparing practices in schools that house high and low-performing classrooms,
we find large differences in behaviors and perceptions. This study was not designed to make
causal claims, for example that higher teacher satisfaction causes improved student learning,
since indeed improved student learning could be a cause for increased teacher satisfaction.
Nonetheless, there are clear associations between particular behaviors and student learning
outcomes which are likely to be useful in explaining differences in student performance in the
Palestinian Territories.
Interaction with parents and high parental involvement is correlated with higher student
achievement

52.     Not surprisingly, high parental involvement is positively associated with higher student
learning outcomes. According to
responses from teachers in high-                  Figure 14: Parental support to students
performing      classrooms,      parental
involvement in school activities is                   High performing       Low performing
reported to be at 45 percent, compared 80
with 11 percent parental involvement in 60
school activities at low-performing 40
classrooms. Directors of schools report 20
that when parents are informed about         0
school performance, school rules, or are            Parental     Parental support General parental
given advice to support them when               participation in   for student       support for
helping their children with homework,           school activities achievement         students
they are more likely to engage with their

                                                24
children and encourage them to perform better. School directors with high-performing
classrooms report other important areas for parental involvement including communication about
children’s performance and behavior, workshops for parents and promoting parent-teacher
conferences.

Cooperative experiences and meaningful forms of teacher cooperation can impact student
learning outcomes

53.     Recent evidence from other contexts suggests that cooperative and collaborative
experiences such as observing peers, mentoring, peer coaching or participation in a network of
teachers with a common objective is a more effective form of teacher learning and development
than simple exchanges of knowledge for example sharing lesson plans (OECD, 2012). Based on
international data from the Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) in 2008, more
traditional forms of teacher cooperation, such as the exchange of knowledge, which includes
attending workshops or seminars and exchange of general concerns of teachers, is most prevalent
across education systems globally but is likely less effective in improving teacher performance in
the classroom than other more collaborative approaches (OECD, 2013).
54.     Based on the results of the teacher survey in the Palestinian territories, teachers largely
cooperate through the less effective exchange of knowledge, which places them in line with the
practices of many education systems, with some large differences in prevalence between high
and low performers. Eighty-five percent of teachers in high-performing classrooms discuss and
coordinate course homework with other teachers at least once a week compared to 20 percent of
teachers in low-performing classrooms. Targeted cooperation for specific student age groupings
happens at least once a week for 21 percent of high-performing teacher classrooms and only 4
percent in low-performing teacher classrooms, according to teacher self-reports.

                                  Figure 15: Teacher cooperation

                                 High performing        Low performing

          90
          80
          70
          60
          50
          40
          30
          20
          10
           0
                 Teacher     Teacher   Cooperation    Teacher        Teacher Teachers who
               discussions cooperation between       meetings      exchange on     discuss
                  about     based on      teachers (attending at   pedagogy (at selected
                 student   student age teaching the least 1 per     least once    topics in
               homework       groups    same grade     week)        per week) education (1
                                         or subject                            to 3 times per
                                                                                   week)




                                                   25
55.     The results of our teacher survey demonstrate that teachers in high-performing
classrooms invest more of their time interacting with fellow teachers through activities such as
discussions on courses and teaching techniques, coordination of homework and co-teaching than
teachers in low-performing classrooms. This suggests that teacher cooperation and collaboration
has not become an institutionalized practice in Palestinian schools, and that the quality of the
cooperation taking place could emphasize more cooperative and collaborative activities. Teacher
satisfaction could potentially be an influencing factor in determining the level of teacher
cooperation and interaction.
56.     Evidence from teacher surveys reveals that teachers in high-performing classrooms are
more likely to be satisfied (90 percent) than teachers in low-performing classrooms (70 percent).
Additionally, only 45 percent of teachers in low-performing classrooms believe that teaching is a
satisfactory profession, compared to 70 percent of teachers in high-performing classrooms.
However, linkages between teacher job satisfaction and on the job cooperation were not
examined within this study, making it difficult to draw any conclusions.

Teacher education qualifications combined with training have the potential to improve
student-learning outcomes

57.     Higher levels of education for teachers and school directors were associated with higher
student performance levels: low-performing classrooms had eight percent more directors and
teachers without a Bachelor’s degree equivalent. While it is promising that many teachers and
directors in the Palestinian Territories hold university and college level degrees, it is important to
note that educational
qualifications are only a                  Figure 16: Minimum Education Qualifications
part of the equation
                                                    High performing      Low performing
towards becoming an
effective           teacher. 50
Evidence from other 40
contexts suggests that the 30
role teacher certification 20
and              additional 10
qualifications play in          0
improving            student           Teacher holds a      Teacher holds a 2-year Principal holds a 2-
outcomes        is      less         university teaching       college degree      year college degree
important than the quality                certificate
of     these     programs,
particularly the inclusion of practical learning experiences (Boyd et al. 2009, Yoon et al. 2007).




                                                  26
58.     As part of their professional
development, teachers in the                    Figure 17: Teacher professional development
Palestinian Territories participate in                            participation
training activities but the level of
participation varies between the                       High performing       Low performing
high        and      low-performing 100
classrooms. The best practice
identified was in UNRWA schools           80
with high-performing classrooms,          60
where teachers consistently report
higher teacher training enrollment        40
rates. For example, 68 percent of         20
UNRWA high-performing teachers
enrolled in sessions on handling           0
individual student needs in the last             General        Student    Individualized ICT Pedagogy
two years compared to 33 percent                 Training    Assessment      Instruction
of non-UNRWA low-performing
teachers. The large variation in participation in trainings is also likely related to multiple factors
including the availability of trainings, location of the trainings, teachers’ workload, directors’
attitudes towards trainings and the release time given for teachers to participate.
Performance-based visits by Supervisors

59.    The conceptualization of teacher supervisors is changing across many education systems.
The role is shifting away from a purely authority-based relationship with a strong focus on
accounting for progress though the official curriculum toward a relationship that includes
mentorship, support and cooperative learning. This is the case in the Palestinian Territories,
where the title of “Inspector” was changed recently to that of “Supervisor” to reflect this new
conception. Our study found that supervisors visit schools with low-performing classrooms
more often than high performers: 54 percent of teachers in low-performing schools report that
they were visited 2-4 times per semester by a supervisor compared to 26 percent of teachers in
high-performing schools. This appears to be an appropriate allocation of scarce resources to
those schools most in need. Since supervisors visit both types of schools, they could be a
conduit for transferring effective practices between classrooms and schools.

Teacher Practices and Teacher Performance Standards
60.    The classroom observations we conducted did not explicitly use the Palestinian Teacher
Standards as a rubric. However, we thought it would be relevant to briefly link the current
discussion of teacher classroom practices to these standards. A set of seven teacher performance
standards have been identified by the National Institute for Educational Training (Table 3).
Overall, our evidence suggests uneven compliance levels towards these standards, with higher
achieving classrooms doing better than others.




                                                 27
                          Table 3: National Teacher Performance Standards21
                                  National Teacher Performance Standards (date)
1      Planning for school improvement based on well-defined vision and mission
2      Engaging with internal and external stakeholders to facilitate the performance of school duties
3      Maintaining the school’s financial and material resources
4      Maintaining a high level of quality teaching and learning
5      Building a friendly school environment for the students to motivate learning and build stronger
       bonds to the school
6      Utilizing various assessment tools to support improved student learning
7      Utilizing technology in teaching, learning and school administration

61.     The first of these Standards is planning for school improvement based on a well-defined
vision and mission, where teachers are expected to first participate in the process of creating and
publicizing the school’s vision and mission. Results from the surveys conducted indicate that few
teachers, whether in high or low-performing classrooms, actively promote or participate in the
process of school mission and vision development. Evidence we collected does suggest that
teachers are spending time to establish internal and external relations (Standards Two and Three)
that are ultimately helping the school improve performance. This is evident by teacher
communication with parents, and by internal communication between peers, which is higher for
teachers in higher-performing classrooms.
62.     Teachers report significant time spent on collaboration and cooperation, especially in
high-performing classrooms (Standard Four). Teachers are interested in professional
development opportunities but may not necessarily translate that into updated pedagogy or
effective teaching in the classroom. Building a school friendly environment for the students
(Standard Five) is a task that begins with the school director and includes teachers and students.
The resources and school materials need to be maintained and preserved throughout the years of
usage, and the culture of creating a safe school environment is a challenge as teachers and
students report issues with theft, misbehavior and vandalism.
63.     Standard Six is related to student assessment and is supported through practices such as
the national examination system, which was used to help identify classrooms for this study. At
the classroom level, student assessment is considered essential to effective lesson plan design
and is a key feedback mechanism for teacher performance. This area could be strengthened
across grades and schools. Similarly, Standard Seven, the use of ICT in schools and by teachers
is limited. Low-performing classrooms utilize technology at an average of two percent
compared to five in high-performing classrooms. This is likely a reflection of the absolute
availability of ICT resources in addition to pedagogical choices made by the teachers.




21
  Authors’ translation from The National Institute for Educational Training (2010), School improvement based on standards: The
Palestinian standards of effective schools. Ministry of Education and Higher Education.




                                                             28
       (b) School Leaders

School Leaders can be Instructional Leaders

64.      School directors hold multiple roles that span human resources, financial management
and academic leadership (Hans and Brewer, 2013, Grisson, Loeb, and Maseter, 2013, Branch G.
F., Hanushek E. A., Rivkin S. G, 2012). This broad workload can mean that directors focus on
immediate needs in the administrative side of their work while their role of academic or
instructional leader is neglected (Darling-Hammond et. al, 2007). This trend is apparent in the
Palestinian Territories, where school directors report that they are over-stretched and have little
time to focus on quality classroom instruction. This is a challenge that is shared with many other
school systems. In the Palestinian Territories, surveyed directors reported issues that they saw as
limiting student learning outcomes, three of which are directly linked to their roles as school
leaders: technical direction, external communication and administrative management.
65.     First, directors report that their role as a technical director includes a range of tasks such
as evaluating teacher performance, knowledge and understanding of subjects through evaluative
measures, management of professional development courses, and the management of other non-
academic activities. Second, directors have a role in assuring external communication with
parents and other stakeholders includes informing parents about teachers’ accomplishments and
the school’s academic level, and organization of external events. Third, school directors have an
administrative management responsibility and are required to manage and allocate school
resources. Based on this information, it is clear that School Directors have the potential to
influence teacher performance and student learning outcomes in their schools. It also appears
that there may be gains from delegating some of the responsibilities of School Directors to others
(e.g. administrative functions), in favor of a focus on instructional leadership.
66.     The greatest potential student learning gains are likely to come from increasing the
instructional leadership element of school management. There is some evidence from other
contexts that effective school leadership leads to higher student learning outcomes as directors
increase the time and energy devoted to support improvement of instruction (e.g. Darling-
Hammond et al, 2007, Reitzug et al., 2008). However, these types of changes need to be coupled
with support to School Directors, both to train them on how to be effective instructional leaders
and the authority and resources to delegate some of their other functions.

School directors and student behavior

67.    School directors indicated the following issues affecting student performance: attendance,
cheating on exams, theft among students, verbal abuse among students, physical abuse among
students, expulsion, schools seeking community assistance in resolving behavioral issues.
Teachers report varying rates of disruptive students in the classroom, vandalism, and rule
adherence. In all cases, lower student performance is associated with higher levels of student
misbehavior. It is likely that each factor contributes to the other.

68.    Student behavior was identified in the analysis as strongly negatively associated with
high levels of student learning outcomes. Variations in student learning outcomes between high
and low-performing classrooms in schools are apparent and school directors indicated that

                                                 29
misbehavior on school premises is connected to poor student learning outcomes across classroom
types. In addition, directors in schools with low performing classrooms reported spending a
larger amount of time managing student misconduct, which ranged from skipping school to
vandalism of school property.
69.     Classrooms with low levels of student performance are located in schools which suffer
from a higher rate of disciplinary and behavioral problems among their student populations.
Violence and the prevalence of physical assault, verbal abuse or derogatory language is almost
double the rate present in schools with high-performing classrooms. It is not surprising that
teachers in schools with lower performing classrooms are dedicating more of their time to
classroom management and containment of problematic and disruptive behavior. We presume
that the relationship between student performance and instruction is dynamic (e.g. low-quality
instruction can contribute to student misbehavior and student misbehavior can contribute to low-
quality instruction).

                                    Figure 18: Student behavioral issues
                                          High performing     Low performing

         90
         80
         70
         60
         50
         40
         30
         20
         10
          0
              Cheating   Verbal abuse Physical Expulsion     School seeks Disruptive   Vandalism     Students
                            among abuse among                 community students in                adhering to
                           students   students                 assistance     the                  school rules
                                                                  with    classroom
                                                              behavioral
                                                                 issues



Poor facilities and a lack of school resources are a distraction

70.      School directors are unified in their dissatisfaction with the level of financial resources
and physical facilities of their schools, and link these shortcomings with poor student learning
outcomes on surveys. Nonetheless, the quality, availability and use of school resources and
facilities vary across schools in the Palestinian Territories. Three key issues were identified in
relation to school facilities.
71.      First, schools that do not maintain regular and consistent communication with the
MoEHE, particularly when placing a request for maintenance or new facilities, are less likely to
have extra facilities such as a multipurpose room, space for physical education and other sporting
activities, or green spaces within the school grounds. Second, teaching and learning tools used by
schools varies across schools in association with the level of performance, as well as the
presence of the school mission statement at the entrance and displays of student work on the
walls. Third, higher performing classrooms are more likely to be located schools that maintain

                                                        30
their school facilities and show pride in student achievements by displaying the school ranking.
(Annex 1: School Facility survey analysis).

 V.    Conclusion: Policy implications and next steps

72.     This study set out to examine areas for improvement in low-performing classrooms based
on promising practices in high-performing classrooms to inform the Education Development
Strategic Plan 2014-2019. Palestinian children have a school enrolment rate that is high relative
to other developing countries and Palestinian teachers use instructional time better than other
contexts for which comparable data is available. Why then are their achievement levels so
modest?
73.     This study found that more effective teachers tend to use more discussion in the
classroom, have a higher proportion of students engaged in learning, receive greater support and
conduct more outreach to parents. We found statistically significant relationships between
classroom performance and the following parameters: teacher accountability, school culture,
parental engagement, school facilities, school mission and student recognition, student
involvement and student-centered pedagogy. While we make no causal claims, it is reasonable to
predict that practices such as engaging more students in learning are more likely to lead to higher
learning outcomes than not.
74.     The findings of our study in and of themselves are not surprising, and align well with
research from other countries and sources. What is different about our approach is that we have
identified Palestinian teachers and school directors who already know how to implement these
promising practices, and could share them with their colleagues. This contrasts with other
approaches, many of which embrace an externally driven reform program. Instead of looking
only to Shanghai or Helsinki, Palestinian educators can look to their peers for ways to improve
student learning outcomes. Research suggests this peer-based localized knowledge is more
likely to be used and translated into changed practices (Jackson et al. 2009, Birko 2004, Marsh et
al. 2004). This is not to suggest that Palestinian educators have nothing to learn from
international experience; on the contrary, there is a clear need to continually enrich teachers and
school leaders. By combining what works locally with approaches for which there is good
evidence internationally, Palestinian students should be able to significantly improve their
learning outcomes.
75.     The MoEHE has invested heavily in recent years to upgrade teacher skills, following the
Palestinian Teacher Education Strategy (2008), which anchored the Palestinian Education Sector
Development Plan (2008-2012). The plan focused on quality, with the core aim of improving
teaching and learning in public schools through investments in pre-service and in-service teacher
training. The policy response has included investments in these areas in recent years, for
example the expansion of classroom experience during pre-service training, and a greater
emphasis on practices as opposed to more theoretical approaches. However, teacher behavior is
well established in research literature as difficult to change, and based on the data collected for
this study, teacher classroom practices still have much room for improvement. We see the
Teacher Education Strategy and prior Education Sector Development Plan as appropriate but as
yet uncompleted agendas. The 2014-2019 strategy definition is an opportunity to strengthen and
re-commit to the quality agenda through improved teacher practice and school leadership.

                                                31
76.     As a result of this and other research as well as their own experience, the Palestinian
authorities are aware of the deficiencies in schools and classrooms. The current task is to design
effective policy to implement changes that will positively impact student learning as soon as a
part of the next Education Sector Development Plan. Based on the evidence collected and
discussions with the MOEHE, we make the following recommendations:
Teachers:
  I.        Support teachers to use pedagogy that incorporates more active participation of
            students through high-quality discussions, debates and question and answer sessions,
            particularly in the lower grades and in Arabic language classes. Support this through
            school-wide initiatives that include peer-feedback between teachers and cross-
            observation of each other’s classrooms both within and between schools. Teachers
            should be skilled at a broad set of pedagogic approaches of which lecture and student-
            centered discussion are simply two examples. These approaches should be tailored to
            specific topics and student needs and the teacher should be able to choose among
            these instructional options to achieve maximum student learning.
 II.        Organize school-based training of teachers and school directors responsible for
            promoting and facilitating cooperation among teachers within schools to support
            recommendation I, above. Mentoring could take place within and between schools for
            highly effective staff, and mentors and mentees could be incentivized through
            recognition and professional advancement. Prioritize lower performing schools for
            this assistance.
III.        Strengthen teachers’ knowledge and skills to design, conduct and analyze regular
            student assessment and to use this information for lesson planning and student
            support planning. Classroom assessment is the measurement of student learning. If
            students are not learning the material, classroom instruction should be adjusted in
            response. From this perspective, the assessment is not an end in itself, but a means to
            improve pedagogy. Encouragement and support for formative and summative
            classroom assessment can be provided through existing professional development
            programs, peer-to-peer teacher exchanges and supervisor evaluation and support.
IV.         Support active parent participation by requesting that key student assignments be
            shared with parents either before or after submission (with teacher feedback
            included). Design instruction to include parents, for example by asking students to
            include information gathered from family members. Reach out to parents for support
            and include them in student successes through notes, phone-calls or invitations to join
            occasional school-based activities.
School Directors:
 V.         Support school directors' to fulfil their instructional leadership role and shared
            responsibility for student learning, for example by providing for greater
            administrative support by other staff. School directors could be given greater
            autonomy to hire staff and assign responsibilities, and encouraged to conduct more
            parental and community outreach. At the same time, hold directors to a higher degree
            of accountability for student achievement, as measured by national exam scores and
            other school and student performance indicators.


                                                32
 VI.         Promote the establishment of a school director's professional practice to stimulate
             joint learning and sharing of good practices. Directors should have personalized
             professional development plans, participate in professional development for teachers,
             as well as targeted training specifically for directors as part of a long-term
             professional development strategy. Stronger directors in higher performing schools
             could be paired with lower-performing ones in a peer-learning relationship. Directors
             should then be held accountable by the next level of administration for changing their
             practices as an outcome of this training and mentorship.
VII.         Special attention should be paid at the level of the classroom and school to the lowest
             performing students. School directors should be given the autonomy to allocate
             resources for tutoring and support of low-performing students though the use of
             existing teacher time, the use of school space for afterschool peer tutoring by other
             students, and by inviting parents or community members with appropriate expertise to
             undertake supervised tutoring of struggling students.
 Ministry:
VIII.        Improve MoEHE communication with low-performing schools through a program of
             regular meetings with school directors to review progress toward improvement.
             Mechanisms of improvement can include items presented above, as well as school
             improvement plans prepared by the school community (parents, students, teachers
             and school managers/administrators) under the guidance and leadership of the school
             director if funding is available.
 IX.         Track school and student performance over time through national and international
             assessment to sustain accountability for results. Student performance should be
             measured through both national and international assessment, and results should be
             fed back to schools and teachers so they can be supported to adjust their practices to
             respond to specific performance gaps.
  X.         Establish a school exchange program that focuses on cross-fertilization and sharing of
             good practices and joint learning between schools. This could be done within
             neighborhoods, so that lower and higher performing schools within the same
             geographic zone could learn from each other, and involve teachers as well as school
             directors.
 77.     One aspect highlighted in the MoEHE report is that of low-performing boy’s classrooms;
 86% of low-performing classrooms were male-only. We were unable to address the gender issue
 on its own due to sample size limitations. Nonetheless, we believe it is likely that more effective
 classroom instructional practices will benefit boys as well as girls. A policy approach that
 prioritized low-performing students and schools would necessarily include more boys’
 classrooms than girls’.
 78.    There are multiple ways to achieve the overall objective of improved student learning,
 and the research team is in dialogue with the MoEHE on how best to design implementation
 mechanisms using existing programs and available resources. The overarching goal is to improve
 student learning using locally-available expertise, augmented by international experience. There

                                                 33
is a role for lessons from elsewhere in the region and around the globe, as even the highest-
performing Palestinian students do not match those of the highest ranked countries. Nonetheless,
there are grounds for optimism that many of the solutions to the challenges of education already
exist in the Palestinian context, and that student learning outcomes can be improved using locally
available solutions. In order to do this, the policy actions chosen by the Government will need to
be supported by continuous backing and follow-up at all levels of the MoEHE. They will also
need to be incentivized for example through links to salary increases and professional
advancement, as improvement will not happen by itself.
79.      The central premise of this research is that some of the practices associated with
improved student performance are transferrable between teachers and schools, and we identify
multiple mechanisms to support their broader implementation throughout the Palestinian
territories. At the same time we recognizing that “evidence on what to change is not the same as
evidence on how to change,”22 and that some of these areas have been identified well prior to this
research. The next step is to agree on the policy initiatives and to design effective change
processes that will lead to improved student learning.




22
     Hargreaves and Fullan (2012) p. 48


                                               34
Annex 1 – Logistic and Factor Analysis Results

                                   Model 1(without                          Model 2 (Controlling for
                                   controlling for                          Socioeconomic status of
                                   socioeconomic status at                  students)23
                                   school)
          Factor                   Exp(B) Sig.                              Exp(B) Sig.
          Low                      0.34      0.001                          0.42   0.001
          accountability
          School culture           2.23          0.002                      2.22         0.001
          Communication            1.81          0.013                      1.73         0.020
          and parental
          involvement
          School facilities        2.23          0.001                      2.30         0.001
          School mission,          1.62          0.043                      1.84         0.008
          tools and student
          recognition
          Uninvolved               0.02          0.023                      0.02         0.020
          students
          Student-centered         3.41          0.016                      3.5          0.013
          pedagogy

Low Accountability Factor: lack of teacher monitoring, lack of support and evaluation policies (teacher
survey)
School Culture Factor: treatment of school property by students, student behavior policies, teacher
expectations of student performance, level of teacher satisfaction, parent participation, low-income
student support services (teacher survey)
Communication and Parental Engagement Factor: the level of communication between the school and
parents including on student performance, and parents’ participation in a broad range school activities
(leadership survey)
School Facilities Factor: student access to playgrounds, classroom space, library, computers (leadership
survey)
School Mission, Tools and Student Recognition Factor: defined as prominently displaying a school’s
mission statement, displaying student work and activities, presence in classrooms other educational tools
such as pictures, maps and other visual and instructional aids (facilities survey)
Uninvolved Student Factor: Based on the classroom observations, this is the proportion of students who
are not engaged in the lesson and the amount of time they are not engaged
Student-Centered Pedagogy Factor: Also from the classroom observations, this is the proportion of
instructional time during which during which students participate in discussions, debates and question and
answer activities




23
  Using the same methodology as TIMSS, we asked school directors the proportion of low-income students at their school.
Controlling for income by this method does not a have a large impact on the value of the exponent.


                                                            35
Factor analyses were conducted separately for the three survey tools: school director interviews,
teacher interviews, and school facility surveys. The Stallings data was analyzed separately. The
results of the three factor analyses are as follows:
Survey Tool 1: Standardized Interviews with school directors

     First factor: Student behavior
     No.        Factor 1                                               Density of factor
     1          Theft                                                  0.814
     2          Students verbally abusing teachers or employees        0.812
     3          Physical assault on teachers or employees              0.791
     4          Cheating                                               0.77
     5          Physical assault among students                        0.716
     6          Leaving school early                                   0.705
     7          Vandalism                                              0.704
     8          Late students attendance                               0.688
     9          Delays in filling vacancies                            0.662
     10         Student absence                                        0.658
     11         Teacher absence                                        0.639
     12         Verbal abuse among students                            0.617
     13         Late attendance or early departure by teachers         0.314


Second factor: School Facilities
Number Factor 2                                                        Density of
                                                                       factor
1         Inadequate playgrounds and open space                        0.799
2         Shortage of school buildings                                 0.769
3         Inadequate lighting                                          .776
4         Lack of classrooms                                           .737
5         Lack of facilities                                           .706
6         Lack of stationery                                           .676
7         Shortage in library contents (books for science, Arabic      .644
          language, and mathematics)
8         Lack of computers to teach science, mathematics, and         .644
          Arabic language
9         Lack of books at the beginning of the school year            .64
10        Lack of computer software to teach science, mathematics,     .538
          or Arabic language
11        Inadequate heating and cooling systems                       .383




                                               36
Third factor: School Director Responsibilities
Number Factor 3                                                     Density of
                                                                    factors
1         Relationships between teachers and students in school     .689
          evaluation
2         Teachers’ knowledge and understanding of their majored    .671
          subject based on school evaluations
3         Interaction between teachers and with the principal       .654
          during school evaluations
4         Teachers’ understanding of pedagogy based on school       .628
          evaluation
5         Teachers’ classroom management ability based on school    .602
          evaluation
6         Professional development teachers took during school      .507
          evaluation
7         Nonacademic student outcomes                              .503
8         Creativity during class activities in school evaluation   .49
9         Promotion of the school’s mission and vision              .46
10        Students evaluation of the knowledge they attained in     .447
          school evaluation
11        Extracurricular activities                                .442
12        Direct evaluation through classroom visits                .436
13        Promoting the curriculum                                  .433
14        Students succeeding classes and not leaving school        .403
          during school evaluations
15        An essential part of my work is to monitor rules          .385
          enforcement
16        Student scores in school evaluation                       .355


Fourth factor: Communication and Parent Engagement
Number Factor 4                                                     Density of
                                                                    factor
1         Informing parents about school accomplishments            .773
2         Informing parents about school rules                      .655
3         Supporting parents to help their children with homework   .652
4         Informing parents about the school’s academic             .626
          achievements
5         Discussing with parents their level of involvement with   .601
          their children
6         Organizing workshops and lectures for parents on          .563
          teaching and learning
7         Serving in school committees                              .533
8         Volunteering in school projects, programs, or trips       .528

                                                 37
9         Informing parents about student grades                      .423
10        Informing parents about their children’s school behavior    .338
11        Visiting other schools, or attending educational            .332
          conferences for new ideas


Fifth factor: Administrative management responsibilities
Number Factor 5                                                       Density of
                                                                      factor
1         Do you participate in decisions regarding promotions and    .772
          raises
2         Do you participate in discussions regarding teachers’ end   .729
          of service
3         Do you participate in discussions regarding allocation of   .724
          teachers’ starting salary
4         Do participate in setting disciplinary rules in school      .585
5         I can influence decisions taken on a high administrative    .541
          level
6         Do you participate in accepting students into the school    .505
7         Initiating educational, or developmental projects           .469
8         Asking for intervention by the local community in cases     -.432
          of student misbehavior
9         Do you participate in setting a budget for teacher’s        .379
          professional development
10        Do you participate in setting the school budget             .334




                                              38
Survey Tool Two: Standardized Interviews with Teachers.

First factor: Accountability
Number Factor 1                                                           Density of
                                                                          factor
1         The Principal enforces financial penalties on teachers          -.883
2         Poor performing teachers are overlooked                         -.846
3         Contracts of poor performing teachers are terminated            -.677
4         Frequency of student examinations                               -.673
5         Number of supervisory visits conducted by supervisors           .670
          during the year
6         There is a plan to improve the performance of teachers          .650
7         Using successful methods by the school director to              .571
          distinguish good and bad teachers
8         Reviewing the work of teachers to meet administrative           .496
          needs


Second factor: Interaction between teachers
Number Factor 2                                                        Density of
                                                                       factor
1         Exchange of teaching methods between teachers                .639
2         Discussing how to teach a specific subject                   .629
3         Observing classes of other teachers, and giving them         .619
          feedback
4         Cooperation, planning, and preparing                         .619
5         Giving my educational experience to others                   .690
6         Cooperating with others to try new ideas                     .564
7         Attending meetings on students of the same age group         .546
8         Participating in training activates                          .498
9         Discussions with colleagues who teach the same grade         .487
10        Discussing and choosing educational tools                    .483
11        Discussing achievement issues for a specific student         .464
12        Contributing to the enrichment of the curriculum             .428
13        Visiting other colleagues to improve performance q19.4       .389
14        Discussion and coordination of home work among               .384
          different subjects, or the same subject a29.10


Third factor: Training
Number Factor 3                                                    Density of factor
1         Participation in professional to improve student         .792
          performance in critical thinking and problem solving
2         Participation in professional development programs on    .695
          handling students’ individual needs
3         Participation on professional development programs       .670

                                              39
          on evaluating classroom subjects
4         Participation in professional development on subject     .644
          pedagogy
5         Participation in professional development on subject     .469
          content
6         Level of usage of computers during class                 .460
7         Participation in professional development programs on    .444
          using ICT in the classroom
8         Extent of computer usage in lesson preparation           .370
Fourth factor: School Culture
number Factor 4                                                       Density of
                                                                      factor
1        Students preserving school property                          .630
2        Teachers’ expectations of student attainment                 .576
3        Job satisfaction of other teachers                           .556
4        Parents support for students’ educational attainment         .519
5        Level of careless students in the classroom                  -.508
6        Your job satisfaction                                        .507
7        Inability of a student to recall knowledge previously        -.478
         acquired
8        The existence of special services for students with low      .430
         income
9        Parents participating in school activities                   .409
10       Disruptive students in the classroom                         -.395




                                              40
Fifth factor: Incentives
Number Factor 5                                                         Density of factor
1          I get a reward for improving my performance                  .874
2          I get a reward if I have an innovative idea related to the   .871
           teaching process
3          Distinguished teachers receive rewards                       .772


Survey Tool Three: Facility Survey

1.   First factor: Resource availability and use
Number Factor 1                                                          Density of
                                                                         factor
1         Availability of multi-purpose rooms in school                  .718
2         Availability of space for sports                               .61
3         Aesthetic environment in school                                .536
4         Using the computer for purposes other than Technology          .524
          class


Second factor: School Mission, Tools and Student Recognition
Number Factor 2                                                         Density of
                                                                        factor
1         Teaching and learning tools                                   .776
2         Posters made by students on the announcement board            .708
3         Display of the school mission at the front of the school      .617


Third factor: Maintenance and display
Number Factor 3                                                         Density of
                                                                        factor
1         Display of the school’s achievement level                     .804
2         Major maintenance needed for school building                  .678




                                                 41
Annex 2 Models of Teacher Learning and Behavioral Change
80.     There are at least three key teacher characteristics which influence student performance
that have been the subject of considerable research and interest: teacher subject matter
knowledge, teacher understanding of how students learn, and teacher instructional practice
(including classroom management). Clearly, other teacher characteristics are relevant to student
learning, however, this study focuses on teacher instructional practice. This is the focus of the
classroom observation instrument, and requires a discussion of how teacher instructional
practices change. There is an established literature on teacher training which will not be
reviewed here (see for example Yoon et al, 2007 and Villegas-Reimers 2003). We offer some
key observations linked to teacher training in the Palestinian Territories, below.
81.     The standard model of teacher instructional practice change is that investments in teacher
knowledge through training leads teachers to improve their classroom practices, which then leads
to improved student learning outcomes (Figure A). However, there is evidence that training
programs often fail to change teacher classroom behavior, and further that even when they are
effective at changing teacher behavior, improved student learning doesn’t necessarily follow
(Yoon et al., 2007 and Kennedy, 1998). Guskey (2000, 2002) proposes an inverted model where
training programs allow for classroom practice experimentation. He suggests that if these
experiments are effective in increasing student learning outcomes, teachers then adjust their
beliefs and attitudes accordingly to accommodate these new modalities (Figure B). A hybrid
model whereby teachers are learning new information, trying it out, discarding some elements,
adding others and continuously experimenting to see how it affects student learning has been
discussed by Piper (2013). This mixed model appears the most convincing to the team, given the
limited evidence on sequencing and causality (Figure C).

Standard Model (schematic)




                                                Change in
  Teacher           Change in Teacher                                 Improvements in Student
                                                 Teacher
  Training             Knowledge                                             Learning
                                                Practices




                                               42
Guskey Model (schematic)




                                                   Improvements in
  Teacher             Change in Teacher                                          Change in Teacher Beliefs and
                                                   Student Learning
  Training                Practices                                                        Attitudes
                                                     (if successful)




Dynamic Model (schematic)


                                          Teacher Training




                                                                          Teacher
               Teacher Practices                                       Knowledge and
                                                                           Beliefs




                                          Student Learning


82.     In the dynamic model proposed here, teacher training has an impact on classroom
practices as well as teacher knowledge and beliefs, which are both influenced by classroom
experience and student success or failure. Ideally, teacher training is responsive to teacher needs
as reflected in their practices and understanding. Rather than simply telling teachers what to do,
trainers work with teachers to better understand how they can improve, and accompany them
through that improvement process. Some of these approaches are incorporated into current
Palestinian policy and practice, and one use of this study is to help inform the design of pre-
service and in-service development programs.




                                                    43
INSTRUMENTS
Due to the size of the files, the instruments could not be attached to the report. However, they
can be found in the portal and will be disclosed along with the final report.
The instruments are:
   1)   Observation Tool
   2)   Teacher Questionnaire
   3)   Principal Questionnaire
   4)   Facility Survey




                                                44
References

ANERA (2013). Early Childhood Development in the West Bank and Gaza. ANERA Reports on
    the Ground in the Middle East: 5.
Assessment and Evaluation Department (2013). “Lessons Learned from High Achieving Schools
       in Palestine”. Ministry of Education and Higher Education.

Barber, M., Mourshed, M. (2007) How The World’s Best-performing School Systems Come Out
     on Top (McKinsey and Company).

Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2009) Teacher Preparation and
    Student Achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 31(4): 416-440.
Branch G. F., Hanushek E. A., Rivkin S. G.(2012). Estimating the effect of leaders on public
      sector productivity: The case of school principals (Working Paper No. 17803).
      Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brookfield, S. D., Preeskil, S. (2005). Discussion as a Way of Teaching, Second Edition. Wiley
       and Sons Inc., San Francisco.

Bruns, B, Filmer, D, Patrinos, H. A. (2011). Making Schools Work: New Evidence on
       Accountability Reforms. World Bank.
Claussen J, Kiernan M. and Gramshaug R. (2013) Public Expenditure Review. Education Sector
       In Palestine, September, 2013
Clotfelter, C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. L Vigdor. “Teacher credentials and student achievement:
        Longitudinal analysis with student fixed effects.” Economics of Education Review 26,
        2007: 673-682.

Darling-Hammond, L., LaPointe, M., Meyerson, D., Orr. M. T., & Cohen, C. (2007). Preparing
       School Leaders for a Changing World: Lessons from Exemplary Leadership
       Development Programs. Stanford, CA: Stanford University, Stanford Educational
       Leadership Institute.
Eide, E., Goldhaber, D., & Brewer, D. (2004). The Teacher Labour Market and Teacher Quality.
        Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 20, pp 230-244.

Filmer D., Pritchett L.H., (2001). Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data or Tears:
       An Application To Educational Enrolments in States in India. Demography, February
       2001, 38:1: 115-132.

Freire, P., (2006). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Continuum International Publishing Group, New
        York. (1st edition 1970).

Grissom, J., Loeb, S., Master, B., (2013). Effective Instructional Time Use for School Leaders:
       Longitudinal evidence from observations for principals. Education research 42: 433-444,
       first published on October 25, 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264123540-en

                                               45
Guskey, T. R., (2002). Professional Development and Teacher Change. Teachers and Teaching:
       theory and practice, Vol. 8, No. 3/4.

Hanushek E., Rivkin S., (2006). Teacher Quality. Handbook of the Economics of Education,
      Volume 2, Amsterdam: North Holland Pages: 1052-1078

Hargreaves, A., Fullan, M., (2012) Professional Capital: Transforming Teaching in Every
       School, Teachers College Press, New York.
Hill, H., Rowan, B., Ball, D., (2005). Effects of Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching
      on Student Achievement. American Educational Research Journal, Summer 2005, Vol. 42,
      No. 2, pp. 371–406
Kennedy, M. (1998). Form and Substance in Inservice Teacher Education. Research
    Monograph. Madison: National Institute for Science Education, University of Wisconsin.

Klar, W Hans and Curtis A. Brewer (2013). Successful Leadership in High-Needs Schools: An
       Examination of Core Leadership Practices Enacted in Challenging Contexts. Educational
       Administration Quarterly December 2013 49: 768-808, first published on March 29, 2013
Longitudinal Evidence from Observations of Principals. Educational Researcher Volume/Issue:
       42(8) Pages: 433-444.
Lung, F. and Ragatz, A. (2010). Inside Indonesia’s Mathematics Classrooms: A TIMSS video
       study of teaching practices and student achievement. World Bank Group.
Marshall, J. H. & Sorto, M. A. (2012). The Effects of Teacher Mathematics Knowledge and
Pedagogy on Student Achievement in Rural Guatemala. International Review of Education
58(2): Pages 173 – 197.

Metzler, J., and Woessmann, L., (2002). "The impact of teacher subject knowledge on
       student achievement: Evidence from within-teacher within-student variation." Journal of
       Development Economics, 2012 Pages: 486-496.

Newton, P., Driver R., Osborne J., The Place of Argumentation in the Pedagogy of School
      Science. International Journal of Science Education,Volume 21, Issue 5, 1999

OECD (2009). Creating Effective Teaching and Learning Environments: First Results from
     TALIS. OECD Publishing.

OECD (2013/14). Fostering learning communities among teachers. Teaching in Focus, OECD
     Publishing.
Pascale R., Sternin J., Sternin M., (2010) The Power of Positive Deviance: How unlikely
       innovators solive the world’s toughest problems. Harvard business review press.
Piper, B., (2013). Presentation Aug 6, 2013 for USAID Education Summit.




                                              46
Pont, Beatriz, Deborah Nusche, D., and Hunter Moorman, H.. (2008). Improving school
       leadership, Volume I: Policy and Practice. OECD Publishing.
Reitzug, U. and Deborah L. West, and Roma Angel (2008). Conceptualizing Instructional
       Leadership: The Voices of Principals. Education and Urban Society: 40 Page: 694-
       714, first published on May 28, 2008.
Schleicher, A. (2011), Building a High-Quality Teaching Profession: Lessons from around the
       World, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264113046-en
The National Institute for Educational Training (2010), School improvement based on standards:
     The Palestinian standards of effective schools. Ministry of Education and Higher
     Education.

UNESCO, World Data on Education, 7th edition 2010/2011, retrieved on 28 April 2014,
     http://www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/WDE/2010/pdf-
     versions/Palestine.pdf.

Vieluf S., et al. (2012), Teaching Practices and Pedagogical Innovation: Evidence from TALIS,
       OECD Publishing.

Villegas-Reimers, E. (2003). Teacher professional development: An international review of the
       literature. Paris: International Institute for Educational Planning.

Vishwanath, T., Blankespoor, B., Calandra, F., Krishnan, N., Mahadevan, M., Yoshida, M.
(2014). Seeing is believing: poverty in the Palestinian territories. World Bank Group.

Wei, R. C., Andree, A., Darling-Hammond, L. (2009). How nations invest in teachers: high-
       achieving nations treat their teachers are professionals. Educational Leadership.
Yoon, K. S., Duncan, T., Lee, S. W.-Y., Scarloss, B., & Shapley, K. (2007). Reviewing the
    Evidence on How Teacher Professional Development Affects Student Achievement.
    National Center For Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education
    Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Zeitlin, M. (1991). Nutritional resilience in a hostile environment: Positive Deviance in Child
        Nutrition. Nutirion Reviews: 49(9) Pages: 259-268.




                                                47
