Report No: ACS9155



Republic of India

Mutisectoral Nutrition Action in Bihar




June 9, 2014




SASHN

SOUTH ASIA
Standard Disclaimer:




This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Copyright Statement:




The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the
work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-
750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                            ii
iii
iv
Multisectoral Nutrition
Actions in Bihar: A Report
                              May 2014




                           Ashi Kohli Kathuria1

                               Rajni Khanna2




Senior Nutrition Specialist, World Bank
1


Senior Nutrition Consultant, World Bank
2




                                          v
                                                          Table of Contents

Table of Contents

Acknowledgements..................................................................................................................................... vii
Acronyms ................................................................................................................................................... viii
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND .......................................................................................... 1
      1. Background and Rationale .................................................................................................................. 1
      2. Development Context in Bihar............................................................................................................ 1
      3. Multisectoral Approach to Nutrition .................................................................................................. 2
      4. World Bank’s Strategy to Address Malnutrition ................................................................................. 2
      5. Background of Multisectoral Nutrition Actions in Bihar ..................................................................... 3
      6. Objectives ........................................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION II: METHODOLOGY ......................................................................................................................... 4
      7. Two- phased Approach ....................................................................................................................... 4
      8. The Analytical Framework: ................................................................................................................. 4
      9. Consultations and design development ............................................................................................. 5
SECTION III: CASE STUDIES ............................................................................................................................ 9
      10. Case Study 1: Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project –Jeevika’s Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot 9
      11. Case Study 2: Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project ..................................................................... 18
      12. Case 3: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project in Low Income States (RWSS-LIS) .................... 22
SECTION IV: CONCLUSIONS......................................................................................................................... 25
      13. Conclusions ....................................................................................................................................... 25
ANNEXES: .................................................................................................................................................... 28
      Annex 1: ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK ....................................................................................................... 28
    Annex 2: SUMMARY OF PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE: Improving Nutrition Actions in Rural Livelihoods
Projects .......................................................................................................................................................... 32
   Annex 3: SUMMARY OF PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE: Improving Nutrition Actions in Programs for
Panchayati Raj Institutions (Local Governance Structures) ........................................................................... 45
      Annex 4: Statistics on Bihar ..................................................................................................................... 51




                                                                                vi
                                Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the department of Social Welfare, Government of Bihar
for their overall support for the concept embodied in the activity, Multi-sectoral
Nutrition Actions in Bihar, is to use appropriate opportunities in other sectors to
improve nutrition. We are grateful to the departments of Panchayati Raj Institutions,
State Rural Livelihoods Mission, and the Water and Sanitation Missions, and Public
Health Engineering Department, Government of Bihar for their commitment to
improving nutrition through their departmental programs supported by the World
Bank. The three projects include the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (Jeevika), the Bihar
Panchayat Strengthening Project (BPSP) and the Rural Water and Sanitation Project for
Low Income States (RWSS-LIS). This work would not have been possible without the
inputs and engagement of the teams of these departments involved in preparation and
implementation of these projects.

In particular, the authors are grateful for the support and collaboration of Mr Arvind
Chaudhary, Chief Executive Officer, Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society and his
team in developing the mutli-sectoral nutrition convergence pilot within Jeevika, and
the Jeevika Saharsa District Team under the leadership of R.K Nikhil, for sharing
information, facilitating interactions with multiple stakeholders. Thanks are also
extended to Lokesh Kumar Singh, the Project Director and his team from the Bihar
Gram Swaraj Yojna for their receptivity to including nutrition on the agenda of
Panchayats. The development partners working in Bihar, in particular UNICEF, Project
Concern International, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation contributed richly to
the design of the interventions and shared their valuable experience for which the team
is thankful.

The authors acknowledge the commitment to incorporating nutrition displayed by the
World Bank task teams of the three projects mentioned above. Special thanks are due to
Parmesh Shah, Sitaramachandra Machiraju and Vinay Vutukuru of the Jeevika project,
Yong Mei and Mohan Nagarajan of the BPSP and their team of the BPSP, and Smita
Misra and her team for their commitment to strengthening the linkages of water and
sanitation with nutrition using the platform of the RWSS-LIS. Technical inputs of
Upneet Singh, Sector Specialist Water and Sanitation Program, and operational support
of Anand Kothari are gratefully acknowledged.

World Bank nutrition specialists, Leslie Elder, Meera Shekar, and Silvia Kaufmann peer
reviewed the report and the Program Guidance notes and contributed to improving the
quality and presentation of the report. The overall guidance and support of Julie
McLaughlin, Sector Manager, Health, Nutrition and Population, South Asia of the
World Bank, during the entire duration of this Technical Assistance is much
appreciated.


                                           vii
                              Acronyms


ASHA   Accredited Social Health Activist
ANM    Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
AWW    Anganwadi Worker
BCC    Behavior Change Communication
BGSYS  Bihar Gram SwarajYojna Society
BPSP   Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project
BPMU   Block Project Management Unit
BMGF   Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
B-TAST Bihar Technical Assistance Support Team
BS     Block Samiti
BRLP   Bihar Rural Livelihood Project
BRLPS  Bihar Rural Livelihood Promotion Society
BK     Book Keeper
CHNCCs Community Health and Nutrition Care Centers
CPS    Country Partnership Strategy
CMs    Community Mobilizers
CRPs   Community Resource Persons
DfID   Department for International Development
DPMU   District Project Management Unit
FGD    Focus Group Discussion
FSF    Food Security Fund
GOI    Government of India
GoB    Government of Bihar
GDP    Gross Domestic Product
GPs    Gram Panchayats
HNP    Health, Nutrition Population
ICDS   Integrated Child Development Scheme
IFPRI  International Food Policy Research Institute
IQ     Intelligence Quotient
JS     JeevikaSaheli
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
MIS    Management Information System
NDCCs  Nutrition Day Care Centers
NRHM   National Rural Health Mission
NRLM   National Rural Livelihoods Mission
NRLP   National Rural Livelihoods Project
ODF    Open Defecation Free
PAD    Project Appraisal Document
PGN    Program Guidance Note
PIP    Project Implementation Plan

                                  viii
NBA      Nirmal Bharat Abhyan
NLTA     Non Lending Technical Assistance
NRDWP    National Rural Drinking Water Program
NRHM     National Rural Health Mission
ODF      Open Defecation free
PCI      Project Concern International
PGN      Program Guidance Note
PIP      Project Implementation Plan
PDS      Public Distribution System
PHED     Public Health Engineering Department
PRI      Panchayati Raj Institution
RAS      Regional Assistance Strategy
RD       Rural Development
RWSP     Rural Water and Sanitation Program
SA       South Asia
SNP      Supplementary Nutrition Program
SHGs     Self Help Groups
SW       Social Welfare
TSC      Total Sanitation Campaign
TTL      Task Team Leader
UNICEF   United Nation Children’s Fund
VO       Village Organization
VRP      Village Resource Person
WDC      Women Development Corporation
WB       World Bank
WSP      Water and Sanitation Program
ZP       Zilla Parishad




                                     ix
               Multisectoral Nutrition Actions in Bihar: A Report


SECTION I: INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND


1.     Background and Rationale

India, currently, has one of the highest malnutrition rates in the world. One-third of its
children are born with low birth-weight, 43 percent of children under five are
underweight, 48 percent are stunted and 20 percent are wasted. Stunting rates in India
are two to seven folds higher than those of other BRICS countries. Micronutrient
deficiencies are extremely high with almost 75 percent of the under threes being
anemic, 62 percent deficient in vitamin A and over 13 million infants remaining
unprotected from iodine deficiency disorders. There are large differentials in the
prevalence across states and socio economic groups. Sixty percent of the malnutrition
burden exists in low income states: Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh,Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Government’s policy commitment to
address malnutrition and the multitude of programs that are being implemented,
progress in reducing undernutrition has been slow. It therefore becomes imperative to
address the malnutrition challenge and to prevent and reduce maternal and child
malnutrition as early as possible across the life cycle especially through pregnancy and
in the first two years of life, i.e., in the first 1,000 days of life, and in adolescent girls and
women. In order to accelerate improvements across the states, the Government of India
(GOI) has made policy commitments to mobilize multisectoral action to address the
multiple causes of malnutrition effectively through formulating a multisectoral strategy
and a multisectoral program to be implemented in 200 high malnutrition burden
districts of the country. The multisectoral strategy also aims to bring a strong nutrition
focus in various sectoral plans to address maternal and child malnutrition.

2.     Development Context in Bihar

Bihar is one of the largest and poorest states in India. Ninety percent of its population
lives in rural areas. It has deep rooted social inequalities especially along gender and
caste lines. There is high incidence of malnutrition with 50 percent of children under the
age of three being stunted (too short for their age), 55 percent being underweight (too
thin for their age) and 33 percent wasted (too thin for their height). Forty three percent
of women aged 15 to 49 years suffer from lower than normal body mass index, two
thirds of women in this age group and 87 percent of children under the age of three
suffer from anemia. Basic access to nutrition, health and sanitation services is poor.
Only 24 percent of households have access to toilets. Quality of drinking water is a
problem as a result of poor sanitation. There is a plethora of Government programs on
health, nutrition and sanitation being implemented in the state such as the Integrated
Child Development Scheme (ICDS), National Rural Health Mission (NRHM),

                                                1
NirmalBharat Abhyan (NBA), Public Distribution System (PDS) and the National Rural
Drinking Water Program (NRDWP), besides others. Due to implementation challenges
and constraints, they have not been able to bring about the desired improvements in
nutrition and health outcomes. Moreover, there is limited or no coordination between
these different sectoral programs

3.    Multisectoral Approach to Nutrition

The determinants of malnutrition are multisectoral. The immediate causes include
inadequate food intake and disease. Underlying these are causes that operate at the
household and community levels: household food insecurity, inappropriate maternal
and child care practices, lack of access to health services, unavailability of clean water
and sanitation, with poverty underpinning these. Gender relations are a key factor
which affects women’s access to resources and decision making within the household
and community including women and girls entitlement to adequate food and nutrition.
Ultimately these factors are determined by the larger political, economic, social and
cultural environment. Therefore, in order to address the multiple and interactive causes
of malnutrition, it requires a multisectoral approach and action at different levels.




4.    World Bank’s Strategy to Address Malnutrition

The World Bank’s South Asia (SA) Regional Assistance Strategy (RAS) for Nutrition
(2010-15) that outlines the region’s vision and approach to improve nutrition is
committed to scaling up the Bank’s response to the high rates of malnutrition in the
region. One of the key strategic approaches to guide the scale up of nutrition includes
adopting multispectral actions by implementing comprehensive programs that
integrate nutrition sensitive interventions in different sectors. The strategy also
identifies the need to test implementation of nutrition actions in multiple sectors in one
geographical area.


                                            2
The World Bank’s India Country Partnership Strategy(CPS) 2013-17 supports a
multisectoral approach both through Government Programs and Bank’s Operations in
different sectors. To promote inter-sectoral work in nutrition and to support the WB
task teams and their clients and implementing partners to do so, it is important to
develop and test approaches that have the potential to affect nutrition outcomes
through programs in that sector and to provide them with the necessary programmatic
guidance and tools.

5.    Background of Multisectoral Nutrition Actions in Bihar

The state of Bihar was selected as the geographical area of focus for carrying out
initiatives to incorporate nutrition actions within different sectoral operations of the
World Bank. Given that Bihar has several WB projects under implementation and new
projects that are under preparation, this provided a unique opportunity to explore the
feasibility to incorporate nutrition interventions within the various Sectoral Projects.
Some of the WB operations in Bihar include the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project, Bihar
Capacity Building Technical Assistance Project, Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery Project, and
the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project, besides others. Based on the above
considerations and consultations with government counterparts, it was decided to
undertake the Non Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) in Bihar with the overall
objective to explore, initiate and demonstrate incorporation of nutrition sensitive
interventions across multiple sectors and program platforms in order to enhance their
food and nutrition security impact.

6.    Objectives

The purpose of this activity was to incorporate/demonstrate Nutrition actions in at
least three World Bank operations indifferent sectors in Bihar. The expected
intermediate outcomes from these initiatives were to: i) Inform and influence nutrition
policies and programs based on the experience and effectiveness of the multisectoral
nutrition actions ii) informing policies and programs in selected sectors about the
effectiveness of incorporating nutrition actions in their respective sectors, and iii)
documenting and disseminating knowledge and experience of cross-sectoral nutrition
actions.

This report captures the methodology, experience, lessons, opportunities and challenges
in incorporating nutrition actions into the design of three World Bank operations in
Bihar – the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project-Jeevika, Bihar Panchayat Strengthening
project and the Rural Water and Sanitation in Low Income States project, and includes a
case study on each. It also includes (in the Annexes) two Program Guidance Notes, one
for Rural Livelihoods programs and the other for programs in the Panchayati Raj
Institutions (Local Governance Structures) developed for use in these specific sectors.




                                           3
SECTION II: METHODOLOGY

7.    Two- phased Approach

The operationalization of the Multisectoral Nutrition Action in Bihar has been
undertaken in two phases.

Phase 1, Scoping and Design Phase: This component included engaging with Task
Teams of WB operations in Bihar, including those under preparation as well as those
under implementation to identify key entry points and platforms for incorporating
nutrition sensitive interventions in the projects, and to monitor the outputs and
outcomes of these interventions through suitable indicators, possibly incorporated into
the project results framework. The TTLs of ongoing projects were consulted to explore
with them the potential to develop nutrition sensitive approaches and models that
could be designed and undertaken by the Project. Further discussions and consultations
were held with client teams to work with them to provide technical support to develop
the design of the nutrition sensitive interventions. Consultations and discussions with
other concerned stakeholders was also part of the design development process. The
scoping and design phase also included identifying and design of evaluation of the
nutrition actions in the projects selected. Technical support was provided to the
identified projects by Consultant/s and through modest staff time.

Phase2, Implementation Support: This included technical support for the
implementation of the designed interventions, monitoring and evaluation, and
documentation. This report focuses on documentation of phase I, which has been
completed, and phase II activities are ongoing. However, phase II will take time for
completion and outcomes can be expected only after implementation over a reasonable
period. This report focuses on documenting the process and analytical framework
adopted and sharing three Case Studies of incorporating nutrition sensitive
interventions in WB projects in three sectors.

8.    The Analytical Framework:

An Analytical Framework was developed as a tool to facilitate the identification,
analysis and incorporation of nutrition actions within Multisectoral projects of the
World Bank. It sets out core principles and adopts the project cycle approach through
its various stages namely Identification and Design, Implementation, Monitoring,
Learning, Knowledge Management and Evaluation. It is a guide which can be used
with the WB Task Team Leaders and other staff and project implementers of
counterpart organizations to identify key issues, opportunities and challenges for
consideration to explore, inform and influence WB Sectoral projects to incorporate
nutrition actions within the Project framework.

Some Core Principles include:


                                          4
    Facilitate shared understanding amongst key stakeholders (internal and external) of
     the Multisectoral Projects through advocacy, information sharing, consultations and
     presentations on the importance of nutrition and its multi-dimensional nature. How
     nutrition is relevant and has synergy to the concerned Sectoral project so that it is
     perceived and understood to be mutually beneficial and can add value.
    Important to get a buy in, commitment and ownership from TTLs and other key
     stakeholders of the Multisectoral project to incorporate nutrition actions through
     discussions, negotiations, agreements and possibly through incentives, rewards and
     recognition.
    Identify natural entry points, opportunities and challenges, benefits and risks which
     would be the basis for incorporating nutrition actions both in new and ongoing
     Multisectoral projects.
    Engage with project teams and provide ongoing technical support to incorporate
     nutrition interventions when a new project is being designed or provide technical
     support in designing the nutrition interventions in the case of ongoing projects.
    Gender to be incorporated in the analysis and actions framework.

A project cycle approach can be used to incorporate nutrition sensitive interventions
within the Multisectoral Project framework.




The Analytical Framework details are included as Annex 1 of the Report.

9.      Consultations and design development

Using the core principles outlined in the Analytical Framework, consultations were
held with the task-teams of key Bank operations in Bihar to explore interest as well as
potential opportunities and entry points for incorporating nutrition interventions
                                             5
within the Sectoral Projects. These included both projects under preparation and
projects under implementation. Based on the outcomes of the consultations with the
Bank task teams, consultations with the client project teams/project implementing
teams, the department of Social Welfare, Government of Bihar, and other stakeholders
working on nutrition in Bihar were held. As a result three WB projects in three sectors
with the full support of the Bank and client teams were selected to include nutrition
actions/strengthen nutrition linkages within their project framework. These include:

i) Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project, Jeevika
ii) Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project
iii) Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States

Each of these projects varies in size, scope and scale and geographical areas. A brief
description of these follows

i) The Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP): also known as Jeevika is an ongoing
project implemented by the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (BRLPS) set up
by the Government of Bihar and supported by the World Bank. This project aims to
promote rural livelihoods to enhance the social and economic empowerment of the
poorest and most marginalized women on a large scale. It has promoted community
institutions and its federations to be set up to give collective voice, space and resources
to address their needs and priorities. Initially nutrition actions in this project were
started with a view to reduce health expenditures and provide food security to its target
group of women. More recently Jeevika has committed to include Health and Nutrition
as a component in its project for experimentation and demonstration before it is scaled
up. There are various models and approaches of nutrition interventions being
implemented by Jeevika using its community institutions and in collaboration with
different development organizations and the government. These models adopt different
approaches and are of different size and scale operating in different locations and at
various stages of preparation and implementation.

Under this grant, Jeevika has been provided technical support through Consultant/s
from the World Bank to develop the design of the Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence
Pilot and further support by Consultants in the implementation of the pilot during the
initial one year period. The pilot has recently moved from design to its implementation.
The details of this Case study are described later in the Case Study Section III.

ii) Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project: This project aims to support the Bihar
Government to develop capacity to promote and strengthen responsive and
accountable Gram Panchayat (GPs) in six selected districts in Bihar over a period of five
years.

The focus of this project is to support Panchayat leadership at the local level to bring
about visible changes in the village including village sanitation, improved quality of
drinking water, improved nutritional status of women and children and better

                                            6
management of natural resources. Technical inputs and coordinated support was
provided to the client Project team by the TTL Nutrition along with concurrent
technical inputs from concerned Sector Specialists in Water and Sanitation right from
the outset and during the design and development stage of the Project and thereafter.
This project is in its initial stages of implementation.

iii) Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project: This project aims to improve piped
water supply and sanitation services for selected rural communities in the target states
through decentralized delivery systems. Light touch technical inputs in Nutrition were
provided to the project during its design stage. The project is yet to be rolled out for
implementation.

Map of Bihar and districts covered by the Projects is given below:




                                           7
Two of the three projects were in their early stages of preparation, thus provided the
opportunity for the technical staff in nutrition to engage with the project teams (WB and
client teams) to design the incorporation of nutrition actions from the early stages of
project preparation, including key results. However, flexibility in terms of the intensity
and type of engagement of the nutrition team was important. In the case of the third,
the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project which was already an ongoing project under
implementation, the approach adopted was to develop the model of nutrition
interventions as a pilot and operationalize prior to mainstreaming it into the project,
especially given that other models were being explored alongside. The development of
the pilot design, a model that brings about convergence of multiple sectors, was based
on extensive consultations with community organizations, project staff, the Water and
Sanitation Program (WSP) and staff and officials of relevant government departments
and programs and development organizations working in the area.

Thus the entry points and experience for incorporating nutrition interventions were
different for each of the three projects which followed different processes of
engagement. Details of each are presented as case studies in the section III. Two sector
specific Program Guidance Notes (PGNs) have been developed for Rural Livelihoods
Projects and for Panchayati Raj Institutions (local Governance Structures) as outputs
based on the experience of designing nutrition sensitive interventions within these
projects under this Technical Assistance. Summaries of the sector specific PGNs: i)
Program Guidance Note on Incorporating Nutrition Actions in Rural Livelihoods
Projects; and ii) Program Guidance Note on Incorporating Nutrition in programs for
Panchayati Raj Institutions are included in Annex 2 and 3 respectively. The full
Program Guidance Notes providing guidance to client and Bank teams on generic
guidance and principles on why and how to incorporate nutrition sensitive
interventions which can be adapted to their operational context and projects. These
sector specific Program Guidance Notes are available on the World Bank website.


                                            8
SECTION III: CASE STUDIES

10.    Case Study 1: Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project –Jeevika’s Multisectoral
       Nutrition Convergence Pilot

10. Case Study: Development of Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot with
Jeevika:

Overview and Profile

A pilot that incorporates multisectoral nutrition convergence using the Jeevika platform
(henceforth referred to as the Jeevika Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot) was
developed to improve nutrition of women and children. The pilot builds on Jeevika’s
existing community institutions of Village Organizations (VOs) to interface with
multiple local service providers as well as other stakeholders and is informed by
extensive consultations with the Jeevika implementation team, particularly at the
district and block teams as well as community cadres, the community and officials and
staff of government programs in nutrition, health and sanitation, and development
organizations working in the area. The pilot has recently begun to be implemented to
test its feasibility. It is expected that the pilot will be scaled up after about a year of
feasibility testing and refinements. Technical and implementation support by the
nutrition team continues as a critical part of this phase by Consultants continues to be
provided to support implementation of the pilot during the initial one year feasibility
period.

The Target Group includes the poorest and most marginalized women in the
community with a focus on pregnant and lactating women and young children below
two years (1000 days window of opportunity) and adolescent girls. For some
interventions the entire community will be targeted.

The Design framework and approach

The design approach followed included

   A bottom up, community based participatory approach starting small with plans for
    scale up through learning and adjustment.
   Facilitating interface between demand and service provision of nutrition sensitive
    interventions through a community based convergence approach
   Leveraging resources, expertise and learning’s of the different stakeholders.
   A multisectoral approach with multiple stakeholders
   Investing in women and their empowerment




                                            9
The objectives, interventions and expected outcomes




                                        10
The Nutrition Interventions include:

i) Behavior Change Communication (BCC). The BCC approach will promote awareness
and actions related to nutrition, health, water and sanitation. The Jeevika Sahelis (JSs)
and other community cadres have received initial training in BCC. The BCC modules
will be rolled out every two months. JSs will communicate specific BCC messages at
SHG fortnightly meetings with members. Further trainings in BCC are planned and will
be implemented to drive change in behaviors on key nutrition, health and sanitation
messages. Some of the key messages focus on the window of opportunity and include
those related to maternal health, infant and young child feeding and care practices, and
those related to health, hygiene and sanitation. These messages are communicated
through one-to-one and one-to-many approaches using and leveraging existing
appropriate tools, materials and resources developed by different organizations
working in the area. The community cadres will support local service providers for BCC
during group meetings and community events.

ii) Household Food and Nutrition Security The existing Food Security Fund (FSF) will
be restructured from a nutrition lens to target the poor, food and income insecure
households including those with pregnant women and young children below two years
through the micro-planning process and tool. Through the FSF, a basic food basket of
cereals, pulses, oil and other food items will be made available to the target households
as required at reasonable cost in 3 to 4 tranches through the year. Kitchen gardens will
be promoted and universalized to ensure availability of fresh vegetables and seasonal
fruits for consumption in the daily diet of targeted households. Emphasis will be on
food availability and nutrition counseling for intra-household consumption of food
especially by pregnant women and young children. In addition, Jeevika Sahelis will
facilitate participation and contributions from mothers with young children (6 to 24
months of age) to encourage them to prepare and feed suitable locally produced
nutrient dense foods to their children below two years.

iii) Convergence and Coordination between community (comprising /VO members)
and local service providers for demand generation, improved service delivery and
greater mutual accountability. Coordination structures and mechanisms at village,
block and district levels will be established to provide support. Village Health,
Nutrition and Sanitation Coordination Committees comprising of local service
providers (AWWs, ASHAs, ANMs, panchayat reps, school teachers and others) and
community(Jeevika Sahelis and VO members) will plan, coordinate and monitor
activities related to health, nutrition and sanitation through monthly meetings. Building
rapport and trust, confidence and close working relationship between community and
service providers will be promoted. Recognition, rewards and incentives would be
provided for good work in coordination.

iv) Water and Sanitation Community mobilization and motivation of households
would be undertaken to stop open defecation (ODF) and create demand for safe

                                           11
sanitation. Along with the construction of toilets, personal hygiene and sanitation
practices will be promoted through individual and collective action and through BCC
actions. Technical support will be provided by the Water and Sanitation Program
(WSP).

v) Women’s Empowerment will be promoted through their enhanced awareness,
capacity, participation, access to resources and services and in decision making so that
women are able to meet their nutrition, health and sanitation needs as well as for their
families and community.

Scope and Geographical Coverage: The model is being piloted in Saur Bazar Block of
Saharsa District in Bihar. The initial feasibility phase will cover three contiguous Gram
Panchayats with approximately 35,000 population of which 3/4 of the households are
covered by the Jeevika project. Jeevika has 413 Self Help Groups (SHGs) established and
functioning with 29 Village Organizations (VOs) which will be part of the pilot.

Each SHG comprises of 10 to 12 women members from the poor and most marginalized
communities and 10-15 SHGs are federated to form a Village Organization (VO). The
VO is the project’s commonly used community platform to implement the various
interventions. The VO comprises of 3 executive members from each SHG committee
represented in the VO and has a membership of around 100 to 150 members. The VO
meets twice a month and has various sub-committees to oversee the specific activities
undertaken by the project.

Implementation Arrangements and Collaboration with External Stakeholders

The pilot will be implemented through the existing institutional structure and
arrangements of the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (BRLPS) and relevant
external stakeholders related to the Coordination and Convergence component of the
model. Implementation of nutrition, health, and sanitation activities will primarily be
carried out by community cadres supported by community structures (Village
Organisations) as indicated in the organogram below. These community cadres
include:

The Jeevika Sahelis (JSs) are the nodal persons to implement the activities at the village
level and will be supported by the VO to plan implement and coordinate activities. She
will be supported by members of the Health and Nutrition sub-committee and
Procurement committee of VOs, and Community Mobilizers (CMs) and Village
Resource Persons (VRPs) for specific activities. The roles and responsibilities of these
community cadres have been defined related to implementation of the model. Project
staff on the ground, which includes an Area Co-ordinator and Community Co-
ordinators, will provide need based support to Village Organizations and community
cadres related to the model as required.


                                           12
   Structure at Community Level                                  Structure at District Level

      For each Village                                                           District Project
       Organization                                                                 Manager

                                               Block Project                     District Manager             Three WB Local
    1 – Jeevika Saheli
                                                 Manager                       (Health & Nutrition)            Consultants
         for 2 VOs


     1 – Community                          Area Coordinator
        Mobilizer
      VRP and BK
                                                                    Community
     3-4 members of                                                 Coordinator
    Nutrition, Health
     and Sanitation
       Committee                                                                        Village
                                                                                     Organizations
     3-4 members of
      Procurement
       Committee                                                                                      Self Help Group




The pilot implementation will be managed and supported by the concerned Jeevika
District and Block staff under the leadership of the District Project Manager DPM). The
Jeevika Health and Nutrition Manager at the district level, supported by a team of three
consultants form the core team to provide oversight, monitor progress, problem solve
and address issues and challenges along the way. The Consultants will support the
community cadres and project team in implementation, monitoring and documentation
of the pilot during the feasibility phase.

         Jeevika Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Model:
                  Implementation Arrangements
                                                               District                      Consultant for
                                                              Project                        Technical and
                                                              Manager                       Implementation
                                       Behavior Change                                         Support
                                       Communication
                                            Lead:
                                         Task Group;
                                                                                             Monitoring,
                                                                                               Learning,
                                                                                           Documentation &
                           Food &                                                             Evaluation
                          Nutrition
                          Security                                                               Lead:

                            Lead:                              Core                           Task Group:
                         Task Group:
                                                              Team:
                                                             Consultants(3)
                                                               and H&N                            Capacity
                                                               Manager                            Building
                         Coordination &
                          Convergence                                                               Lead:

                              Lead:                                                             Task Group:
                           Task Group;

                                                Water &
                                               Sanitation
                                                  Lead:
                                               Task Group:




                                                                          13
Coordination and Collaboration with Multiple Stakeholders

The following figure demonstrates the arrangements proposed to co-ordinate multiple
external stakeholders. Periodic planning and review meetings will be held at the
community, block, and district level. At the community level, the Jeevika Saheli and
members of Health and Nutrition sub-committee of VOs will participate in the Village
Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee as well as other community forums and
platforms where local service providers are a part and issues related to nutrition, health
and sanitation will be discussed. Clarity of purpose for coordination, roles and
responsibilities and accountability mechanisms will be established and regular
meetings to motivate community cadres and local service providers to work together
including instituting incentives such as recognition, rewards, building their capacity
and leadership roles and acknowledging the good work being carried out by them.
Actions will be planned at these meetings for implementation and monitoring by the
committee which would enhance community participation, build mutual
accountability, and assist in generating demand and in strengthening service delivery.

Block and District planning, co-ordination and review meetings will include
representatives from the District Administration, District Health Society(DHS), ICDS,
Public Health Engineering Department(PHED), Panchayati Raj Institution
Department(PRI), Jeevika staff, and development partners operating in the area, e.g.,
Care India (works with the Health Department as the technical support unit), and
Project Concern International(PCI) (works with Jeevika under their Parivartan project
on community mobilisation and capacity building on health, nutrition, and sanitation).

 District Coordination Committee
                                           DISTRICT MAGISTRATE


                     DPO           CMHO   PHED      ZilaParisha   Jeevika   WB Local      Developme
                                                         d         DPM      Consultant    ntPartners



Block Coordination Committee

                    CDPO           BMO    Ex-E/AE     Block       Jeevika    WB Local
                                                    Panchayat       Rep      Consultant




Village Coordination Committee

                     AWW           ANM/               Gram        VO reps     School
                                   ASHA             Panchayat                 teacher




                                                    14
Monitoring and Evaluation

A monitoring framework for the model is being developed for the feasibility phase and
beyond. This will be used to assess progress with key milestones and bring out issues
related to the implementation. Further work on developing the monitoring plan with a
list of indicators, processes, outputs and outcomes is under development.

     Promote nutrition, health, water and sanitation awareness and change in practice
          with a focus on pregnant and lactating women and young children.
            Activities                  Outputs                  Indicators                  Results
 Develop a framework of         Behavior Change         No. of community          Improvement in
  key behaviors in nutrition,     Communication            cadres and staff           infant and child
  health, hygiene and             (BCC)implementat         trained to deliver and     feeding practices
  sanitation to be targeted       ion plan and its         support delivery of       Improvement in
 Review and use identified       operation                messages                   maternal health
  behavior change                Communications          No. of awareness           and nutrition
  communication(BCC)              materials                sessions and events        practices
  materials developed by          available                held per month and        Improved personal
  stakeholders to be used in     Community cadres         attendance by              hygiene and hand
  the pilot                       and relevant staff       members                    washing practices
 Plan delivery of messages,      trained to deliver      Community events          Increased
  methods and materials to        BCC                      and VHNS day held          households with
  be used and capacity           Community                and organized by           access to safe
  building required               monitoring format        community members          sanitation
 Training of trainers            developed for            and local service         Increased
 Training of community           village                  providers                  awareness and
  cadres                          organizations to        Follow up of               utilization of
 Implement and support           support and              households with            services
  roll out of BCC plan and        oversee the roll out     pregnant women and
  its review.                                              young children

              Improve household food and nutrition security with focus on the
                           1000 days window of opportunity.
           Activities                       Outputs                Indicators         Results
 Build a consensus to revise  Micro planning includes        Target            Availability of
  the Food Security Fund to     information and inclusion of    households         nutritious
  include cereals, pulses and   pregnant women and young        access the FNSF food
  oil based on the needs of     children for FNSF               to meet            throughout
  target households            Food security fund revised to maternal and         the year for
  especially 1000 days          food and nutrition security     child nutritional target
  window of opportunity         Fund with                       needs              households
 Develop an operational        provision of diversified food  Follow up visits including
  manual for sustained          basket                          by front line      HHs with
  implementation of FNSF.      Fund operational and            workers            pregnant
 Technical support for         utilization cycles initiated    and  community     women and
  promotion of universal        and reviewed.                   cadres to 1000     young

                                                  15
  kitchen gardens at           Coverage of kitchen gardens         days window        children.
  household level.              increased to make fresh fruits      of opportunity    Improved
 Implement and support the and vegetables available to             households to      infant and
  roll out of the revised FSF   all target families at              ensure food        child feeding
  and fund and kitchen          affordable cost                     consumption        and maternal
  gardens                                                                              feeding
                                                                                       practices.

  Institutionalize coordination and collaboration between concerned departments related
   to nutrition, health, sanitation and between community and local service providers to
 improve quality and utilization of services and making it responsive to the needs of the
           target group and to improve nutrition outcomes as a common objective
           Activities                    Outputs                   Indicators              Results
 Consultation with key       Community, block, and       Effective                Greater
  stakeholders to agree on     district coordination        participation of          accountability
  coordination structures      structures and               community                 between
  and mechanisms at            mechanisms in place          representatives and       community
  village, block and          Interaction and co-          service providers in      and service
  district levels.             ordination meetings          community meetings        providers
 Agreement on roles and       between stakeholders         and  committees          Demand for
  responsibilities between     regularly held              Progress on plans         services
  community and local         Improved community           and follow up             increases
  service providers for        participation and stronger   actions from co-         Improved
  coordination purposes.       linkages                     ordination meetings       service
 Development of a            Demand for services         Demand and                delivery and
  coordination framework       generated from the           utilization of services   its utilization.
  and plan for the             community
  community and service
  providers to interact
  and co-ordinate

     Develop community and organizational capacity to plan, implement and monitor
                          nutrition sensitive interventions.
         Activities                 Outputs                   Indicators               Results
 Training needs            Training sessions        Systematic plans for    A sustainable
  identified related to      held                      implementation are       community based
  the project               Organizational and        drawn up and             model is built.
  interventions              community                 executed                Model is
  identified for staff and   capacity built           Plan, review and         implemented and
  cadres.                   Staff and cadres          monitor training         monitored by the
 Training and capacity      better equipped to        sessions and events      community with
  building schedule and      plan, implement           and take follow up       support from project
  calendar drawn up          and monitor               actions.                 staff
 Training modules           community                Need based support      Enhanced capacity
  developed                  nutrition                 provided to              of community cadres
 Training of trainers       interventions             community cadres         and organization to

                                                16
  carried out.                                      after training.           plan, implement and
 Roll out of training to                          Application of training   monitor nutrition
  community cadres                                  by community cadres       interventions
  and staff                                         related to their work.


External Evaluation
An external impact evaluation is planned for rigorous evaluation of the pilot. Funding
from SIEF is likely to be approved soon (seed funding was received to develop the
evaluation proposal) and the evaluation will be conducted by the International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and the Oxford Policy Management (OPM). The
impact evaluation design is under finalisation. It will have a treatment group which will
receive the intervention package of the multisectoral nutrition convergence model and a
control group which will provide the counter factual. Both groups will have the same
structure of community based organisations that include women’s self help groups and
their federation of village organisations(VOs) thus providing a robust and best possible
counter factual. Treatment and control VOs will be randomly selected. Bias due to spill
overs could take place. To minimise this, assignment of treatment and control groups
will be clustered and specific attention will be given to ensuring that there is adequate
space between clusters of both groups. Clustering will also ensure internal validity. A
quantitative baseline survey will set base parameters and a subsequent quantitative
midline and endline survey on the same sample, with qualitative data collection will be
carried out in the interim period. The evaluation period is proposed to be three years.

This evaluation and its results will be extremely useful from a policy and program
perspective as there are few initiatives operational on the ground and evidence on their
impact is scarce. With established community platforms and infrastructure available,
this provides a unique opportunity to test this model and provide evidence on the
efficacy and impact of a Multisectoral Approach in Nutrition.

Key Issues and Challenges

   Due to a variety of reasons, there has been a considerable time lag between the
    design and the implementation phase even though the intervention is to be
    implemented through an ongoing Bank project. Given that the pilot implementation
    is to be done through existing project staff, it required reallocation of responsibility
    and time to support implementation of the pilot. The Jeevika Project team at the
    district level at that time was over stretched; there was high staff attrition, with
    increased workloads and       competing work demands and timelines. Nutrition
    interventions were seen by staff as an add-on to their work. There were issues
    related to ownership and commitment to implementing nutrition interventions.
    These issues are beginning to be addressed by reallocation of specific responsibilities
    of selected project staff to support implementation, by providing ongoing
    orientation and training to staff in nutrition and building their understanding and

                                             17
    perspective on the relevance of nutrition to their project work to help them develop
    a sense of ownership. This has to be an ongoing process.
   As mentioned above, the implementation of the pilot is primarily the responsibility
    of the community cadres and community structures to be supported by the
    concerned project staff. Slow progress was made in establishing community
    structures and recruiting Jeevika Sahelis, the front line community cadre responsible
    for implementation of the pilot. In some instances, it was time consuming to find
    suitable women from the community to fit the requirement of the Jeevika Saheli for
    which several rounds of selection and recruitment were carried out.
   Besides, the technical and capacity support, oversight, direction provided by the
    nutrition team at the Bank, in order to overcome the above constraints, at the advice
    of the Jeevika team, three local Consultants have been placed in Saharsa to support
    community cadres and staff to implement the pilot through mentoring and capacity
    building and for monitoring and documentation of the pilot.
   Since nutrition is a new area for the project team, it will require ongoing orientation
    and support to build a perspective amongst the team on the importance of nutrition
    as a development priority and its relevance to the work of Jeevika. A capacity
    building approach will be followed through.


11.    Case Study 2: Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project

11. Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project

Background: The Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project (BPSP) aims to support the
Government of Bihar to develop capacity to promote and strengthen responsive and
accountable Gram Panchayats (GPs) in six selected districts of Bihar.

Project beneficiaries include: (i) rural residents in the target PRIs of the six districts, who
are more effective in monitoring fulfillment of government obligations and can enjoy
better and inclusive government services and undertake effective collective actions to
solve local problems; (ii) elected officials and functionaries at the Gram Panchayat level,
who can become more capable of taking initiatives to solve the problems of their
constituents, resolve local conflicts fairly, and are able to mobilize resources and
support for the initiatives.

Nutrition improving actions are nested under the Capacity building for Gram
Panchayats component, one of the five project components that aim at institutional
strengthening and nurturing development-oriented panchayat leadership and local
initiatives. It builds panchayats’ core institutional competencies to empower them to
achieve substantive development outcomes. It also engages communities and citizens,
through training, mobilization, and media, to participate in local governance and to
hold panchayats accountable. The approach is to, on the one hand, raise awareness
among local leaders and communities about important behavior changes and local

                                              18
actions that can improve nutrition, health and livelihood; and on the other hand, to
facilitate their access to government program resources to finance community priorities.
The project focuses on developing GP’s capacity to plan and implement initiatives that
improve results in at least one of the following areas: natural resource management,
nutrition status of women and children, quality of drinking water, and village
sanitation.

The focus of the project is to develop capacity and to support panchayat leadership to
bring about visible changes in the villages including village sanitation, improved
quality of drinking water and improved nutritional status of women and young
children. This will be done through helping GPs access and effectively use resources
provided by the government programs like Total Sanitation Campaign (TCS), National
Rural Drinking Water (NRDW), Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) and
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee (MGNREGA). Moreover,
coordination and collaboration will be undertaken with concerned departments such as
PHED, ICDS, Rural Development (RD), Social Welfare (SW) and others.

A phased and results based approach will be adopted to raise awareness and build
capacity among leaders and local community about the importance of behavior change
and local actions that can improve health, nutrition, water and sanitation and to access
program resources to meet community needs and priorities. The project will develop
the capacity of GPs to plan and implement initiatives that improve results in areas such
as nutritional status of women and children, quality of drinking water and village
sanitation. Building capacity and leadership of Gram Panchayats will be a motivating
factor for them to undertake their role in taking up issues of undernutrition among
women and children which otherwise are of low priority and remain invisible and
unattended to in most instances.

The nutrition team along with other sector specialists (Water, Sanitation and Natural
Resource Management) engaged with the BPSP and the client teams, participating in
preparation and appraisal Missions, and the design of each sectoral intervention was
jointly developed. This included presentations on nutrition as well as technical inputs in
the design of nutrition sensitive interventions including its monitoring and evaluation
aspects. There has been a long lag between approval and implementation and project is
in early implementation phase now.

Objective, Approach and Expected Outcomes for Nutrition Interventions

The following figure demonstrates the objective, approach and expected outcomes of
the nutrition, water and sanitation interventions:




                                           19
Strategy for Nutrition Sensitive Interventions

The proposed strategy and pathway to improve nutrition through Panchayat
interventions is as follows:




                                          20
Key activities supported to improve nutrition

The key activities that the project will fund to improve nutrition include:

i)    Capacity Building activities, including:
     Technical support services to develop training curricula, modules, content, and
      tools for GPs and community representatives to create awareness about nutrition
      and promote behavior change;
     Developing Master Training Teams to provide ongoing training support and
      monitoring training quality at all levels;
     Sensitization meetings for senior officials of different departments, training of
      Block Facilitators, training of all three tiers of PRIs including village Health-
      Nutrition-Sanitation-Water committees.
ii) Establishment and strengthening of village Health-Nutrition-Sanitation-Water
      Committees;
iii) Periodic review meetings/joint trainings with line department functionaries at GP,
      block, district level;
iv) Exposure visits;
v) GP and village level events for social mobilization to create awareness and
      promote behavior change;
vi) Information, Education and Communication, including nutrition and health
      content development for mass media, information & communication technology
      (ICT), wall paintings, community display boards etc.
vii) Learning, documentation and policy-advocacy
viii) Establishing a monitoring system to track nutrition status at the GP level – linked
      to the project MIS and the MIS for the ICDS.
ix) Rigorous impact evaluation of nutrition-related activities. Documentation – series
      of papers on successes, lessons learnt.

Geographical Areas of Coverage: The project will cover in a phased manner, six
districts and 91 blocks in Bihar over a period of five years.

The Target Groups to be reached will include elected representatives, officials and
functionaries at the Gram Panchayat (GP) level whose capacity will be developed to
become strong leaders who can listen to their constituents and solve their problems and
are able to mobilize resources and take initiatives.

Rural residents especially the disadvantaged in the target PRIs of the six districts will be
mobilized to monitor and hold government accountable and can undertake collective
actions to solve local problems.

Implementation Arrangements: The implementation and coordination arrangements
for the nutrition actions are embedded within the project implementation structures
shown in the figure below. Technical expertise, leadership, and facilitation for nutrition
will be provided at the project level through a State Nutrition Coordinator, at the
                                            21
district level through a District Nutrition Coordinator, and at the block level through a
Joint Water-Sanitation-Nutrition Coordinator.




Key Issues and Challenges

   It has been easier to incorporate nutrition sensitive interventions for the new project
    which was in the initial stage of formulating the project design. The engagement of
    technical experts (in nutrition, water and sanitation) with the project teams, both the
    Bank task team and the client team, began very early with participation in all
    preparation Missions and discussions, including in the development of the project
    results framework, implementation arrangements, monitoring and evaluation
    arrangements. This enabled the full integration of nutrition interventions in the
    project, including the Project Appraisal Document and Project Implementation Plan.
    The nutrition team continues to be engaged in Implementation Support.
   BPSP had a very long preparation period due to a variety of reasons, resulting in
    significant delay in the start of project implementation, and overall BPSP
    implementation is somewhat slow.

12.    Case 3: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project in Low Income States
       (RWSS-LIS)

12. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation in Low Income States: This case study presents
a brief outline of the nutrition interventions and approach agreed upon with the Bank
task team and incorporated into the Project Appraisal Document. While the
engagement with the project team was initiated during project preparations, given the
need for the task-team to meet the appraisal deadlines, and the relatively large number
of sectoral competing priorities and the engagement with five entities (the central level
and four states), it was agreed that the details and fine-tuning of the proposed approach

                                            22
and its implementation would be done through participation during implementation
Missions.

The RWSS-LIS objective is to improve piped water supply and sanitation services for
selected rural communities in the states of Bihar, Jharkhand, Assam and Uttar Pradesh.
The project will be implemented over a period of six years. The project takes a
decentralized service delivery approach in the participating states with increased
participation of local governance structures (Panchayati Raj Institutions) and
communities with enhanced accountability at all levels. It adopts a district wide
approach where there is low coverage of piped water supply and sanitation services
through an integrated approach to water supply and sanitation. It will support
household toilets, institutionalized sanitation in schools, anganwadi centers and
community/public toilets. It will promote environmental sanitation and solid waste
management for village wide cleanliness. This will be supported by Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) and Behavior Change Communication (BCC)
activities.

Strengthening water-sanitation-nutrition and health linkages, and testing their
impact

Promoting institutional convergence with relevant sectors and building partnerships as
appropriate with the Education, Health and Nutrition sectors for improving rural Water
and Sanitation services will be the key thrust of promoting and supporting nutrition
sensitive interventions through the RWSS-LIS. While the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
(NBA), National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), NRHM, ICDS – all recognize
the strong links between the sectoral programs, outline their commitment for inter-
sectoral convergence, and have identified institutional mechanisms to do so, in practice
these linkages largely remain weak and the sectoral intents unrealized. The RWSS-LIS
project offers the opportunity to strengthen these linkages across the project. Further,
ten districts across three states where both RWSS-LIS and the Bank-supported nutrition
project, ICDS Systems Strengthening and Nutrition Improvement Project (ISSNIP)
overlap3, offers the unique prospect to simultaneously deliver a comprehensive package
of water, sanitation, health and nutrition services with community participation and
engagement.

Given these opportunities, the project will support:

 Improving community awareness of the importance of improved water, sanitation
and hygiene in disease prevention and achieving better health and nutrition,
particularly for children. The NBA and NRDWP guidelines speak to this integration,



3
  The ten districts common to both projects across three states are: Kushinagar, Ghazipur and Allahabad in UP; Dumka, Garhwa and Palamau in
Jharkhand; and Pashchim Champaran, Muzzaffarpur, Munger and Purnia in Bihar



                                                                    23
and by strengthening IEC/BCC strategy, package and training, the project will help
operationalize the policy intent of the two programs;

 Enhancing institutional convergence with NRHM and ICDS in two ways. First, at
the village level by improving the collaboration between and capacities of the Village
Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC) of the Water and Sanitation programs and the
Village Health Sanitation nutrition committee (VHSNC) formed under the NRHM and
ICDS for joint IEC/BCC where VHSNCs exist. Where VHSNCs do not exist, the project
will build the capacity of the AWW and ASHA, key functionaries of ICDS and the
NRHM along with the VWSCs, and engage with NRHM at the district and block levels
to catalyze the VHSNCs (Note: the AWW and ASHA are mandated to be VHSNC
members and are also identified for IEC and community mobilization activities and
training under the NBA and NRDWP). Second, ensure that as mandated under the
NRHM, the ASHA fulfills the roles assigned to her related to household level disease
data collections, sample collection for testing, sanitary inspection of sources, and
corrective action to prevent pollution.

 In the ten districts common to RWSS-LIS and ISSNIP, the two projects will
collaborate to ensure that a complete package of health, nutrition, water and sanitation
interventions are delivered at the village level with community participation and
engagement. In these districts, in addition to the integrated IEC for water, sanitation,
hygiene, ISSNIP will support BCC for promoting positive nutrition behaviors such as
Infant and Young Child Feeding and Caring practices, along with the water,
environmental sanitation and hygiene messages.

Monitoring and Evaluation

The Impact Evaluation of the project will design and test the impact of improved water
and sanitation on health and nutrition indicators. The overlap with ISSNIP project in
several districts offers the opportunity to possibly test the differential impact of water
and sanitation interventions, nutrition and health interventions, and nutrition, health,
water and sanitation interventions delivered together. Studies to study the impact of
improved water and sanitation on morbidity reduction could also be considered.

Suggested indicators for the project to measure progress on the above activities (these
might not necessarily be included in the results framework but should be tracked as
part of the project MIS):

Outputs:

 Number of villages with IEC and community mobilization activities conducted with
the participation of ASHA and AWW (at least X sessions over the past year);
 Number of villages conducting joint trainings for VWSC and VHSNC members



                                           24
Outcomes:

 Increased percentage of women with knowledge of linkages of water, sanitation and
health and nutrition;
 Increased percentage of households with improved practices pertaining to: hand-
washing with soap before meals, before handling food and after using the toilet; food
hygiene (cooking, storing and serving); Infant and young child feeding practices, in
addition to hand-washing and food hygiene (in the RWSS-LIS and ISSNIP common
areas)

Implementation Arrangements: The project will be implemented under the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation and through the State and District Water and Sanitation
Missions going down to the village level through the Gram Panchayats. Mechanisms to
bring about institutional convergence will be established.


SECTION IV: CONCLUSIONS
13.   Conclusions

The three Case Studies included in this report are in the design and early
implementation stage. Therefore it is too early to capture the issues and learning’s
related to implementation of the nutrition interventions and the challenges and
opportunities that it would pose. These will need to be monitored through the period of
implementation to document experiences and evidence it generates for purposes of
learning, knowledge management and its dissemination. The evaluation of the nutrition
sensitive interventions within each of these projects is also planned.

The experience of incorporating nutrition sensitive interventions to date within each
case study has been different. It has been relatively easier to incorporate nutrition
actions in the case of new projects through engagement of Nutrition team and other
sector specialists (Water and Sanitation) with the respective TTLs and client project
teams during the preparatory and formulation stages of the Project Appraisal
Document. Moreover suitable provisions and investments were made within the project
for implementation, monitoring, evaluation and capacity building support for the
nutrition sensitive interventions.

In the case of Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot of Jeevika, additional and
substantive technical inputs and support were provided by the Consultant for
developing the design of the pilot and subsequently through recruiting Consultants to
support the implementation of the pilot and build capacity of the community cadres
and project staff. This technical support was provided to Jeevika since there was
no/limited provision for these.



                                          25
The Jeevika Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence pilot will initially be implemented on
a small scale to test and adjust the community based multisectoral convergence
approach before it is scaled up. The reason for this is for Jeevika to learn from the
experience of working with multiple sectors and stakeholders, adjust and then scale up
within Jeevika’s other operational areas and possibly replicate this model in similar
types of Rural Livelihood projects.

In the case of Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project, engagement with the TTL and
project team to incorporate nutrition sensitive interventions started at an early stage of
project design, and therefore the project could incorporate substantive technical inputs
and suggestions on nutrition sensitive interventions into the Project Design and Results
Framework.

In the case of Rural Water and Sanitation Project, the technical inputs on Nutrition were
light touch.

In all the three Case Studies, there has been a considerable time lag in moving from the
design stage to project implementation.

The following issues have emerged based on the experience of the three Case Studies.

a. Key Issues Emerging

• It is well recognized that to mainstream nutrition actions in a Multisectoral project it
  is important to have nutrition specific objective/s and nutrition sensitive
  interventions incorporated into the design of the project and to monitor its outputs
  and outcomes with appropriate indicators which should form a part of the overall
  monitoring and results framework of the project.

• Incorporating nutrition sensitive interventions within a Multisectoral Project requires
  appropriate support and investments for it -technical, human and financial. In the
  case of new projects which incorporate nutrition interventions, these investments can
  be built into the project design, implementation arrangements and budgets, whereas
  for ongoing projects that undertake nutrition interventions, these have to be
  provided for. This was clearly evident in the case of Jeevika Multisectoral
  Convergence pilot which posed challenges as these provisions were not there within
  the overall project.

• Technical support in nutrition needs to be provided to the Sectoral project client
  teams on an ongoing basis especially during the design and early stages of
  implementation of nutrition interventions along with ongoing capacity building
  support to the project team and community cadres.

• It is important to develop a perspective and understanding amongst the project team
  about the importance of nutrition and how it is relevant to their overall project
  otherwise it will be perceived as an add on

                                           26
• It is critical to identify within the institutional structure, those responsible for
  implementing nutrition actions(among project staff and community cadres) with
  clearly defined roles and responsibilities and mechanisms of accountability otherwise
  nutrition actions tend to get deprioritised.

• It is important to address issues related to ownership, commitment and workloads of
  staff for nutrition interventions. Competing priorities and workloads can derail
  nutrition interventions.

• Suitable Incentives, Rewards and Recognition need to be considered and put into
  place for undertaking Nutrition actions in Multisectoral projects.

• Strong Leadership and Champions are required within the project/organizations that
  can provide impetus to nutrition actions

• Setting up institutional coordination structures and mechanisms to work
  multisectorally with multiple stakeholders will require organizational commitment,
  responsibility, resources and time. It is a relatively new area to be tried and tested on
  how it will work so as to add value for all stakeholders concerned. It would require
  different ways of working which the implementation of the three case studies will
  provide evidence on.

b. Way Forward: It is proposed to continue providing technical assistance as
appropriate to the three Case Studies that have incorporated nutrition actions within
their Sectoral Projects in order to learn from the experience of implementing nutrition
interventions within these Projects. These initiatives will offer substantial learning’s
which will not only be useful for the project itself but also for wider dissemination.




                                            27
ANNEXES:

Annex 1: ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

This Analytical Framework sets out the core principles and adopts the project cycle
approach for analysis and possible actions for incorporating nutrition sensitive
interventions within the existing and new World Bank Multisectoral Projects in Bihar.

The Analytical Framework will help to work with Task Team Leaders (TTLs) and other
World Bank staff and project implementers to identify key issues, opportunities and
challenges for consideration in order to explore, inform and influence the potential to
mainstream nutrition interventions within individual Sectoral Projects through the
various stages of the project cycle namely: Identification and Design, Implementation,
Monitoring, Learning, Knowledge Management and Evaluation.

The Core Principles

   Facilitate a shared understanding amongst key stakeholders (internal and external)
    of the Multisectoral Projects (through advocacy, presentations, information sharing,
    and consultations) on the importance of nutrition as a development priority, the
    multidimensional determinants of nutrition and its synergy with the individual
    Sectoral Project and platform, so that it is perceived to be mutually beneficial and
    serves a common purpose.
   Identify natural entry points and opportunities which would be the basis for
    incorporating Nutrition Actions within the existing project design (Project Appraisal
    Document) rather than changing the design itself.
   Engage with the Project team to incorporate nutrition interventions when a new
    project design is being formulated.
   Nutrition Sensitive/Specific interventions to be proposed which have synergy and
    can add value to the overall project and will contribute to improved nutrition
    outcomes.
   The target group within the overall project (PAD) to consider and include the most
    nutritionally vulnerable group especially pregnant women and children up to two
    years i.e. the 1000 days critical window of opportunity. Besides this group, other
    nutritionally vulnerable groups and areas, socio-economically vulnerable groups
    and poor to be included.
   Gender analysis and actions to be mainstreamed within the project cycle framework
   Important to get buy-in, commitment and ownership from Task Team
    Leaders(TTLs) and other key stakeholders of the project to incorporate nutrition
    sensitive interventions through discussions, negotiations, agreements and possibly
    through incentives, rewards and recognition.
   Leadership/Champions for Nutrition to be identified within the individual projects
    which will be critical to the success of implementing the nutrition sensitive
    interventions.

                                           28
   In order to mainstream nutrition actions within the Sectoral Project, areas of synergy,
    collaboration (with existing and new external and internal stakeholders) and
    convergence (program and geographical) within individual projects to be assessed
    and made explicit (through consultations with the project stakeholders).
   An analysis (in conjunction with the key project stakeholders) of the Opportunities
    and Challenges, Benefits and Risks which would influence and inform the selection
    and decision on whether or not it is feasible to mainstream nutrition interventions
    within individual Sectoral Projects.
   Accountability and Governance issues related to the nutrition interventions should
    be cross cutting within the project rather than as a stand- alone.
   Technical Nutrition support and other capacity building support is critical and
    needs to identified and provided on a timely basis throughout the project cycle
   Review of lessons learned and good practice on Nutrition Actions in Multisectoral
    Projects from global and national experience should inform these projects as well as
    lessons emerging from these projects should be systematically drawn and
    documented for learning, knowledge management and sharing




                                            29
THE ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

This framework asks a set of key questions for exploring the feasibility and the potential
to incorporate and implement nutrition sensitive interventions within the different
stages of the project cycle.

Checklist 1 within Identification and Design: Key Questions

   What is the nature of nutrition problems and its consequences in the project
    areas/sectors? Is the information available in the broader project context analysis
    and whether nutrition analysis can be incorporated/made available to the project?
   Gender analysis should be crosscutting in all aspects of analysis and actions.
   Within individual Sectoral Projects, which project objective/s and its components
    lend themselves to incorporating nutrition specific/sensitive actions? What is the
    link between that objective, project component and activities to nutrition action?
    How would it provide leverage and add value? What are the potential links and
    pathways of that sector and nutrition?
   What are the likely entry points?
   What would be the likely benefits and risks?( To get perspectives from the TTLs and
    key stakeholders through consultations)
   What would be the opportunities and challenges to incorporate nutrition into the
    existing Multisectoral Projects –issues related to stakeholders’ interest, commitment,
    realism, doability, staff time, issues of capacity, technical support needs, use and
    deployment of existing and new human and financial resources, existing or new
    partnerships, issues related to coordination, collaboration and convergence, and any
    other.
   What would be the nutrition interventions /activities –for whom, what, where and
    how within the broader project design framework
   Who would be the target groups-women and children, most vulnerable and
    marginalized groups, who else?
   What nutrition interventions (nutrition specific and sensitive) can be suggested for
    the different Multisectoral Projects –what is appropriate for different Sectors?
   Geographical focus-which districts, blocks, communities, households, numbers.
    What would be the scope and scale of operations/activities?
   Which nutrition interventions, and at what levels: household, community, and
    block, district, state and national?
   Which Stakeholders and Partners to be involved? What is there comparative
    advantage? Roles and responsibilities and accountability made explicit within the
    project cycle.
   The above analysis would inform the Implementation plan




                                            30
Checklist 2 within Project Implementation and Management: Key Questions

   What are the arrangements for Implementation and Management of nutrition
    interventions within the overall project management?
   Who will provide Leadership? Who will be Champions for the Nutrition
    Interventions in the Project?
   What will be the Roles, Responsibilities and Accountability for nutrition amongst
    the structure of the Implementation organization and within the broader Project
    Management structure?
   What would be the mechanisms of coordination and collaboration amongst different
    stakeholders operating in different geographical areas and at different levels?
    How would the concerned stakeholders and partners be oriented to nutrition to
    have shared understanding on the nutrition implementation plan and its expected
    outcomes within the broader project framework?
   Capacity and Technical support needs in Nutrition to be identified and delivered –
    what, for whom, when and how?
   What are the opportunities to mainstream relevant nutrition information and action
    within the existing broader Project Implementation Plans, structures and
    mechanisms and what would be the challenges to do so? What would be
    creative/flexible ways to address these?


Checklist 3 within Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning: Key Questions

Monitoring and Evaluation plan for nutrition interventions to be developed and
indicators to measure nutrition outcomes to be part of the overall monitoring system
and Results Framework for the project.

Key Questions:

   What indicators will be used to measure the progress of nutrition activities and its
    outputs and outcomes at baseline, mid-term and project completion?
   What indicators would be included in the Monitoring plan to assess progress,
    identify challenges and constraints and ways to address these?
   Set milestones to measure progress
   Evaluation to be planned and executed
   How to capture the learning’s that will be generated through sharing and reflection
    amongst the relevant stakeholders and its dissemination.




                                           31
Annex 2: SUMMARY OF PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE: Improving Nutrition
Actions in Rural Livelihoods Projects

Purpose of Program Guidance Note

   Purpose of the Program Guidance Note-why, what and for whom?

a. This Program Guidance Note (PGN) is developed to assist the World Bank Task
   Team Leaders (TTLs), and program implementers of client organizations working in
   the Rural Livelihoods projects. The purpose is to analyze and design nutrition
   sensitive interventions within the Rural Livelihoods projects. The PGN is meant to
   provide generic guidance and is suggestive rather than prescriptive which can be
   adapted to specific operational and project contexts. It provides the rationale, need,
   importance and the how of nutrition actions that can be incorporated into the design
   of new and or ongoing project/s. It sets out the principles for action related to
   design of nutrition interventions and to work with multiple stakeholders through a
   project cycle approach.
b. The PGN will be developed in two phases. Phase 1 which is the present Program
   Guidance Note is related to the development and design of nutrition sensitive
   interventions within the Rural Livelihoods project drawing on the experience of
   designing the Multisectoral Convergence Pilot by the Bihar Rural Livelihoods
   project with technical support from the World Bank. This would be useful and
   relevant for similar projects within the framework of the National Rural Livelihoods
   Mission (NRLM) and the National Rural Livelihoods Project (NRLP) supported by
   the World Bank. Phase 2 PGN will be developed later as a sequel to this Program
   Guidance Note and will provide guidance on the implementation, monitoring and
   evaluation aspects.
c. The PGN is structured into three sections. The first section provides basic
   information and rationale for investing in Nutrition. The second section provides
   information on the National Rural Livelihoods Mission and Projects and key
   principles to incorporate nutrition in the design of Nutrition Actions. The last
   Section draws on from the Case Study of the Jeevika Multisectoral Nutrition
   Convergence Pilot to develop the design of nutrition sensitive interventions using
   the project cycle approach.




                                           32
   Nutrition Specific and Nutrition Sensitive Interventions

      Nutrition Specific Interventions         Nutrition Sensitive Interventions

      A term that refers to interventions      These are interventions within
      that directly address inadequate         sector specific objectives which aim
      dietary intake or disease which are      to    improve      the     underlying
      the     immediate      causes     of     determinants of nutrition, namely
      malnutrition.     These     include:     food security, adequate maternal
      promotion of breast feeding,             and child care at household and
      complementary feeding, treatment         community level, access to health
      of    malnutrition,   micronutrient      services, hygiene and environmental
      supplementation and deworming,           sanitation, and incorporates specific
      adolescent and maternal health and       nutrition objectives and actions.
      nutrition.                               Various actions that would address
                                               the determinants of malnutrition are
                                               possible in many sectors such as
                                               rural livelihoods, agriculture, water
                                               and sanitation, education and so on.



Basics in Nutrition

a. Malnutrition is poor nutritional status caused by nutritional deficiency
   (undernutrition) or excess (overnutrition). The focus is on undernutrition which
   results from inadequate quantity and quality of food, disease and inadequate care
   and feeding practices that results in underweight(low weight for age), stunting( low
   height for age) and wasting( low weight for height) and /or micronutrient
   deficiencies.
   Maternal malnutrition: Many children are born undernourished because their
   mothers are undernourished. The nutritional status of women and girls are affected
   due to several factors such as limited access to food, traditional and cultural
   practices where women tend to eat the last and least, early marriage, repeated
   pregnancies, frequent infections with limited access to health care and sanitation.

b. Consequences of Undernutrition:
 Single largest cause of child death
 Lost human capital: Undernourished children have poorer cognitive development,
   lower school attainment and lower IQ, lower productivity and incomes as adults
   and are more likely to have undernourished children thereby perpetuating poverty.
 Lost economic growth: It is estimated that undernutrition costs as much as 2-3
   percent of GDP in many low income countries.



                                          33
   Irreversibly important for the first 1000 days: Malnutrition experienced during
    pregnancy and the first two years of life will have severe and irreversible
    consequences on child development.
   Nutrition is important throughout the life cycle: Malnutrition reduces adult workers
    productivity, exacerbates disease, results in reduced work capacity, and chronic
    fatigue.

c. Importance of Nutrition in the First 1,000 Days-Window of Opportunity
   Pregnancy to age 24 months, the first 1,000 days of life is the critical window of
   opportunity. By the time children reach their second birthday, if undernourished,
   they could suffer irreversible physical and cognitive damage which could impact
   their future health, development and well being. The consequences of insufficient
   nourishment in early childhood can continue into adulthood and be passed on to the
   next generation as undernourished girls and when women have children of their
   own. The importance of proper nutrition during this 1000 day period in pregnancy
   and until 24 months of the child’s life is therefore critical. Effective interventions are
   known which when provided during the first 1000 days of life can improve
   undernutrition. These include exclusive breast feeding, appropriate complementary
   feeding, micronutrient interventions (Vitamin A, iodine and iron), deworming, hand
   washing and hygiene and food supplementation in food insecure households. It is
   critical to ensure these interventions reach women and children during the narrow
   window of opportunity.

RURAL LIVELIHOODS AND NUTRITION

    Background of National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)
    The National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) is perhaps the largest poverty
    reduction initiative and the largest program for women in the world. The World
    Bank is supporting this program through its National Rural Livelihoods Project,
    which is its largest single investment in a poverty reduction program. NRLM will
    be implemented in 12 states that account for 85 percent of the rural poor households
    in India.

    The NRLM reaches down to the household level to support the formation of
    institutions of the poor at the community level from Self Help Groups(SHGs) to
    aggregation of these institutions which are federated at village, cluster, block and
    district levels. These provide a collective space and voice for the poor especially
    women to work together to leverage resources and services related to livelihoods.
    These include savings, building assets, adoption of new livelihoods for themselves
    and their families. The vast resources enable the institutional platforms to engage
    with many sectors and interact with many service providers. The program was a
    wide outreach.



                                             34
Through the National Rural Livelihoods project, the World Bank provides technical
and financial support to improve program delivery. The program which is being
rolled out in a phased manner will allow the 12 states that have high poverty rates
(Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh) to
implement large scale pilots, create demonstration sites and best practice to
incorporate lessons learned. It provides an excellent program platform to
incorporate Nutrition Actions. An example of the model that has incorporated
nutrition interventions under the World Bank supported Andhra Pradesh Poverty
Reduction project called Nutrition cum Day Care Centers (NDCCs) is given below.

Nutrition cum Day Care Centers (NDCCs) in Andhra Pradesh
This World Bank supported pilot program aims to reduce malnutrition and improve
nutritional status of pregnant and lactating women and young children from poor
households in the long term. The NDCCs are community driven, community owned
and community supervised rather than having a top down approach. They have
been built on the social infrastructure of women’s Self Help Groups (SHGs) and
their Village Organizations (VOs) and federations that have been established across
the state for almost two decades. NDCCs aim to provide complete nutrition to
pregnant and lactating and their children below two years with three cooked, well
balanced meals a day on site to ensure that the food is consumed by the beneficiaries
themselves. The cost of the meal is being recovered through a variety of measures
with a view to becoming financially sustainable. These include amongst others,
payment by beneficiaries (one third of the cost of the meal), linkages with programs
like ICDS and Public Distribution System (PDS) to get food in bulk and at
subsidized prices and to use fresh foodstuff from the centers own community
gardens. The NDCCs seek to ensure provision of antenatal care for all pregnant
women, postnatal care for mothers and immunization for young children, increase
awareness and behavior change for maternal, infant and young child health and
nutrition practices and repayment for services by the NDCC beneficiaries. Since
2007, through a phased incremental approach around 5000 NDCCs have been
established in villages across Andhra Pradesh.

It is recommended that a Review of other Nutrition Sensitive Interventions within
Multisectoral Projects that are being implemented especially in the Rural
Livelihoods sector be carried out to draw lessons learned on what has worked well
and why and what has not worked well so that these can be used to inform future
nutrition interventions that can be planned and carried out within the framework of
the National Rural Livelihoods Mission and Projects.

Brief about the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (Jeevika)
The Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (BRLPS) is an independent society
set up by the Government of Bihar (GoB) and supported by the World Bank. The

                                       35
   GoB has designated BRLPS as the State Rural Livelihoods Mission for
   implementation of NRLM at the state level. The BRLPS is implementing Jeevika-
   Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP) to promote social and economic
   empowerment of the rural poor especially women which is being carried out on a
   large scale in Bihar.

   The objectives of the project are to:
    i) Create self managed community institutions of participating households,
    ii) Enhance income through sustainable livelihoods,
    iii) Increase access to social protection including food security by enabling women
         to have a voice in implementation of such schemes.

   The strategy of the project is to build dynamic, self managed social capital
   comprising of community institutions of women. The strategy promotes savings,
   credit and livelihood opportunities where community organizations revolve
   leveraged funds to meet their various needs. The Self Help Groups (SHGs) are the
   primary level community organizations which are federated at village level into
   Village Organizations (VOs) as well as at the cluster and block levels. The project is
   moving towards a saturation approach to cover all the poor households in the
   geographical areas of its operation. The BRLP intervenes with the community
   through the following four themes which include: i) Institution and capacity
   building, ii) Social development, iii) Microfinance and iv) Livelihoods promotion.

   Nutrition Actions within BRLPS
   More recently, BRLPS has included Health and Nutrition interventions as a fifth
   theme which is being incorporated within its Project. Initially this was done with a
   view to reduce health expenditures and provide food security to its target group of
   women. Jeevika is presently experimenting with different models and approaches of
   nutrition interventions which are being carried out in different geographical areas
   and in collaboration with different sectors and organizations. These are being
   implemented through structures and project infrastructure.

   The various models and approaches on Nutrition of the BRLPS include:
i) The Community Health and Nutrition Care Centers (CHNCCs): This pilot was started in
   2012 with the objective of setting up community managed Nutrition Care Centers to
   improve nutrition and health and nutrition seeking behavior among pregnant and
   lactating women and young children below two years from the poorest and
   disadvantaged households. It is based on the Andhra Pradesh Nutrition cum Day
   Care Centers model. The CHNCCs are supported by the Village Organization (VO)
   structure and targets pregnant and lactating women and for children 13 to 24
   months provides them with nutritious on site meals three times a day at the center.
   It promotes exclusive breast feeding for children from birth to six months and
   provides weaning foods for children from 7 to 12 months as well as nutrition and

                                           36
       health education, health check up and immunization through monthly check-ups.
       The beneficiaries are SHG members who pay a subsidized amount for the meals.
ii)    BRLPS administered Supplementary Nutrition Program model for ICDS: will be piloted in
       5 blocks where VOs will administer supplementary feeding program. BRLPS will
       receive funds from the ICDS which will in turn be transferred to the VOs who will
       procure food supplies, supervise distribution of take home rations to pregnant and
       lactating women, prepare and distribute supplementary food to children below six
       years at the AWCs. This intervention provides the potential to enhance community
       participation and improve service delivery of the supplementary nutrition
       component of the ICDS through an open, transparent and accountable process.
iii)   The Gram Varta model: The purpose of this intervention is to promote positive health,
       nutrition, water and sanitation practices in the community through the platform of
       SHGs. Gram Varta is a process of 20 participatory learning and action based meeting
       cycles delivered through SHGs using participatory methods integrating nutrition,
       health, water and sanitation messages targeting pregnant women and young
       children under two years (1000 days window of opportunity). Community meetings
       by VOs to engage with local service providers in order to seek their participation for
       improving service delivery. Technical and capacity building support is provided to
       Jeevika by the Technical Assistance support team (B-TAST) and learning and
       financial support by the Women Development Corporation (WDC). The first phase
       will cover 36 Blocks in five districts of Bihar
iv)    Model of collaboration between BRLPS and Project Concern International (PCI) to
       improve nutrition and health service coverage and outcomes. The Ananya program
       is a consortium of development partners funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates
       Foundation (BMGF) implementing a package of demand and supply side of
       interventions with a focus to reduce maternal and child mortality and improve
       health and nutrition outcomes. PCI through its Parivartan program is implementing
       interventions that aim to catalyze community mobilization and action to bring
       change in desirable behaviors specifically eight on health and nutrition and four
       related to water and sanitation through mobilizing and strengthening SHGs.
v)     The Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot: Jeevika has developed this pilot with
       technical support from the World Bank. The pilot has developed a community based
       convergence approach to bring Village Organisations to interface with local service
       providers from government programs (ICDS, NRHM, PHED and others) and
       development organizations working in the area to generate demand, improve
       quality and utilization of services, enhance mutual accountability and improve
       nutrition outcomes. The pilot will start small as a feasibility phase with inbuilt
       mechanisms for learning, monitoring and scale up.

       The above nutrition action models/approaches of Jeevika are at different stages of
       planning, start up, implementation, and are located in different or in some cases
       same geographical areas. Some of these models have focused on center-based
       feeding for the nutritionally vulnerable groups mainly pregnant and lactating

                                               37
women and young children (1000 days window of opportunity) in conjunction with
health check- ups and behavior change communication, and in some instances the
water and sanitation component has been included. The Jeevika Multisectoral
Nutrition Convergence Pilot is a systematic attempt of a community based
multisectoral convergence approach of working with key sectors and stakeholders to
generate demand and improve service provision for improved nutrition outcomes.

The various models and approaches adopted by Jeevika are of different scope, size
and scale. It provides a unique opportunity for BRLPS to learn from them on what
and how to implement nutrition sensitive interventions and to assess the
effectiveness and outcomes of these different approaches for future scale up.

This Program Guidance Note draws on the experience of developing the design of
the Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot by Jeevika with technical support
from the World Bank.

Nutrition Sensitive Rural Livelihoods
A large proportion of malnourished persons reside in rural areas and the most
affected amongst them are women and children. Rural livelihoods provide a source
of income for the poor especially women through savings and livelihood
opportunities. Simply increasing women/household incomes and agriculture
production are insufficient to improve nutritional status of family and within it
women and young children (especially the 1000 days window of opportunity).
Many poor and vulnerable households lack nutrition and health information and
awareness and often do not avail of existing services. Investing in nutrition
especially for women will not only improve nutrition outcomes for their families
and community but will also support rural livelihoods and poverty reduction
efforts.

Therefore Rural Livelihoods is an important sector and has the potential to address
nutrition especially for women and children on a large scale and would further
empower poor and disadvantaged women. Nutrition sensitive Rural Livelihoods
policy and projects can influence and improve nutrition outcomes for the rural poor
especially women and young children by layering nutrition actions related to food
and nutrition security, maternal, infant, child and adolescent health and nutrition
practices, create demand for services and its utilization by providing appropriate
nutrition support through its community platforms.

Key Principles to incorporate Nutrition in Rural Livelihoods Projects
Guiding principles can be kept in mind to incorporate nutrition sensitive
interventions into the design and implementation of policies, projects and
investments within the National Rural Livelihoods Mission/Rural Livelihoods
projects. These can be adapted and used to individual contexts.

                                      38
   Incorporate nutrition concerns into the design and implementation of Rural
    Livelihoods projects and to measure nutrition outcomes. The way to achieve this
    principle is to include nutrition objective/s and nutrition sensitive interventions
    explicitly into the project design and to measure nutrition outcomes and results
    which should be part of the overall Monitoring, Results and Evaluation framework
    of the project.
   Target nutritionally vulnerable groups. In the rural livelihoods project, the
    population that is being targeted is the poorest and most marginalized women who
    are being reached. From a nutrition standpoint, the most nutritionally vulnerable
    groups within this target group which needs to be prioritized and reached is the
    target group “1000 days window of opportunity” which starts during pregnancy
    and closes at about 2 years of age which is the critical period for preventing child
    malnutrition.
   Increase year round availability of diverse food basket to the income and food
    deficit households. The affect of seasonal food shortage and seasonal income deficits
    (periods when there is no/little work available) can have negative consequences on
    food and nutrition security of the household especially for the critical 1000 days
    window of opportunity. To prevent and mitigate this situation and to reduce the
    impact of food shortage on families and nutritionally vulnerable within it, it is
    important to provide access to diverse food basket throughout the year. Information
    related to when food and income shortages occur, who gets most affected by it and
    for how long and how severe needs to be obtained. By using a nutrition lens, the
    project can plan and implement (during periods of food scarcity and otherwise)what
    provisions need to be made through food security fund or alternate income
    generating activities, what and how much food would be required to meet the food
    and nutrition needs of the households especially for pregnant women and young
    children
   Improve nutrition knowledge among rural households especially women.
    Incorporate nutrition awareness and communication to target behavior change
    especially related to maternal, infant and child health and nutrition, safe hygiene
    and sanitation practices for the community especially women.
   Empower women in nutrition and invest in them. Increase in rural women’s
    incomes through livelihood opportunities has contributed to women’s economic
    empowerment. This can be further strengthened by juxtaposing nutrition and health
    knowledge and awareness and building capacity of women’s collectives and
    strengthening their role in decision making including how community resources
    and household incomes are spent. Women who control income have significant
    positive effect on child nutrition, family food security, health seeking behavior
    besides other benefits. Given that women play multiple roles within household and
    community, it will not only benefit them but also their families and community.
   Promote interface between demand and supply and seek opportunities to work
    across sectors. Through community structures and organizations promoted and
    strengthened by the rural livelihoods programs (NRLM) these can be enabled to

                                           39
    foster linkages and engage with nutrition, health and sanitation programs for
    mutual accountability. Promote interface between demand and supply through
    community platforms for convergence with service providers from multiple sectors.
    This would require multisectoral planning, coordination, geographical overlaps and
    creating shared structures and commitment for coordination in order to improve
    nutrition outcomes. Issues around governance and accountability, roles and
    responsibilities and incentives for coordination will need to be well defined. Actions
    can be planned taking into account the context, objectives and operating
    environment
   Reaching nutrition to the unreached: The Rural Livelihoods project primarily targets
    the most impoverished and vulnerable households which are often missed out by
    service providers and difficult to reach. Discriminated groups require specific
    measures to help them overcome obstacles that impede their access to and
    utilization of nutrition, health and sanitation services and to make these services
    more responsive and accountable to their needs.
   Develop understanding and capacity on nutrition as a development priority:
    Develop capacity of human resources within the project in nutrition (especially on
    maternal and child nutrition) at all levels (relevant project staff and community
    cadres) and to ensure training, capacity building support, mentoring and guidance,
    motivation and recognition is provided for nutrition work especially for front line
    workers and community cadres.

    Practical Steps
   In the case of an ongoing project, review the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) to
    understand the project objectives, results framework, activities, geographical areas
    covered, implementation arrangements, project status and key issues. Assess what
    could be possible opportunities and key entry points for incorporating nutrition
    interventions. For new projects, engage at the outset during the project preparation
    and design stage to incorporate nutrition actions within it.
   Get commitment and buy-in from the Task Team Leader (TTL) and other related WB
    staff and teams from client organizations and continue to engage with them on an
    ongoing basis in the development of the design of nutrition sensitive interventions
    for incorporation within the Rural Livelihoods project.
   Project site visits and meetings with the project task teams of counterparts at the
    state, district and block levels. Consultations with key stakeholders from project
    (concerned state, district and block project staff, VO members and other community
    members) as well as external stakeholders- from government programs (such as the
    ICDS, NRHM, PHED and other development organizations working in the area) to
    understand the context, programs and issues in the operational area.
   Information and analysis of the context, nutrition problems, opportunities and risks
    to incorporate nutrition sensitive interventions within the project platform, building
    on need and what is there.


                                            40
      Identify key entry points and synergy between the Project and Nutrition Actions
       identified.
      Provide ongoing technical support in nutrition to the project team in design of the
       project.
      Develop and build a perspective amongst the team on the importance of nutrition
       within the project framework.


   Sample Checklist that can be used for preparing the design of the Nutrition Sensitive
   Nutrition Interventions

                                       Sample Checklist

1. Analysis of the           Sample Questions
   context and
   nutrition issues in      What are the prevalent nutrition problems in the operational
   the operational area      area and more widely?
                            Which population and target groups suffer the most?
                            What are the existing maternal, infant and child care practices?
                            What is the role of women in addressing these problems?
                            How can increased incomes be used to improve food and
                             nutrition security of households?
                            Who are the service providers and development organizations
                             working in nutrition, health, sanitation in the geographical area
                             of operation?
                            What are the opportunities and risks for community structures
                             to work with them?

                          Tools: Review existing documents, consultations with key
                          stakeholders, site visits, Focus Group Discussion with SHGs/VOs
                          members.




                                              41
2. Consultation with        Sample Questions
women from SHGs/
Village Organizations      Dietary/food consumption patterns
                           Seasonal food availability (households and community)and
                            intra-household food consumption
                           Prevalent practices related to maternal, infant and young child
                            feeding, hygiene and sanitation practices
                           Awareness and use of nutrition and health services
                           Roles and responsibilities of women within household and
                            community and in decision making

                        Tools: Focus Group Discussion with members of SHGs and VOs

3.Consultations with    Sample Questions
project staff
                           What are the nutrition problems in the area?
                           What, why and how can nutrition activities be incorporated into
                            the project?
                           What are the activities that can be built on and strengthened?
                            E.g. Food Security Fund, kitchen gardens, agriculture/nutrition
                            related livelihoods activities?
                           Need and how to collaborate with government services in the
                            area?
                           What are the potential opportunities and risks and suggestions?

                        Tools: Meetings with staff, one to ones
4. Consultations with   Sample Questions
external stakeholders
(ICDS, Health, PHED,       What is the perception about multisectoral coordination? Who
District leadership and     and what (sectors and constituents) to collaborate with and for
development                 what purpose?
organizations) to          How to facilitate coordination and collaboration between
explore the potential       community and service providers in nutrition, health and
for collaboration           sanitation? (horizontally and vertically)
                           What would be the triggers to work multisectorally?
                           How to make coordination and collaboration work over time?
                           What should be the structure, mechanisms, motivation,
                            dynamics and accountability for this coordination? How can it be
                            mutually beneficial?
                           How to develop shared understanding and commitment to
                            coordination?

                        Tools: Consultations with multi-stakeholders, meetings, workshops


                                             42
The Design Framework and Objectives and Results Framework of the Multisectoral
Nutrition Convergence Pilot are provided on page 10 of the report

The Nutrition Sensitive Interventions of the Pilot include:

   i) Behavior Change Communication (BCC) on nutrition, health, water and
   sanitation.




   ii) Household Food and Nutrition Security
   iii) Institutionalize Convergence and Coordination
   iv) Water and Sanitation Component
   v) Promote gender equity and women’s empowerment as a cross cutting aspect.

Details of the nutrition sensitive interventions are on pages 11 and 12

Program Impact Pathway: as in the diagram below




                                            43
Design of the Impact Evaluation: Information on page 17 of the report

Key Issues, Opportunities and Challenges:

The Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot has generated a lot of issues and
learning’s based on the design development phase that needs to be taken cognizance
of in multisectoral approach to nutrition. There will be a lot more issues that will
emerge once the model is implemented. Some of the key issues are as below:


 Key Issues
 The model has been developed in an ongoing Rural Livelihoods Project, which
  will be first piloted before it is scaled up.
 The project needs to have appropriate resources-people, financial and technical
  to undertake nutrition actions.
 Since nutrition is not a core area of the team, technical support in nutrition is
  required to the client project staff to develop design and to implement the
  interventions by providing ongoing mentoring and capacity building support.
 Develop perspective and understanding among the project team about the
  importance of nutrition as a development priority so that they perceive its
  relevance to the project
 Identify within institutional structure, those responsible for implementing
  nutrition actions (among project staff and community cadres). Roles and
  responsibilities need to be clarified with mechanisms of accountability.
 Address issues related to ownership, commitment and time among staff for
  nutrition interventions. Competing priorities and workloads can de-prioritize
  nutrition interventions.
 Provide suitable Incentives, Reward and Recognition for carrying out nutrition
  actions
 Leadership and Champions within the organization can provide impetus to
  nutrition actions
 Institutional coordination structures and mechanisms should be developed
  from the community upwards and to learn from evidence how these can be
  made to function effectively.




                                       44
Annex 3: SUMMARY OF PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE: Improving Nutrition
Actions in Programs for Panchayati Raj Institutions (Local Governance
Structures)

PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE


   Purpose of the Program Guidance Note-why, what and for whom?
a. This Program Guidance Note (PGN) is developed to assist the World Bank Task
   Team Leaders (TTLs), its project partners and program implementers from client
   organizations to incorporate Nutrition through strengthening decentralized
   governance in the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). It is meant as a generic
   guidance and is suggestive rather than prescriptive which can be adapted to specific
   operational and project contexts. It provides principles and actions related to
   mainstreaming nutrition sensitive interventions within the design of the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Project Implementation Plan (PIP) through a
   project cycle approach.
b. The PGN is related to the development and design of nutrition actions within the
   PAD framework to strengthen decentralized governance through Panchayati Raj
   Institution projects and programs drawing on the experience in incorporating
   nutrition sensitive interventions within the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project.
   This would have relevance and use for similar and related projects on a wider scale.
c. The PGN is structured in three sections. The first section provides purpose of the
   PGN; the second section provides background information on the Panchayati Raj
   Institutions and the key principles to incorporate nutrition in decentralized
   governance structures. The last section draws on from the Case Study of the Bihar
   Panchayat Strengthening Project to develop the design of nutrition sensitive
   interventions using the project cycle approach.


INCORPORATING NUTRITION ACTIONS IN PANCHAYATI RAJ
INSTITUTIONS

   Brief on the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs):
   The PRI is a three tiered system at the state level with elected bodies at the village,
   block and district level. Panchayats are institutions of self governance vested with
   powers and functions which varies across the different states. There are Gram
   Panchayats for a village or a group of villages. These village level democratic
   structures are set up with the purpose to ensure greater participation of people-
   women and men and more effective implementation of rural development
   programs.



                                           45
Background on Panchayati Raj Institutions in Bihar:

Bihar has had a long history of PRI. However, these have only had legal existence
without proper functioning or having funds. In contrast, the PRIs that emerged after
the 2006 elections were provided concrete mandate and funds. The role of
panchayats were also defined in health and nutrition, water and sanitation, women
and child development, education, housing and other areas so that it gave them an
opportunity to contribute to local development.

                    Table Bihar Governance Structure (PRI)




The local gram panchayat members face challenges to execute their responsibilities.
These are mainly due to low levels of education, limited and lack of awareness and
capacity to implement their responsibilities, poor representation along gender and
caste lines and those related to issues of governance, participation and
accountability. This holds true for their awareness or lack of it on nutrition, health
and sanitation and their understanding of the various dimensions of malnutrition
and the important role that they can play to address the nutrition and health
challenges at the local level.

To address these challenges, it is important to develop awareness and capacity of
local leaders and representatives of the local gram panchayats in nutrition and
health so that they are well equipped, positioned and motivated to provide
leadership to bring improvements in their community related to nutrition, health
and sanitation, especially for women and young children.

Key Principles to Incorporate Nutrition Actions through Decentralized
Governance and PRIs
The guiding principles and possible actions that can be kept in mind to incorporate
nutrition sensitive interventions into the design and implementation of policies,

                                        46
    projects and investments within the Panchayati Raj Institutions and local
    governance structures. These can be adapted and used to individual contexts.
   Incorporate nutrition concerns into the design and implementation of Panchayati
    Raj Institutions and local governance structures of projects, policies and
    investments and to measure nutrition outcomes.
   Undertake a holistic and bottom up approach to development. People, both men
    and women at grassroots level especially the poor and disadvantaged are
    empowered to participate in local governance structures and take decisions that
    affect their lives and development including those related to health and nutrition.
   Build understanding and capacity of local leaders in governance structures about
    the importance of nutrition. Through awareness and capacity building approach,
    develop understanding amongst local leaders in governance structures about
    undernutrition and their role in promoting nutrition and health of the family
    (especially women and children) and community.
   Empower the community to access government resources and programs of nutrition,
    health, water and sanitation and other related services.
   Target the most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. In the project, the poorest
    and most marginalized groups should be targeted. Within that, from a nutrition
    standpoint, the most nutritionally vulnerable groups would need to be prioritized
    and reached which is the target group“1000 days window of opportunity” which
    starts during pregnancy and closes at about 2 years of age and is the most critical
    period for preventing child undernutrition.
   Improve nutrition knowledge among rural households and community : Incorporate
    awareness and behavior change through communication related to nutrition, health,
    water and sanitation to improve practices especially related to maternal and child
    health and nutrition, safe hygiene and sanitation for the families and community.
   Empower women and invest in them. Women’s participation and representation in
    local governance structures needs to be enhanced. Strengthening rural women’s
    awareness, capacity and role in decision making including how community
    resources and government programs are used. Given that women play multiple
    roles within household and community, it will not only benefit them but also their
    families and community.
   Promote work across sectors and strengthen decentralized governance and
    accountability: Build capacity of local governance structures to facilitate
    coordination withmultiple sectors and stakeholders working in nutrition, health,
    water and sanitation. This would require multisectoral planning, coordination, and
    developing capacity, creating shared understanding, commitment and structures for
    coordination in order to improve nutrition outcomes. Issues around governance and
    accountability, roles and responsibilities and incentives for coordination will need to
    be well defined.
   Develop understanding and capacity on nutrition as a development priority:
    Develop capacity of human resources within the project at all levels and to ensure


                                            47
   training, capacity building and mentoring support is provided to PRIs and other
   multiple stakeholders in relevant sectors.

Case Study of Incorporating Nutrition Actions in the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening
Project


   Background of the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project (BPSP) and Nutrition
   Actions –Information on this is provided on pages 18 and 19 of the report

   Objectives, Focus, Approach and Expected Outcomes of Nutrition Sensitive
   Interventions within the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project: Refer to page 19
   and 20

   Nutrition Sensitive Interventions:

   The focus of the project is on Nutrition, Sanitation and Safe drinking water.

   Nutrition: The GP leadership will be developed and community action promoted
   through decentralized governance structures. Community mobilization will be
   undertaken and households will be supported to adopt appropriate maternal, infant
   and child health and nutrition practices. Creating awareness and demand for
   services and to ensure delivery of health and nutrition services and promote
   convergence of services through interface between demand and supply. A capacity
   building approach will be adopted and decentralized local structures and
   mechanisms will be set up to promote nutrition especially for women and children.
   At the GP level, events like Health melas, Nutrition Health and Sanitation days
   (with community reps and local service providers working collaboratively) and
   campaigns will be supported. Monitoring and supportive supervision will be
   provided to the GP and documentation of key processes will be undertaken.

   Sanitation: Community led total sanitation campaign will be the entry point
   intervention to be implemented in a phased manner through community awareness
   and mobilization to create a need for safe sanitation environment and to stop open
   defecation. The strategy will be to develop the capacities of GP members and along
   with them to motivate the community for behavior change. Technical inputs would
   be provided for toilet construction, facilitating availability of materials and skills and
   to monitor the sustenance of behavior change. A monitoring system at the GP level
   will track coverage of toilets and its usage and sustainability linked to the TCS
   Monitoring Information System (MIS).

   Safe Drinking Water:A majority of rural households in Bihar rely on private, low
   cost shallow hand pumps. In most cases, water is highly contaminated due to poor
   sanitary conditions. The project will provide technical support for improving the

                                             48
quality of drinking water. Capacity building support and establishing coordination
structures and mechanisms with concerned stakeholders will be provided.

Capacity Building Approach
There is a strong emphasis on building the capacity of the PRIs at all levels with
utmost attention to be given at the GP level. A cascading training model will
provide initial and ongoing training and mentoring support to build capacity of
GPs, as also other stakeholders at the block and district levels. Development of
training modules, manuals, materials and approaches and developing the BCC plan
and its roll out would be undertaken.

Given the importance of working in partnership with programs like the ICDS,
PHED and RWSP and others, sensitization and capacity support to community
organizations, local service providers and officials of these programs will be
provided.

Implementation Arrangements and Coordination with Stakeholders
Bihar Gram Swaraj Yojna Society (BGSYS) under the Panchayati Raj Department,
Government of Bihar is the nodal body for the implementation of the project in six
districts. The Society will work in conjunction with other departments including
PHED (for water and sanitation) and Social Welfare (ICDS) and development
partners such as Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), UNICEF, DfID, and Gates
Foundation for the purposes of coordination and collaboration and for technical
support to the project. It will work with Support and Training Organizations for
providing capacity building support at different levels and to different stakeholders.

Monitoring and Evaluation
The outcomes related to the nutrition sensitive interventions are incorporated into
the Results Framework and Key Performance Indicators of the project and will be
monitored as a part of the ongoing monitoring system by internal and external
agencies.

The evaluation will generate evidence of the efficacy of the nutrition sensitive
interventions and its impact within the framework of the overall project.

Key Issues, Opportunities and Challenges

 Key Issues Emerging:
  It has been experienced that when the engagement and commitment to
    include nutrition interventions within a Sectoral Project takes place in the
    initial stages of preparation of the Project Appraisal Document it is easier to
    incorporate nutrition into the overall project framework rather than in an
    ongoing project.

                                        49
   It is important to provide orientation to TTL and the client teams on the
    importance of nutrition (using tools such as videos and presentations) to
    develop their understanding and interest as well as for them to see the
    relevance and added value of the nutrition sensitive interventions from the
    overall project perspective.
   The suggestions and contributions on nutrition sensitive interventions from
    the Sectoral Specialists team (Nutrition, Water and Sanitation) who were
    engaged from the outset and at different stages of the project preparation
    were taken on board. Their contributions and suggestions were included in
    the overall project design, implementation arrangements, and capacity
    building support as well as in monitoring and evaluation of the nutrition
    outcomes.
   In a new and developing project, it was possible to get coordinated technical
    inputs from Specialists in Nutrition, Water and Sanitation which would have
    otherwise not been possible especially in the case of ongoing Projects.
   It is important to be realistic and pragmatic about how much the Sectoral
    Project can take on of nutrition sensitive interventions keeping in view the
    expected outcomes and to have selected number of indicators without
    overwhelming/overloading the project and the team




                                       50
Annex 4: Statistics on Bihar


Table on Bihar Statistics

                            Indicators                                Bihar
Neo-natal mortality rate (NMR) per 1,000 live births                 35
Infant mortality rate (IMR) per 1,000 live births                    55
Under-5 mortality rate per 1,000 live births                         77
Children under 3 years who are underweight (i.e. weight-for-         56
age) (%)
Institutional births (%)                                             47.7
Households have access to toilet facility (%)                        25.9
Households used piped or tap drinking water (%)   ^                  4.4
Total Fertility Rate(TFR)                                            3.7
Median Age at first live birth of women aged 15 to 49 years          21.5
Mothers who received 3 or more antenatal care (%)                    34
Mothers who consumed IFA for 100 days or more (%)                    10
Children with birth weight less than 2.5 kgs (%)                     22.4
Children breastfed within one hour of birth (%)                      30.3
Children (aged 6 to 35 months) exclusively breastfed for at least    28.5
6 months
Children who received animal or formula milk during first 6          61.3
months
Total population (million)                                           104
Rural population (%)                                                 89
Source: Annual Health Survey 2010-11; #Hungama Survey Report 2010; ^ District Level
Household Survey - 3, 2007-08




                                           51
