                                                                Focus on
                                                          comprehensive,
                                                               long-term
                                                              responses.




Community-Based
Approaches to Intimate
Partner Violence
A REVIEW OF EVIDENCE AND ESSENTIAL
STEPS TO ADAPTATION
MAY 24, 2016




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence              1
Acknowledgments:                                                                            Focus on
This report was prepared by a core team of authors led by Margarita Puerto Gómez      comprehensive,
(WBG). Core authors included Manuel Contreras-Urbina of the Global Women's                 long-term
Institute of George Washington University (GWI), Brian Heilman (GWI), Amber Hill
                                                                                          responses.
(GWI), Anne von Au, (WBG), Jennifer Zelaya (GWI), and Diana J. Arango (WBG).

The report team benefited greatly from the thoughtful comments of: Mary Ellsberg
(GWI); Alexandra Blackwell (GWI); Margarita Quintanilla (Consultant); Amy Banks
(Consultant); Jennifer Solotaroff (WBG), Jennifer McCleary-Sills (ICRW), and Andres
Villaveces(WBG) .

The work was supported in part by the World Bank Group's Umbrella Facility for
Gender Equality.

Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status
of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable
law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to
reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request
with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW,
Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                          3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction..................................................................................................................... 5
   Objective.........................................................................................................................................................7
   Summary of What Works to Prevent Intimate Partner Violence............................................................ 9

Transforming Social Norms through Community Mobilization Interventions...... 12
   An Ecological Framework...........................................................................................................................12
   Examples of Effective Community Mobilization Interventions..............................................................15
       SASA! (Raising Voices)........................................................................................................................................... 15
       Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales (Puntos de Encuentro)........................................................................... 16
       Stepping Stones (Various Organizations)........................................................................................................... 17
       Engaging Men to Prevent Gender Based Violence (Grameen Vikas jan Sahbhagita Trust Jaunpur
       and Ujala Welfare Society).................................................................................................................................... 18
       Other Community-Based Interventions............................................................................................................. 19
       Adaptations............................................................................................................................................................... 19
   Some Examples of Specific Adaptations..................................................................................................21
       in Here Shoes........................................................................................................................................................... 21
       SASA! Uganda......................................................................................................................................................... 22

Recommendations........................................................................................................22
ANNEX I: SIX ESSENTIAL STEPS TO ADAPTING COMMUNITY-BASED
PROGRAMS TO PREVENT INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE..................................25
Introduction...................................................................................................................26
Six Steps to Adapting Community-Based Programs to Prevent IPV..................... 27
   Step One: Understanding violence in the program setting, violence prevention approaches, and
   selecting the particular methodology and model to adopt...................................................................28
   Step Two: Select program locations thoughtfully...................................................................................30
   Step Three: Develop a network of local partners....................................................................................31
   Step Four: Formalize a locally appropriate program and evaluation design...................................... 33
       Formalize the approach.........................................................................................................................................33
       Formalize the strategies........................................................................................................................................34
       Formalize the intended participants and beneficiaries................................................................................ 36
       Formalize the evaluation design........................................................................................................................ 36
       Formalize the budget and timeline.....................................................................................................................37
   Step Five: Prepare the program materials............................................................................................... 37
   Step Six: Finalize the outreach and dissemination plan as early as possible..................................... 38

Conclusion.....................................................................................................................39
References and Resource Documents.......................................................................40
APPENDIX A: CRITERIA FOR SELECTING INTERVENTION MUNICIPALITIES AND
COMMUNITIES.............................................................................................................. 47
APPENDIX B: SASA! CRITERIA FOR SELECTING INTERVENTION PARTNERS IN
CENTRAL AMERICA.....................................................................................................48




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                         A gender analysis
                                                                                                                              approach to
Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a serious global health concern and a
human rights violation that affects millions of people worldwide, particularly                                          program design
women.1 The World Health Organization (WHO) defines IPV as “behavior                                                            holds as a
by an intimate partner or ex-partner that causes physical, sexual, or psychological
                                                                                                                          basic principle
harm, including physical aggression, sexual coercion, psychological abuse, and
controlling behaviors.”2 Recent estimates indicate that the prevalence of                                                 that men’s and
physical and sexual IPV against women ranges from 16.3 percent in some                                                     women’s roles
countries in East Asia to as high as 65.6 percent in countries in Central Sub-                                              in society are
Saharan Africa.1 Globally, approximately one third of women will experience
violence at the hand of their partner or ex-partner at some point in her
                                                                                                                           socially rather
lifetime.2 Figure 1, below, illustrates recent prevalence estimates of intimate                                        than biologically
partner violence by region.                                                                                              determined. As
                                                                                                                      such, these roles
                                                                                                                       can be changed.
             Figure 1 - Recent prevalence estimates of intimate partner violence by region.
                                                                                                                           This approach
                                                                                                                            observes that
                                                                                                                      women’s socially-
                                                                                                                              determined
                                                                                                                                position in
                                                                                                                               society has
                                                                                                                       historically been
                                                                                                                          disadvantaged
                                                                                                                         as compared to
                                                                                                                         men’s, and that
                                                                                                                          this imbalance
                                                                                                                           in power at all
                                                                                                                        levels of society
                                                                                                                      is a root cause of
                                                                                                                       intimate partner
Source: World Health Organization, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Medical Research Council.
                                                                                                                        violence as well
(2013). Global and regional estimates of violence against women: prevalence and health effects of intimate partner
violence and non-partner sexual violence. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
                                                                                                                        as other abuses
                                                                                                                     of women’s rights.

Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                                                5
The alarming rates of IPV have significant physical, psychosocial, and
economic costs for the survivor and their family, as well as society as a
whole.2-4 In the United States alone, researchers from The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that the financial costs
of IPV, including health care expenses, loss of productivity, and loss of
lifetime earnings, totals approximately US$6 billion annually.5

The health consequences faced by female survivors of IPV span physical,
psychological, and sexual and reproductive outcomes. Women who
experience IPV are more likely to engage in high-risk behaviors such as
smoking and substance abuse, suffer chronic pain syndrome, and have
overall poor subjective health.7 A systematic review of studies in South Asia
revealed a strong link between poor physical and mental health outcomes
among women who experienced physical violence.6 These women were
at greater risk of experiencing behavioral health issues, including post-
traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and depression.8

In terms of reproductive health, a review of studies in Western countries
(Campbell, 2002) found that gynecological problems are consistent
and longer lasting in battered women.9 Another study in India found
that negative reproductive health outcomes resulting from IPV included
unwanted pregnancies, sexually transmitted infections (STIs), gynecological
disorders, and pelvic inflammatory disease.7 The same study further
showed that women who experience IPV are 52 percent more likely to
contract HIV, 61 percent more likely to contract syphilis, and 81 percent
more likely to contract chlamydia or gonorrhea.10

Importantly, the health consequences of violence also deter women from
entering the labor force or impair job performance, ultimately impacting
productivity in a variety of sectors. Women experiencing IPV are impacted
by fear, geographical isolation, and a lack of economic resources that
prevent them from seeking health services, with negative consequences
for themselves and their children.7

The negative health impacts do not stop at the survivor, IPV affects current
and future children of survivors.11 A recent systematic review on health
consequences of IPV found that IPV is significantly associated with low
birth weight and preterm birth through a variety of pathways.12 These data
are but a small subset of the full range of the harmful, long-term, and inter-
generational effects that are a direct or indirect result of experiencing IPV.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                          6
In addition, the negative effects of witnessing IPV against mothers have
been well documented. There are clear connections between a child’s
experience of violence as a witness and the likelihood to perpetrate or
experience IPV as an adult.


There have been many attempts in recent decades to address violence
against women and girls (VAWG), especially the violence perpetrated by
women’s male partners. Most efforts to address violence have focused on
providing health and legal responses to IPV survivors. However, recent
research and programs are starting to emphasize violence prevention
involving community mobilization which are particularly effective.3-5,12,13
The aim of this note is to document the lessons stemming from the most
effective IPV prevention programs, to inform policymakers, stakeholders,
and decision makers working in development and women’s rights issues.


Objective
To achieve its aim, the paper highlights several examples of effective
community mobilization interventions to prevent IPV. It underscores the
basic components that must be considered to adapt successful interventions
to different contexts and collectively serve as a methodological guide on
programming.i

This review focuses specifically on IPV against women, as opposed to
VAWG more broadly, for several reasons.13 Partner violence is the most
prevalent form of violence against women globally: a woman is at the
greatest risk for suffering violence in her own home by someone she
knows. A recent systematic review commissioned by the World Bank
Group found that most of effective evaluations and programs on VAWG
have been directed to IPV.15 Finally, authors such as Heise and Kostadam
(2015) argue that by specifically focusing on IPV, program implementers
gain access to a strategic entry point (the family) to address harmful social
norms and behaviors that influence other forms of VAWG. While all forms of
VAWG share similar characteristics and underlying risk factors, addressing




i) Studies show that one in four women (22.3 percent) experienced severe physical violence by an intimate
partner, while one in seven men (14 percent) have experienced the same. Although we recognize that men
experience IPV, this note will focus solely on women.14




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                     7
IPV specifically allows program implementers to build strong, evidence
based tools that can later be adapted to address other types of VAWG.ii,13

The field of public health identifies three levels of violence prevention
programs: primary, secondary, and tertiary.16 Primary prevention refers to
programs that aim to stop the problem before it begins. For example, SASA!
is a community-based mobilization program that builds capacity among
a group of community advocates to discuss issues related to gender
equality and power dynamics. By addressing the underlying risk factors
of intimate partner violence, SASA! advocates have helped to change
harmful attitudes and behaviors that perpetuate violence and prevent it
from happening in the first place.17

Primary interventions aim to address root causes and target communities
rather than working at the individual level. Secondary prevention programs
address the immediate needs of the survivor after a violent incident has
occurred with the aim of reducing rates of re-victimization.16 For example,
IPV screening (when done appropriately) in health care settings, such as
during the antenatal care period, provides women with a confidential and
safe space to disclose violence.18 The health care provider can then treat
any immediate injuries and refer women to a counselor for psychosocial
support and/or to a domestic violence advocate who can liaise with the
legal sector, as well as assist in finding temporary or transitional housing.
Secondary interventions aim to minimize harm caused by a specific
incident and provide the survivor with the necessary services to prevent
a reoccurrence. Tertiary prevention refers to programs that help minimize
the long-term consequences faced by survivors of violence, including
those that focus on rehabilitation and reintegration.16

Historically, IPV programming in high-income countries has centered
on secondary and tertiary prevention, otherwise known as response
programming.19 These programs include the provision of support services
for survivors across multiple sectors, including health, legal, and livelihoods.
Other response programs include interventions that aim to strengthen the
justice system, for example by reducing perpetrator impunity. While these
interventions may produce positive outcomes, including improved mental
health, treatment of injuries, and access to justice, there is little evidence


ii) The authors recognize the importance of addressing other forms of violence against women and girls,
particularly through strengthening the evidence base.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                   8
that as standalone programs they lead to significant reductions in rates of              Globally,
IPV victimization or perpetration.16,20
                                                                                   approximately
In response to the growing evidence base from high-income countries                   one third of
on what constitutes an effective intervention to reduce levels of IPV, the
                                                                                       women will
international community has started to shift towards primary prevention.
Evidence emerging from low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) also                   experience
influenced this transition in programming. For example, the public health          violence at the
community has become increasingly aware of the intersection of violence              hand of their
and vulnerability to HIV,19 and increasingly incorporates messaging and
programming that addresses partner violence as a risk factor in interventions
                                                                                    partner or ex-
aimed to prevent HIV contraction. Examples include well-known primary             partner at some
prevention community-based interventions, such as Somos Diferentes,                    point in her
Somos Iguales in Nicaragua, IMAGE in South Africa, SHARE and SASA!
                                                                                          lifetime.
in Uganda, Program H in India, and Stepping Stones in several countries
around the world. These programs all share fundamental principles that
allow them to be successful in reducing the prevalence of IPV.

This paper emphasizes results of these and other primary prevention
programs, not because secondary and tertiary prevention programs are
ineffective,19 but because primary prevention programs allow for macro-
level programming that targets root causes of violence, such as harmful
gender norms, to create generations of men, women, boys, and girls
who not only no longer accept violence, but also feel empowered to
eliminate it.13


Summary of What Works to Prevent
Intimate Partner Violence
Over the past decade, several literature reviews have been conducted to
evaluate what works to prevent intimate partner violence.4,13,15,16,19-21 While
their methodologies differ, the reviews concur that the evidence base on
IPV is lacking. Part of the problem is that the geographical distribution
of studies is overwhelmingly skewed towards high-income countries,
primarily the United States, with a large proportion of studies that have
been conducted in schools, universities, and colleges. More rigorous
evaluations, particularly from low- and middle-income countries, are
needed to improve our understanding of how programs can effectively
reduce rates of IPV and collective knowledge about the attitudes and



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                        9
behaviors that perpetuate violence.13,15,16,19 Going forward, results from
these and other evaluations should be disseminated widely to ensure
researchers are not duplicating efforts, or worse, repeating interventions
that have harmful, unintended consequences.

Interventions use multiple approaches to prevent IPV, including economic
empowerment programs, women-centered support services, legal reforms
or other system-wide approaches, multi-sectoral strategies, community-
based interventions, awareness-raising campaigns, and group-based
training, among others. 4,13,15,16,19-21 Recent reviews suggest that programs
involving community mobilization and/or economic empowerment paired
with gender equality training (otherwise known as economic empowerment
plus), significantly reduce rates of IPV.4,13,15,19,20 There are also numerous
school-based programs, primarily from high-income countries, that have
been effective in reducing rates of dating violence.16,19

A review conducted by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) looks more
broadly at outcomes, noting that many interventions are successful in
changing the knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors that drive violence. In
addition to those mentioned above, promising programs include prolonged
media awareness campaigns that address social and cultural gender
norms, participatory group discussions and empowerment trainings, and
trainings around gender norms for both women and girls and men and
boys.16 A summary of the evidence base from the most recent review can
be seen in Figure 2.19




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                          10
  Figure 2 - A summary of the evidence of IPV interventions in low- and middle-income countries.




                                  CONFLICTING       INEFFECTIVE




                                  INSUFFICIENT
                                                    PROMISING
                                     EVIDENCE




Collectively, the evidence reviews suggest that programs achieving the
most success in preventing IPV include the following elements:

    •	Cutting across and collaborating with multiple sectors (i.e. education,
      citizen security, disaster response, health, judicial, etc.) in an
      integrated manner to coordinate comprehensive prevention and
      response efforts;
    •	Involving multiple stakeholders, such as health service providers,
      legal authorities, community leaders, community members (both
      men and women), and government representatives to mobilize
      communities and foster sustainability;
     Challenging the acceptability of violence among communities,
    •	
     through creating constructive and culturally sensitive dialogues
     about harmful gender norms and unbalanced power dynamics;
    •	Supporting participants in developing new skills to empower them to
      make healthy choices and improve conflict resolution skills;
    •	Investing in implementing the intervention over a prolonged period
      of time (at minimum six months).




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                            11
TRANSFORMING SOCIAL
NORMS THROUGH COMMUNITY
MOBILIZATION INTERVENTIONS
An Ecological Framework
In order to truly understand how to effectively prevent IPV, it is critical to
analyze the root causes of the problem. IPV is distinctively challenging to
eliminate because of its multiple causal layers. .15,22 This is best explained by
the ecological framework originally developed by Urie Bronfrenbrenner23
which has since then been adapted by Lori Heise22 for violence against
women (VAWG). This most recent adaptation of the ecological model
presents the causes of IPV at the macro social, community, interpersonal,
and individual levels. At the macro social level, gender inequality (as
measured through composite indicators, economic rights, discriminatory
family laws, among others), cultural factors (for example, a gender value
emphasis on purity), and economic factors (such as a country’s development
status), all contribute to the perpetuation of IPV. At the community level,
harmful norms, such as the acceptability of wife beating, and neighborhood
factors, including crime, poverty, and unemployment levels, can lead to
IPV. At the partner level, a man is more likely to perpetrate IPV if he was
abused as a child or witnessed IPV during childhood, if he abuses alcohol
or other harmful substances, or if he holds certain harmful attitudes. Causal
factors are similar at the individual level, where exposure to violence as a
child, attitudes of gender inequality, and poor support networks, contribute
to IPV. The partner and individual factors interact at the relationship level,
where conflict resolution, communication, and situational triggers play an
important role.15 Indeed, all ecological levels interact to perpetuate IPV, and
a positive intervention on one level can be undone or neutralized by a risk
factor on another level.

Lori Michau and colleagues have produced a model on how to effectively
address each causal layer of VAWG by transforming the balance of power
and promoting gender equality, as seen in figure 3, below.22




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                             12
      Figure 3 - How the transformation of power across the ecological model can prevent VAW.
                                                                                                                     The alarming
                                                                                                                       rates of IPV
                                                                                                                   have significant
                                                                                                                          physical,
                                                                                                                 psychosocial, and
                                                                                                                   economic costs
                                                                                                                   for the survivor
                                                                                                                  and their family,
                                                                                                                 as well as society
                                                                                                                        as a whole.




Source: Michau, L., et al. (2014) “Prevention of violence against women and girls: lessons from practice”. The
Lancet, A Special Series on Violence against Women and Girls.


At the macro social level, gender inequality takes the form of discriminatory
laws and policies that fail to prioritize VAWG as a pertinent issue and allow
for continued impunity for perpetrators. This can be mediated through
catalyzing social movements to hold governments, ultimately leading
to effective reforms of laws and policies that create legal infrastructure
that prioritizes survivor-centered response and prevention efforts.24
For example, change in healthcare policy could mean the development
and implementation of standardized guidelines and protocols that use
evidence-based methods to respond to both the physical and mental
health needs of survivors.25

At the community level, inequitable norms and practices play the most
significant role. These norms are often perpetuated by religious or cultural
justification, deterring action by stakeholders who are critical to addressing
IPV prevention. Michau and colleagues argue that inequitable norms can
be addressed by fostering collective action through education and capacity
building. Such programs allow participants to feel empowered to make the



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                                        13
necessary changes that will lead to an environment in which a significant
part of the population practices and advocates for gender equality.22
Similarly, norms that perpetuate gender inequality and drive violence can
be addressed in the healthcare sector by carrying out educational and
behavior change interventions among community members and health
care professionals.25

Finally, at the interpersonal level, issues related to stigma, shame, and
silence can be resolved through prolonged and sustained capacity building,
creating networks, and reflecting critically on IPV. Where gender inequality
is demonstrated at the individual level in the form of submissive femininity
and dominant masculinity, interventions to expand women’s opportunities
and enhance their agency and empowerment are critical, as are programs
to hold men accountable for engaging in harmful behavior.24 These models
clearly demonstrate the multi-faceted nature of IPV prevention, further
emphasizing the need for holistic and integrated programs that focus on
the multiple drivers of violence.

 Analyses using this ecological framework indicate that harmful social norms
are among the most significant macro-level predictors of IPV. For example,
Heise and Kostadam (2015) found that norms justifying male authority
over female behavior and those justifying wife beating are strongly and
significantly associated with IPV, and suggest a highly plausible causal
link.26 Community mobilization work has been shown to be the most
effective in addressing these and other harmful social norms.24

Michau (2012) describes community mobilization as “a highly systematic
approach that involves all levels of a community over an extended period
of time. It requires engaging, inspiring and supporting a diverse range of
community members, groups, and institutions. [It] elicits critical thinking,
develops skills and inspires action to replace negative norms perpetuating
violence against women with positive norms supporting safety, non-
violence and the dignity of women and men”.27 Community mobilization
interventions are successful in transforming harmful gender norms, leading
to reductions in IPV, for several reasons. These types of interventions
demonstrate both the key principles of effective programs and the
application of the trans-theoretical model of health behavior change,
whereby change occurs through six key stages: pre-contemplation,
contemplation, preparation, action, maintenance, and termination.28 By




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                        14
building programs around this framework, community mobilization efforts
assist individuals and communities to move through these stages in an
organic and empowering manner.27 Below, we elaborate on examples of
successful community interventions to prevent IPV.


Examples of Effective Community
Mobilization Interventions
SASA! (Raising Voices)
SASA! is a well-known intervention that has been adapted and implemented
in a number of countries. Originally designed and implemented by Raising
Voices in Uganda, SASA! consists of a series of community mobilization
activities that address the balance of power in intimate partner relationships
and broader community dynamics. There are four steps in the overall
intervention: Start, Awareness, Support, and Action. Stakeholders
from many levels of the community, including community leaders, local
government representatives, community activists, and health service
providers participate in each step of the intervention. For example, during
the first step, Start, interested community members are recruited and
trained to become a cadre of activists engaging the broader community
in discussions on gender equality and HIV prevention during the following
three steps. The idea behind SASA! is to create an enabling environment
to ultimately develop a critical mass to change knowledge, attitudes, and
behaviors that perpetuate harmful gender norms.17

A rigorous evaluation of SASA! recently demonstrated the intervention’s
effectiveness related to IPV within participating communities.29 Researchers
measured the impact SASA! made in a total of eight communities,
randomized into treatment and control groups in a pair-matched cluster
design from 2007 to 2012. Data were collected through a cross-sectional
survey designed using the WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s Health
and Domestic Violence and the Uganda Demographic and Health
Survey.30,31 Researchers surveyed men and women at baseline and after
approximately three years of program implementation. The primary
outcomes measured included: (1) acceptability of IPV; (2) acceptability
that women can refuse to have sex; (3) past year physical intimate partner
violence; (4) past year sexual intimate partner violence; (5) appropriate




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                          15
community responses to women experiencing past year physical and/or
sexual IPV; and (6) past year concurrent sexual partners.29

Statistically significant reductions were observed in the acceptability
of physical intimate partner violence among women and past year
concurrent sexual male partners.iii There were also statistically significant
improvements among both men and women regarding the acceptability
that a woman can refuse sex. Additionally, there were improvements in
appropriate community response to survivors of intimate partner violence.
These favorable results of reduced acceptability of violence and healthier,
more balanced relationships were confirmed through simultaneous
qualitative research, which involved 40 in-depth interviews. Finally, in
terms of IPV experience among participating women, SASA! resulted in
a 52 percent reduction in physical violence and a 33 percent reduction
in sexual violence.iv The results indicate that SASA! has been effective
in changing key attitudes and norms that underlie partner violence and
shows tremendous promise in reducing levels of IPV within participating
communities.29,32

Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales (Puntos de Encuentro)
Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales (SDSI, or “We are different, we are
equal” in English), a communication strategy designed to promote healthy
relationships and HIV prevention, was implemented throughout Central
America from 2000 to 2005. Puntos de Encuentro, a feminist organization
based in Nicaragua, created and implemented this strategy through a
series of linked programs to empower individuals and inspire social change
around gender equality and sexual health. The multiple components of
SDSI included: (1) a national-level multi-media campaign, which included a
soap opera and radio series (Sexto Sentido) showcasing sensitive themes
around gender and sexuality; (2) regional workshops to build capacity of
youth leaders and other community leaders by strengthening analytic and
leadership skills around relevant issues; (3) coordination among youth
groups, government and non-governmental organizations, and media
outlets in Nicaragua and other countries to generate discussions around



iii) This refers to non-polygamous men who had a partner in the last 12 months.

iv) While a large effect was observed, changes were not statistically significant. Evaluators observed an increase
in variations of physical IPV levels among control sites at follow-up compared to baseline. This reduced the
power to observe statistical significance when analyzed by cluster.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                              16
healthy relationships at a national and regional level; and, (4) distribution of            The health
informational materials.33
                                                                                       consequences
The intervention is based on a conceptual model through which mass                   faced by female
communication results in changes in knowledge, attitudes, and norms,
                                                                                     survivors of IPV
while also shifting the social context. These shifts then empower
individuals, as well as the community as a whole, to increase their efficacy           span physical,
in responding to violence and HIV prevention, which ultimately creates an              psychological,
enabling environment for positive behavior change and increased agency                and sexual and
at the individual level. All of these processes are part of a series of complex
pathways that are interconnected and continuously evolving.33
                                                                                          reproductive
                                                                                             outcomes.
SDSI was evaluated through a mixed-methods study conducted in four
Nicaraguan cities. Both the quantitative and qualitative components
                                                                                          Women who
were carried out in Estelí, Juigalpa, and León. Qualitative research was              experience IPV
also conducted in Bilwi. Researchers followed a longitudinal design and            are more likely to
administered three surveys to 3,099 individuals over the course of two
                                                                                     engage in high-
years. A total of 91 percent of those interviewed had heard of at least one
of the components of SDSI. Impact results showed statistically significant              risk behaviors
changes in positive attitudes that reflect gender equality, reductions              such as smoking
in stigma associated with HIV, improved knowledge and use of health                    and substance
services, increased knowledge of HIV and prevention, and greater
interpersonal communication, among others. Using a widespread multi-
                                                                                         abuse, suffer
component communications strategy that engaged and empowered                               chronic pain
community members, SDSI was able to have a meaningful impact on the                   syndrome, and
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors that underpin the perpetuation of              have overall poor
violence.33
                                                                                   subjective health.
Stepping Stones (Various Organizations)
Stepping Stones was originally developed as a community-mobilization
intervention to reduce rates of HIV in South Africa, and has since been
adapted and evaluated in many countries. The program consists of
multiple training sessions implemented over several weeks that involve
participatory and active learning approaches, such as role-playing and role-
modeling, for both men and women. While its ultimate goal is to prevent
HIV, Stepping Stones addresses gender equality, healthy relationships,
and effective communication, all of which are contributing factors to IPV
prevention.34




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                            17
In South Africa, researchers evaluated the impact of Stepping Stones
using a cluster randomized trial. The study had two components: (1) one
group received the Stepping Stones training manual and (2) one group
received a standalone three-hour session on HIV and safe sex practices.
Both qualitative and quantitative methods were used to evaluate results
among both groups, and participants were followed up with at 12 and 24
months. The evaluation indicated a statistically significant reduction in the
number of men who disclosed severe partner violence perpetration after
two years of follow-up among those who received the Stepping Stones
intervention compared to those who did not.35 Similarly, a mixed-methods
cross-sectional evaluation conducted to determine the impact of Stepping
Stones in India demonstrated that the program influenced knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors pertaining to gender equality and healthy
relationship dynamics.36 While Stepping Stones has been evaluated and
adapted in other contexts,35 these two studies demonstrate the significant
impact a prolonged community-mobilization intervention can have on
improving the sexual health of the participants and supporting healthier
relationships.

Engaging Men to Prevent Gender Based Violence (Grameen
Vikas jan Sahbhagita Trust Jaunpur and Ujala Welfare Society)
Grameen Vikas jan Sahbhagita Trust Jaunpur and Ujala Welfare Society in
India implemented the community-based intervention, Engaging Men to
Prevent Gender-Based Violence, to engage local male leaders to promote
change in attitudes and behaviors related to violence among male youth.6
The intervention uses youth groups, advocacy campaigns, and community
outreach to provide education on the harmful effects of gender-based
violence in India. Their goal is to create gender equity and sensitivity at
the leadership level in order to influence change within the community.

A quasi-experimental study of this program found significant changes in
men and women’s attitudes and behaviors towards harmful gender norms.
More than 1500 youth were educated on the consequences of gender-
based violence (GBV) and the ways in which they can help prevent it.
They explored themes concerning violence against women, sexuality,
masculinity and gender.6 After participating in the workshops, there was an
increase in positive attitude changes related to household relationships.6
Men self-reported being more willing to participate equally in household




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                         18
responsibilities and boys self-reported advocating for their sister’s rights
to an education.37 Additionally, participants developed individual plans
to address violence against women in their own lives after brainstorming
community education plans and demonstrating increased knowledge of
laws that promote gender equality and improved understanding of gender-
equitable role expectations.6

Other Community-Based Interventions
Other effective community-based interventions that encompass the key
principles mentioned above include Program H, SHARE, and IMAGE,
among others. Program H, developed by Promundo, has shown promising
results in transforming attitudes and behaviors that promote gender
equity in its adaptation in India.38 The SHARE (Safe Homes and Respect
for Everyone) model, which resembles SASA!, is a community mobilization
intervention that addresses the intersection of IPV and HIV through
multiple components.39 A recent evaluation of the program in Uganda
demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in reported both past-
year physical and sexual IPV when comparing intervention groups to
control groups two years following the initial intervention.40 Finally, IMAGE
(Intervention with Microfinance for AIDS and Gender Equity) is another
community-based, multi-modal intervention that aims to reduce both
IPV and HIV by combining gender training with microfinance activities. A
cluster randomized trial conducted in South Africa revealed a 55 percent
reduction in reported rates of IPV.41 All three of these interventions actively
engage community members over a prolonged period of time and provide
individuals with the tools they need feel empowered to make the change
towards more gender-equitable behaviors.

Adaptations
Many of the aforementioned community-based interventions have been
adapted in a variety of contexts. When adapting successful interventions
or promising practices, it is important to ensure that interventions are
culturally appropriate or adaptable before transferring interventions from
one country or region to another.42 Some programs can be empowering for
women in certain contexts and can contribute to increases in intimate partner
violence in others.13 In addition, program cycles and budget frameworks
should be adapted to specific contexts, for example by considering the
local norms and the institutions that perpetuate them. Culturally-adapted



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                           19
interventions have a higher chance of success by encouraging the
involvement and buy-in of members of the target community.43 Maintaining
the programmatic length of the original intervention can also contribute to
successful replication.

Adapting an intervention in a participatory way will increases the chances
for success, leading to the attainment of intended outcomes and
impacts.43 Decades of development work around the globe have taught
us that interventions are not one-size-fits-all. When the setting is different,
interventions need to be adapted to take into account specificities of
the context in which they will be placed. A well-adapted intervention
needs to show understanding of culture and the values that allow one to
construct one’s identity within it. An intervention that is culturally adapted
increases the relevance and effectiveness of project activities, increases
the involvement and participation of members of the target community,
and builds support and buy-in from them for the program.

Literature pertaining to the research and medical fields describes
various stage models specifying the process of adapting interventions
to specific cultural groups.44 All these models adopt an empirically
supported intervention as the foundation for replicating the intervention
within a different context, but also consider the context-specific cultural
determinants of norms and values that permeate individual beliefs,
behaviors and communication patterns, and perceptions and interactions
with broader structures and institutions.45

The practice of cultural adaptation can range from minor modifications,
such as changes to the images and terms used in the work material
(surface structure changes), to more substantial adaptation of the core
prevention components (deep-structure adaptations).45 All adaptations
strive to achieve a balance between some degree of fidelity to the
original intervention and the necessary changes to fit a different cultural
environment. Although the adaptation of interventions requires time,
resources, and close collaboration with the targeted community, this is
an essential investment as it increases the likelihood of achieving desired
program impacts and the ability to bring the program to scale.45

Several of the effective programs outlined above have been tested in
their original setting, but lack equally rigorous evaluations in the settings
to which they have been adapted. Therefore, there is little literature on



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                           20
successfully adapted interventions meant to prevent and respond to IPV,              Interventions
and a clear methodology for successful adaptation is also non-existent.
                                                                                      use multiple
                                                                                       approaches
Some Examples of Specific Adaptations                                                   to prevent
In Her Shoes                                                                        IPV, including
In Her Shoes, originally developed in the United States by the Washington                economic
State Coalition Against Domestic Violence (WSCADV), is a community                 empowerment
education tool about domestic violence. It engages with a broad cross-
section of society, including people who may never have experienced
                                                                                        programs,
violence in their home or community. This toolkit is designed to help           women-centered
increase empathy for those who have experienced violence against                support services,
women. Participants move, act, think, and experience the lives of battered
                                                                                 legal reforms or
women using a role-playing activity. Participants are assigned the role of a
woman and then move through a series of experiences and challenges “in
                                                                                    other system-
her shoes” by making decisions about when to seek help, from whom to           wide approaches,
seek help, and other experiences commonly faced by women.46                         multi-sectoral
The Inter-American Alliance for the Prevention of Gender-based Violence                 strategies,
from a Health Perspective (InterCambios) adapted Caminando en Sus              community-based
Zapatos (the Spanish adaptation of the original In Her Shoes) to the Latin
                                                                                    interventions,
American context. Caminando en Sus Zapatos contains unique characters
and stories that illustrate for example, the particular challenges facing      awareness-raising
Latin American immigrant women who are battered.47 The Latin American            campaigns, and
version draws upon stories derived in a consultation workshop involving               group-based
25 women from 11 countries, organized by PATH and InterCambios.48
                                                                                 training, among
The African Gender-Based Violence (GBV) Prevention Network has                              others
adapted an English translation of InterCambios’ Latin American version of
In Her Shoes to a Sub-Saharan African context.48 Although the Gender-
Based Violence Prevention Network created different stories for the
toolkit, it pursued the same fundamental goals as the original In Her Shoes
program: increasing knowledge and awareness of the difficulties faced
by women who experience violence; illustrating that violence against
women is both a community and global problem; analyzing the capacities
of different institutions to support women who are living in or confronting
situations of violence and seeking help; and encouraging participants to
actively think of ways they can work to prevent violence against women.49
The methodology of this English-language, African version was presented



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                        21
in the English-speaking Caribbean, where a process is now underway to
adapt it to the reality of Caribbean women.48

SASA! Uganda
In Haiti, Beyond Borders is working with translators, cultural consultants,
long-time activists in violence against women, Haitian artists and graphic
designers to adapt, test, design and print components of the SASA!
program originally implemented in Uganda. According to Beyond Borders,
“to respect the original spirit and intent of SASA! and help the materials
be truly Haitian sometimes required rewriting, changes in color and
form of drawings, and even including a new character in the community
dramas—in addition to translation into Haitian Creole.”50 Activists in Haiti
have found that adapting materials to the Haitian worldview and reality,
rather than simply translating them, created a higher level of excitement
and engagement within community members.50



RECOMMENDATIONS
The programs and adaptions highlighted above present evidence of
effective community mobilization interventions. Community mobilization
efforts are successful because they permeate multiple levels of society.
Through educational and behavior change interventions, these programs
foster collective action and build community capacity to challenge gender
norms, leading to reductions in IPV. This capacity building can generate
momentum within society by increasing the call for effective reforms of
laws and policies that prioritize survivor-centered response and preven-
tion efforts. Successful community-based interventions also provide em-
powerment activities for participants, supporting them as they build the
skills necessary to make healthy choices and improve conflict resolution.

Adaptations of effective interventions achieve a balance between
maintaining the essential characteristics of the original intervention and
cultural relevance to a different setting. The most successful adaptions
encourage participation across multiple groups and sectors of society.
They also allow sufficient time and resources to effectively adapt and
implement an intervention, resulting in sustained capacity building and the
creation of networks that are critical to reducing IPV.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                        22
To adapt successful interventions to different contexts, we provide the
following specific recommendations:

Ensure local stakeholders’ participation in the adaption of community-
based interventions. Activities such as meetings and events with
community members, discussions on the intervention design, and high-
level meetings with authorities should be included in budget and program
cycles, allowing local stakeholders to be involved fully in the intervention
from its beginning. This engagement is integral to the successful design
and sustainability of a community-based prevention program. This also
helps to design and implement interventions that are culturally appropriate
for the specific context. Buy-in from the outset will contribute to effective
intervention implementation and scale-up.

Engage multiple segments of the community. Community-based
interventions impact a broad range of individuals. The most effective
programs involve all community members, including women and men,
boys and girls, youth and elders, and professionals and non-professionals.
This involvement creates a sense of ownership and enacts change at both
the community and individual levels.

Evaluate adaptations in different settings to build the evidence base.
The adaption of any community-based intervention to a new setting should
involve a plan for monitoring and evaluation. Rigorous documentation
will help to build evidence on improving, adapting, and scaling up an
intervention for future programs.

Increase access to survivor-centered secondary prevention care and
services. Community mobilization for the primary prevention of IPV
must be complemented with multi-sectoral, survivor-centered secondary
prevention efforts. For example, accessible and survivor-centered services
must be available prior to an intervention to properly respond to the
increase in reports of violence and other factors that can occur as a result
of the interventions.

Promote cooperation and exchange among implementers. Many
successful community-based interventions are being implemented in low-
and middle-income countries. Agencies working on similar issues should
collaborate and exchange experiences to help produce more substantial,
evidence-based programming.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                         23
Invest in violence prevention efforts at the community level. Organizations
working to implement community-based interventions require longer-term
and sustainable funding. Investment should prioritize prevention efforts
that address social norms and concepts of gender equality while engaging
women, men, and key community members.

Focus on comprehensive, long-term responses. Effecting social change
requires programs to address deeply held beliefs and attitudes about
gender equality. Many promising efforts of violence prevention are too
short in duration to produce significant results. Longer-term responses
addressing the root causes of violence against women can strengthen
program results and impact the entire community.

Capacity Building. Community-based interventions should include
a capacity-building component at the local level in order to ensure the
sustainability of the programs implemented. Strengthening capacities
can include providing peer-to-peer learning initiatives, making evidence-
based interventions widely available, and encouraging the development of
technical advisory groups to support program implementation. In addition
to benefiting the community, capacity building can also promote change
at the policy level.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                       24
                                                                              24
                                                                Focus on
                                                          comprehensive,
                                                               long-term
                                                              responses.




Annex 1

Six Essential Steps to
Adapting Community-Based
Programs to Prevent Intimate
Partner Violence
A REVIEW OF EVIDENCE AND ESSENTIAL
STEPS TO ADAPTATION




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence              25
INTRODUCTION                                                                         Adapting an
                                                                               intervention in a
This methodological annex complements the review of evidence on com-
munity mobilization interventions to prevent Intimate Partner Violence
                                                                             participatory way
(IPV). The document aims to support individuals and organizations that            will increases
are implementing or investing in projects involving violence prevention         the chances for
by providing recommendations that can be integrated at different times
                                                                               success, leading
throughout the project design and adaptation phases. It highlights the
root causes and prevalence of IPV, prevention methodology—including           to the attainment
basic components essential to the prevention planning phase—and the                   of intended
logistics that must be considered when adapting a program to a new                     outcomes
setting, including program cycles and budget framework. Rigorous docu-
mentation of the process by those implementing interventions will help to
                                                                                    and impacts.
build evidence on improving, adapting, and scaling up an intervention for            Adaptations
future programs.                                                                      of effective
The most effective IPV prevention programs are those involving community           interventions
mobilization.3-5,7,8 As detailed in the above review of evidence, programs              achieve a
including SASA!, Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales, Engaging Men in             balance between
GBV Prevention, Stepping Stones, Program H, SHARE, and IMAGE vary in
methods but encompass key principles of effective programs, providing
                                                                                     maintaining
individuals with the tools they need to feel empowered to choose more               the essential
gender-equitable behaviors.                                                      characteristics
Effective interventions are based on common principles that can                   of the original
be adapted to individual settings and cultures. Evidence shows that            intervention and
community-based interventions to prevent IPV are successful at reducing
                                                                             cultural relevance
violence because they permeate multiple levels of society, engaging key
stakeholders and fostering collective action to challenge gender norms             to a different
within entire communities. Community-based, multi-sectoral and culturally-                 setting.
adapted interventions increase ownership of outcomes, thereby securing
longer-term involvement of differing levels of stakeholders in adaptation.
Long-term investment in intervention programs allows for more sustained
capacity building and the creation of networks that are critical for
reducing IPV.

An increasing number of practitioners, including stakeholders, donors and
policymakers, seek to replicate effective community-based interventions in
new settings such as SASA!, a community mobilization program designed




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                        26
and implemented by Raising Voices in Uganda that work at all levels of the
ecological framework originally developed by Uri Bronfrenbrenner13 and
adapted for violence against women and girls (VAWG) by Lori Heise.14 This
framework conceptualizes how IPV should be addressed at the individual,
partner, community, and societal levels.

To plan effectively for the costs and logistics required in program
implementation, program designers, donors and decision makers must
have a nuanced understanding of the implications involved in adapting
a model in different settings. Organizations working to implement
community-based interventions require long-term and sustainable funding
that prioritizes prevention efforts targeting social norms and concepts
of gender equality while engaging women, men, and key community
members in the planning and implementing processes.



SIX STEPS TO ADAPTING
COMMUNITY-BASED PROGRAMS
TO PREVENT IPV
To guide practitioners in effectively implementing IPV prevention
programs, this note presents six essential steps to successfully adapt a
community-based program to prevent intimate partner violence. They
include: (1) understanding violence in the program setting, violence
prevention approaches, and selecting the particular methodology
and model to adopt; (2) selecting program locations thoughtfully;
(3) developing a network of local partners; (4) formalizing a locally
appropriate program and evaluation design; (5) preparing the program
materials; and (6) finalizing the outreach and dissemination plan as early
as possible. These steps may or may not occur chronologically; in many
cases, the six steps occur concurrently.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                      27
Step One: Understanding violence in the program setting,
violence prevention approaches, and selecting the
particular methodology and model to adopt
While intimate partner violence is a pervasive global crisis, the dynamics
of violence look different in every setting. The first step to adapting an
IPV prevention program is conducting formative research using a mixed
methods approach and a desk review of applicable literature to understand
the nature, prevalencev, and dynamics of IPV in an individual setting.
Formative research should aim to answer the following questions:

1.	 What types of violence occur in a study site? Who are most often the
    perpetrators and victims? How does violence affect men, women, boys,
    and girls differently? What are the most common forms of violence? In
    what kind of circumstances does this violence occur? Where? When?

2.	 How do families and communities respond to survivors of IPV?

3.	 What types of resources, such as health, legal, security, safety, religious,
    cultural institutions, are available to survivors of IPV? Which entities
    provide these services? How are they accessed, if at all? What reasons
    are cited for accessing or not accessing available resources? Do the
    services refer survivors to other appropriate service providers?

4.	 What are the political and legal frameworks for addressing IPV at
    the national and local levels? What are the main achievements and
    challenges of policies targeting women’s rights and IPV?

5.	What other organizations are working on IPV prevention in
   a specific context? What do these programs entail? How are
   these programs described by different participantgroups?




v) Accurate prevalence data can be found in Demographic and Health Surveys that implement the DHS Domestic
Violence Module or that have implemented stand-alone surveys estimating the prevalence of violence against
women like the those found in the WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence
against Women




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                      28
                     UNDERSTANDING PREVENTION

    Primary prevention refers to programs that work to reduce violence
    at a community, rather than an individual level. For example, the SASA!
    community-based mobilization program builds capacity among a group
    of community advocates to discuss issues related to gender equality and
    power dynamics. By addressing the underlying risk factors of intimate
    partner violence, SASA! advocates are able to change harmful attitudes
    and behaviors that perpetuate violence, thereby reducing overall levels
    of violence in the community.
    Secondary prevention refers to programs that address the immediate
    needs of the survivor after the violent incident has occurred in order to
    reduce rates of re-victimization. For example, IPV screening (when done
    appropriately) in health care settings, such as antenatal care, provides
    women with a confidential and safe space to disclose violence. The
    health care provider can then treat any immediate injuries and refer
    women to a counselor for psychosocial support and/or a domestic
    violence advocate who can liaise with the justice and legal sectors,
    as well as assist in finding temporary or transitional housing. The aim
    of these interventions is to minimize any harm caused by the incident
    and provide the survivor with the necessary services to prevent it from
    happening again.
    Tertiary prevention refers to programs that help minimize the long-term
    consequences faced by survivors of violence. This includes programs
    that focus on rehabilitation and reintegration.



Formative research greatly benefits from a thorough review the latest
literature on violence prevention interventions, including available
program evaluation reports and scholarly articles. Particular attention
should be given to program components that have proven effective, as
well as lessons learned during the implementation process. Practitioners
may find it useful to interview national and global organizations, experts
and programmers experienced in IPV prevention.

Program designers can use this information to construct an informed list
of program models, elements, and lessons that will inform the selection of
which program model or combination of model to adopt in their particular
setting. If the programmers’ funding mechanism requires a program design
proposal prior to conducting formative research, the programmers should
negotiate for the ability to shift, adjust, and revise the proposed program
based on the results of the formative research.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                         29
Step Two: Select program locations thoughtfully                                    While intimate
Community-based violence prevention initiatives may not be viable in             partner violence
every municipality or neighborhood. It is essential to identify suitable,           is a pervasive
high-priority locations by considering community need and readiness, such             global crisis,
as the presence of certain basic services and support structures without
which the program will struggle.
                                                                                     the dynamics
                                                                                  of violence look
The process of vetting municipalities or specific neighborhoods should occur
in conjunction with the formative research. Appendix A, below, contains a
                                                                                different in every
comprehensive checklist of criteria for identifying suitable municipalities      setting. The first
and neighborhoods. In general, the most suitable municipalities will be          step to adapting
those where:
                                                                               an IPV prevention
    •	Leaders are eager to be part of the initiative;                                   program is
    •	A history of collaboration across sectors to address intimate partner            conducting
      violence exists;
                                                                                         formative
    •	Statistics on the prevalence of violence are available;
                                                                                research using a
    •	And locally respected actors, including NGOs or other agencies, are
                                                                                  mixed methods
      working on the issue of intimate partner violence.
                                                                                         approach.
The most suitable neighborhoods or “communities” for such interventions
will be those where:
    •	Public spaces are accessible and comparably safe for program staff;
    •	A sense of history and connection among most residents exists;
    •	A well-functioning network of neighborhood leaders alreadyexists;
      and
    •	Some amount of services for survivors of violence are available.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                         30
Step Three: Develop a network of local partners
After identifying the leading activists, nonprofits, service providers,
government agencies, and other stakeholders involved in violence
prevention and response in a selected setting, program designers
must garner the support of key local stakeholders. Most importantly,
programmers must establish a formal relationship with a lead
implementation partner to oversee the day to day work of the community-
based initiative. The precise nature of a local partner or partners will vary
depending on program location. A variety of partners should be engaged
early in the program process to improve the likelihood of program success.
For example:
    • Local political authorities can lend credibility to the project, or create
      obstacles if they are not included in program design.
    • Local community and religious leaders may extend program reach,
      and lend legitimacy to a program.
    • Local women’s groups can also help with outreach while specifically
      addressing women’s rights.
    • Local donors or charities may be interested in affiliating with and
      complementing a well-designed new prevention program.

A program’s most important partner is the local implementing organization.
Unless the implementing organization has sufficient local presence,
legitimacy, and capacity, it will need to collaborate closely with a local
organization that can oversee the day-to-day program functioning. A
local implementing partner should meet the following criteria: (a) violence
prevention work is central to the organization’s mission; (b) the organization
has necessary legal status and has functioned successfully for a number
of years; (c) organizational leadership commits to regular, sustained
attendance by the same staff members at all trainings, workshops, and
technical advisory sessions held by program implementers ; (d) the
organization practices sound, transparent management of funds and
resources.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                            31
                   CAPACITY BUILDING STRATEGIES

      •	Forming research advisory groups
       Developing and using multimedia tools to provide
      •	
       interactive workshops
      •	Facilitating residential workshops with local researchers,
        practitioners, and activists
      •	Making research methodologies widely available and freely
        accessible
      •	Providing mentorship and peer-to-peer learning initiatives
       Making evidence-based interventions to address IPV
      •	
       widely available and accessible
      •	Providing support on how to adapt community-mobilization
        interventions
       Forming technical advisory groups to support program
      •	
       development and maintain rigorous ethical and safety
       standards
      •	Including key stakeholders in national and international
        meetings on VAWG research


A local partner organization should also demonstrate a strong legal and
financial status; conceptual understanding of the issue of violence (where
a more thorough understanding of gender, power, and prevention is
beneficial); implementation capacity (where a more professional, better
trained staff of program managers with skills in writing, training, data
collection, and outreach is beneficial); and leadership (where a solid
commitment from the organization to prioritize the program is beneficial).
Appendix B contains a list of mandatory and desirable characteristics for
an implementation partner that was developed specifically for adapting
the aforementioned SASA! methodology to Central America.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                      32
Step Four: Formalize a locally appropriate program and
evaluation design
Step four involves formalizing the details of the program design and
evaluation, including the approach, strategies, intended participants and
beneficiaries, evaluation design, budget and timeline.

Formalize the approach
Community mobilization programs to address intimate partner violence
work almost always transform existing social gender norms by aiming to
allow women, girls, and all community members to live free of violence,
which is their right. To do so, these programs rely on the leadership and
creativity of community members themselves, as opposed to an external
authority. Therefore, the design of community mobilization programs to
address intimate partner violence entails (1) a gender analysis component,
(2) a human rights component, and (3) a participatory component.

A gender analysis approach to program design holds as a basic principle
that men’s and women’s roles in society are socially rather than biologically
determined. As such, these roles can be changed. This approach observes
that women’s socially-determined position in society has historically been
disadvantaged as compared to men’s, and that this imbalance in power at
all levels of society is a root cause of intimate partner violence as well as
other abuses of women’s rights. A community mobilization program that
does not emerge from this philosophy will not be effective in fundamentally
altering the root causes of violence.

A human rights approach to community mobilization work operates from
the basic principle that all people have the right to live free of violence,
as is established in international law and human rights conventions.
According to Lori Michau, this framework “creates a legitimate channel
for discussing women’s needs and priorities and holds the community
accountable for treating women as valuable and equal human beings.”15
A community mobilization program that does not use this approach is
comparably toothless, since, again, it does not address the root causes of
violence, instead relying on participants to change their perspectives and
actions purely out of their own good will.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                         33
A participatory approach to community mobilization requires community                  Community
members to lead the effort. Experience indicates that community members’
commitment, creativity, and capacity in program execution produces
                                                                                      mobilization
transformative changes that may be impossible for external actors to                    efforts are
achieve on their own. A program cannot accurately be labeled “community                 successful
mobilization” if it does not place community members’ own leadership and             because they
creativity at its core.
                                                                                         permeate
Step four involves embodying these three approaches into program design          multiple levels of
documents.
                                                                                 society. Through
Formalize the strategies                                                          educational and
After finalizing program design, programmers must formalize specific             behavior change
strategies to be used in program execution. To this end, programmers                interventions,
should be aware that community mobilization is not itself a strategy, but the
desired outcome of several strategies aimed at social change. Common
                                                                                  these programs
strategies of community mobilization programs include:                            foster collective
    •	Local activism, including grassroots initiatives that engage family,        action and build
      friends and neighbors. Examples include: drama, quick chats, door-               community
      to-door discussions, community conversations and public events.
                                                                                       capacity to
    •	Media dissemination, using traditional and new media to target public
                                                                                challenge gender
      perceptions on gender roles. Examples include: soap operas, films,
      newspaper articles and comics, radio programs, and television.            norms, leading to
    •	
     Advocacy to influence local, national or international leaders.
                                                                                reductions in IPV.
     Examples include: one-on-one meetings, petitions, policy analysis
     and lobbying.
    •	 Engagement with stakeholders, particularly with community members
       who promote gender equality at local levels.
     Communicative art dissemination to illustrate ideas. Examples
    •	
     include: artistic graphics, posters, comics, games, murals, flyers and
     picture cards.
    •	Interactive training to explore issues in depth. Examples include:
      workshops, seminars, teach-ins and mentoring.10




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                        34
Leading scholars and practitioners involved in community mobilization
understand that change in communities’ approach to partner violence
occurs in stages. Experience suggests that certain strategies are better
suited for implementation at certain points within these stages. Table 1,
below, draws upon the Stages of Change theory as applied to community
mobilization work by Lori Michau and Dipak Naker, to illustrate the kinds of
strategies associated with phases of community mobilization and stages
of change.16

       Table 1: Strategies and Stages of Change Associated with Community Mobilization



           “Stages of                Phases of Community                      Potential
            Change”                      Mobilization                        Strategies

 1       Pre-contemplation      Community Assessment: a time to           Advocacy,
                                gather information on community           Training
                                attitudes and beliefs about intimate
                                partner violence and to start building
                                relationships with community
                                members and professional sectors.

 2       Contemplation          Raising Awareness: a time to              Local activism,
                                increase awareness about                  Media, Advocacy,
                                intimate partner violence, such as        Communications
                                why it happens and its negative           materials
                                consequences for women, men,
                                families, and the community.

 3       Preparation for        Building Networks: a time for             Advocacy,
         Action                 encouraging and supporting general        Training
                                community members and various
                                professional sectors to consider
                                taking action to uphold women’s
                                right to safety. Community members
                                can come together to strengthen
                                individual and group efforts to
                                prevent domestic violence.

 4       Action                 Integrating Action: a time to take        Local activism,
                                action against intimate partner           Advocacy,
                                violence part of everyday life in the     Training,
                                community and within institutions’        Communications
                                policies and practices.                   materials

 5       Maintenance            Consolidating Efforts: a time to          Local activism
                                strengthen actions and activities for
                                the prevention of intimate partner
                                violence to ensure the sustainability,
                                continued growth, and progress of
                                prevention program.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                      35
Whether or not programmers apply the Stages of Change theory, they
must formalize the precise rationale for chosen strategies and intended
outcomes. The theory of change will become a core component of program
evaluation design as well, and can take many forms. Regardless of whether
programmers use a logical framework, results-based framework, or a kind
of visual presentation of the theory of change, the core program team must
clearly and convincingly articulate how and why the program will bring
about change. Theories of change emphasizing transformations in power
relationships and other structural drivers of intimate partner violence will
be particularly convincing if evidence-based.

Formalize the intended participants and beneficiaries
The selection of program location involves the identification of its intended
participants and beneficiaries. However, it is also important to identify
program participants holistically in terms of the individual, relationship,
community and society, and to consider the social norms that apply to each
level. Figure 3 of the literature review contained in this document shows
how the transformation of power across the ecological model can prevent
VAW, it identifies the social norms—and strategies for shifting them—that
apply to these four levels of the ecological model.

Formalize the evaluation design
A community-based program to address intimate partner violence should
produce reliable evaluation results to benefit both the programming
team and the broader field of violence prevention work. Teams may
select different criteria for program evaluation, with some favoring real-
time insights of nimbler designs, while others prefer experimental or
other rigorous designs that produce more scientifically reliable evidence.
In either case, program teams must invest the energy and resources to
formalize an impact evaluation design. Multiple resources are available to
help guide this effort, including evaluation design and specific guidelines
on data collection instruments and processes17-20, with particular attention
paid to protection of participants’ safety. Any type of program evaluation
should clearly define the program’s intended outcomes (both short- and
long-term) and goals.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                         36
Formalize the budget and timeline
Budget and timeline considerations will have enormous influence over
all the decisions in Step 4, and must be articulated clearly. Programmers
should allow adequate time for all the stages of program adaptation and
implementation. It is unrealistic to expect any participant community where
violence against women has occurred at significant levels for generations
to move through stages of transformative change in a matter of months. A
budget and timeline should allow for at least three, but ideally five, years
of total program implementation for a successful community mobilization
initiative.


Step Five: Prepare the program materials
When adapting materials from an existing IPV prevention program, such as
manuals, posters, radio scripts, graphics, or short films, programmers must
undertake a thorough process of contextual adaptation of these materials.
Adopting materials used in other prevention programs can be helpful and
time efficient, but only if they are adapted to the local context to instill a
sense of authentic leadership and momentum.

To this end, programmers should translate the existing materials into
the language of their program site (if necessary), then work through the
materials to make necessary adjustments to details, storylines, references,
names, and other details in a careful process of cultural adaptation. It
may be necessary to hire illustrators or other artists to adjust the graphics
included in these materials. The people, buildings, communities, natural
surroundings and other details of the graphics must look like “our
community” to people involved in the program.

Programmers should pilot a first draft of the adapted program materials
before fully implementing the program. For example, programmers may
ask a sample of program participants to use the materials for a short
time, then survey participants to assess the utility and appropriateness
of the adapted the text, discussion prompts, graphics, storylines, etc.
Programmers should then revise materials as necessary before formally
launching the program.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                          37
Step Six: Finalize the outreach and dissemination plan as                     Community-based
early as possible                                                                    interventions
Programmers should plan to disseminate the results of their interventions                 impact a
at local, national and international levels. The earlier in the process            broad range of
programmers define key audiences and dissemination channels, the easier
it will be to take necessary steps throughout the program implementation
                                                                                 individuals. The
process to produce the most compelling, useful final products.                     most effective
A common dissemination plan involves initial reports of formative research
                                                                               programs involve
and baseline results, as well as regular intermediate reports throughout            all community
program implementation. Once the program is completed, programmers                       members,
can consider producing a wide array of products, such as articles in peer-
                                                                               including women
reviewed journals, policy notes, working papers, and other documents. Any
products should be prepared both in print and electronic form. Participants
                                                                                   and men, boys
and stakeholders involved in the program must also be included in the            and girls, youth
results dissemination plan. Program teams should also create materials            and elders, and
and presentations for dissemination to the program participants and
                                                                                     professionals
stakeholders.
                                                                                          and non-
At the very least, programmers should produce a final report presenting
                                                                                    professionals.
the most relevant findings and the viability of adapting the program
approach to other settings. Programmers may also consider giving
presentations (workshops, conferences, seminars, etc.) at the national and
international levels. These may include presentations at the Commission
on the Status of Women, appropriate global seminars and international
events on prevention, community safety, women’s rights, children’s rights,
and urban planning, governance and safety, as well as through regional
events organized by local networks working in IPV and public safety.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                       38
CONCLUSION
This methodological annex outlines the steps involved in adapting to
new settings a community-based intervention to prevent intimate partner
violence. While the precise nature of these steps will vary depending on
the setting in which they are applied, the core ethical and effectiveness
considerations here should remain true regardless of location. The
authors hope that this note will help programmers worldwide to
successfully transform community norms and prevent intimate partner
violence. We thank you for your much-needed efforts.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                     39
REFERENCES AND
RESOURCE DOCUMENTS
1.	    Devries, K.M., et al. (2013). “The Global Prevalence of Intimate Partner
       Violence Against Women.” Science 30:1527-28.

2.	    World Health Organization, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
       Medicine, Medical Research Council. (2013). Global and regional estimates
       of violence against women: prevalence and health effects of intimate
       partner violence and non-partner sexual violence. Geneva, Switzerland:
       World Health Organization.

3.	    Duvury, N., Callan, A., Carney, P., and Raghavendra, S. (2013). “Intimate
       Partner Violence: Economic Costs and Implications for Growth and
       Development.” Women’s Voice, Agency, & Participation Series: The World
       Bank 3.

4.	    Klugman, J., et al. (2014). Voice and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls
       for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.

5.	    National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. (2013). Costs of Intimate
       Partner Violence Against Women in the United States. Atlanta, GA: Centers
       for Disease Control and Prevention.

6.	    Solotaroff, J, Pande, R.P. (2014). Violence Against Women and
       Girls Lessons from South Asia. South Asia Development Forum.
       Washington, DC: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/
       curateden/2014/09/20206575/violence-against-women-girls-lessons-
       south-asia-vol-1-2-main-report

7.	    Velzeboer, M., et al. (2003). Violence Against Women: The Health
       Sector Responds Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) Occasional
       Publication No. 12. Washington, DC: Pan American Health Organization,
       2003.

8.	    Taft, A.J., Watson, L.F. (2008). “Depression and Termination of Pregnancy
       (Induced Abortion) in a National Cohort of Young Australian Women: The
       Confounding Effect of Women’s Experience of Violence” BMC Public
       Health 8(75): 1-8.

9.	    Campbell, J., et al. (2002). “Intimate Partner Violence and Physical Health
       Consequences,” Archives of Internal Medicine 162(10), 1157-1200.

10.	   Weiss, H.A., et al. (2008). “Spousal Sexual Violence and Poverty Are Risk
       Factors for Sexually Transmitted Infections in Women: A Longitudinal Study
       of Women in Goa, India.” Sexually Transmitted Infections 84(2):133-139.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                               40
11.	   Coker, Amy (2007). “Does Physical Intimate Partner Violence Affect Sexual
       Health?: A Systematic Review.” Trauma, Violence & Abuse 8(2), 149-177.

12.	   Hill, A., Pallitto, C., McCleary-Sills, J., and Garcia-Moreno, C. (To be
       published) “Intimate Partner Violence as a Risk Factor for Low Birthweight
       and Preterm Birth: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.”

13.	   Heise, L. (2011). What Works to Prevent Partner Violence: An Evidence
       Overview. London, UK: STRIVE Research Consortium, London School of
       Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

14.	   Breiding, M.J., et al. (2014). Prevalence and Characteristics of Sexual
       Violence, Stalking, and Intimate Partner Violence Victimization—National
       Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey, United States, 2011.
       Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Surveillance Summaries 63(8), 1-18.

15.	   Arango, D.J., Morton, M., Gennari, F., Kiplesund, S. and, Ellsberg, M. (2014)
       “Interventions to Prevent or Reduce Violence against Women and Girls:
       A Systematic Review of Reviews.” Women’s Voice and Agency Research
       Series: The World Bank 10.

16.	   World Health Organization, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
       Medicine. (2010). Preventing Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence against
       Women: Taking Action and Generating Evidence. Geneva, Switzerland:
       WHO.

17.	   Raising Voices. (2015). SASA! http://raisingvoices.org/sasa/

18.	   Chamberlain, L. (2011). A Prevention Primer for Domestic Violence:
       Terminology, Tools, and the Public Health Approach. Harrisburg, PA:
       National Resource Center on Domestic Violence.

19.	   Ellsberg, M., et al. (2014). “Prevention of Violence against Women and
       Girls: What Does the Evidence Say?” The Lancet, A Special Series on
       Violence against Women and Girls.

20.	   What Works. (2014). A Summary of the Evidence and Research Agenda for
       What Works. What Works to Prevent Violence Global Programme.

21.	   Jewkes, R. (2002). “Intimate partner violence: causes and prevention.” The
       Lancet 359:1423-29.

22.	   Heise, L. (1998). “Violence Against Women: An Integrated, Ecological
       Framework.” Violence against Women 4: 262-290.

23.	   Bronfenbrenner, U. (1994). Ecological Models of Human Development. In
       International Encyclopedia of Education, Vol 3, 2nd, Ed. Oxford: Elsevier.
       Reprinted in: Gauvain, M. & Cole, M. (Eds.), Readings on the Development
       of Children, 2nd Ed (1993, pp 37-43). NY: Freeman.



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                41
24.	   Michau, L., Horn, J., Bank, A., Dutt, M., Zimmerman, C. (2014). “Prevention
       of Violence against Women and Girls: Lessons from Practice.” The Lancet,
                                                                                                 Community
       A Special Series on Violence against Women and Girls.                                    mobilization
25.	   Gennari F., McCleary-Sills, J., Arango, D.J., and Hidalgo, N. (2014). Violence
                                                                                             for the primary
       Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide: Health Sector Brief.                     prevention of
       Washington, DC: The World Bank, Global Women’s Institute, Inter-
       American Development Bank.                                                               IPV must be
26.	   Heise, L., Kostadam, A. (2015). “Cross-national and Multilevel Correlates of
                                                                                            complemented
       Partner Violence: An Analysis of Data from Population-based Surveys.” The                  with multi-
       Lancet Global Health 3: e332-40.
                                                                                                    sectoral,
27.	   Michau, L. (2012). Community Mobilization: Preventing Partner Violence by
       Changing Social Norms. Bangkok, Thailand: UN Women.
                                                                                          survivor-centered
                                                                                                  secondary
28.	   Prochaska, J.O., Velicer, W.F. (1997). “The Transtheoretical Model of Health
       Behavior Change.” Am J Health Promotion 12(1):38-48.
                                                                                                  prevention
                                                                                                     efforts.
29.	   Abramsky, T., et al. (2014). “Findings from the SASA! Study: A Cluster
       Randomized Controlled Trial to Assess the Impact of a Community
       Mobilization Intervention to Prevent Violence against Women and Reduce
       HIV Risk in Kampala, Uganda.” BMC Medicine 12:122.

30.	   Garcia-Moreno C, Jansen HA, Ellsberg M, Heise L, Watts CH: Prevalence
       of intimate partner violence: findings from the WHO multi-country study on
       women’s health and domestic violence. Lancet 2006, 368:1260–1269.

31.	   Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Macro International Inc: Uganda Demographic
       and Health Survey, 2006. Maryland: Calverton; 2007.

32.	   Kyegombe, N., et al. (2014). “SASA! is the Medicine That Treats Violence.
       Qualitative Findings on How a Community Mobilisation Intervention to
       Prevent Violence against Women Created Change in Kampala, Uganda.”
       Global Health Action 7.

33.	   Solorzano, I., Bank, A., Pena, R., Espinoza, H., Ellsberg, M., and Pulerwitz, J.
       (2008). Catalyzing Individual and Social Change around Gender, Sexuality,
       and HIV: Impact Evaluation of Puntos de Encuentro’s Communication
       Strategy in Nicaragua. Washington, DC: Population Council.

34.	   Jewkes, R., et al. (2007). Evaluation of Stepping Stones: A Gender
       Transformative HIV Prevention Intervention. Pretoria, South Africa: MRC.

35.	   Bradley, J.E., Bhattacharjee, P., Ramesh, B.M., Girish, M., and Das, A.K.
       (2011). “Evaluation of Stepping Stones as a Tool for Changing Knowledge,
       Attitudes and Behaviours Associated with Gender, Relationships and HIV
       risk in Karnataka, India.” BMC Public Health 11:496.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                                  42
36.	   Skevington, S.M., Sovetkina, E.C., and Gillison, F.B. (2013). “A Systematic
       Review to Quantitatively Evaluate ‘Stepping Stones’: A Participatory
       Community-based HIV/AIDS Prevention Intervention.” AIDS and Behavior
       17(3):1025-1039.

37.	   Instituto Promundo. (2012). “Engaging Men to Prevent Gender-based
       Violence: A Multi-Country Intervention and Impact Evaluation Study.”
       Report for the UN Trust Fund. Washington, DC: Promundo.

38.	   Promundo. (2015). Program H http://promundoglobal.org/programs/
       program-h/

39.	   Jewkes, R.K. (2015). “SHARE: A Milestone in Joint Programming for HIV
       and Intimate Partner Violence.” The Lancet 3: e2-3.

40.	   Wagman, J.A., et al. (2015). “Effectiveness of an Integrated Intimate Partner
       Violence and HIV Prevention Intervention in Rakai, Uganda: Analysis of an
       Intervention in an Existing Cluster Randomised Cohort.” The Lancet Global
       Health 3: e23-33.

41.	   Pronyk, P.M., et al. (2006). “Effect of a Structural Intervention for the
       Prevention of Intimate-partner Violence and HIV in Rural South Africa: A
       Cluster Randomised Trial.” The Lancet 368: 1973-83.

42.	   Violence Against Women and Girls Resource Guide. (2014). Innovate.
       Washington, DC: The World Bank, Global Women’s Institute, Inter-
       American Development Bank. http://www.vawgresourceguide.org/innovate

43.	   University of Kansas Work Group for Community Health and Development,
       “Choosing and Adapting Community Interventions.” in Community Toolbox
       Chapter 19. http://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/analyze/choose-and-
       adapt-community-interventions/cultural-adaptation/main

44.	   Okamoto, Scott K., et al. (2014). “Toward Developing Culturally Focused
       Prevention Interventions: From Adaptation to Grounding.” The Journal of
       Primary Prevention 35(2): 103–112.

45.	   Szapocznik, J., Coatsworth, J. D. (1999). “An Ecodevelopmental Framework
       for Organizing the Influences on Drug Abuse: A Developmental Model of
       Risk and Protection”, in M. Glantz & C. Hartel (Eds.), Drug Abuse: Origins
       and Interventions: 331–366. Washington, DC: American Psychological
       Association.

46.	   Washington State Coalition against Domestic Violence, In Her Shoes
       http://wscadv2.org/resourcespublications.cfm?aid=6388541a-c298-58f6-
       02a2a6cf514e6448

47.	   La Alianza InterCambios. (2007). Caminando en Sus Zapatos http://
       alianzaintercambios.org/noticia?idnoticia=11



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                43
48.	   La Alianza InterCambios. (2007). Por los Caminos de Caminando http://
       www.alianzaintercambios.org/noticia?idnoticia=24

49.	   GBV Prevention Network/Raising Voices and Program for Appropriate
       Technology in Health (PATH). (2011). In Her Shoes, Sub-Saharan Africa
       Version http://preventgbvafrica.org/in-her-shoes/

50.	   Beyond Borders. Rethinking Power Adaptation of SASA! http://
       beyondborders.net/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women-girls/
       rethinking-power-adaptation-of-sasa/

51.	   World Health Organization, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
       Medicine, Medical Research Council. (2013). Global and Regional Estimates
       of Violence Against Women: Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate
       Partner Violence and Non-partner Sexual Violence. Geneva, Switzerland:
       World Health Organization.

52.	   Duvury, N., Callan, A., Carney, P., Raghavendra, S. (2013). Intimate
       Partner Violence: Economic Costs and Implications for Growth and
       Development. Women’s voice, agency, and participation research series;
       no. 3. Washington DC; World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
       curated/en/2013/11/18486239/intimate-partner-violence-economic-costs-
       implications-growth-development

53.	   Klugman, J., et al. (2014). Voice and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls
       for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.

54.	   Heise, L. (2011). What Works to Prevent Partner Violence: An Evidence
       Overview. London, UK: STRIVE Research Consortium, London School of
       Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

55.	   Arango, D.J., Morton, M., Gennari, F., Kiplesund, S., Ellsberg, M. (2014).
       “Interventions to Prevent or Reduce Violence against Women and Girls:
       a Systematic Review of Reviews.” Women’s Voice and Agency Research
       Series: The World Bank 10.

56.	   World Health Organization, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
       Medicine. (2010). Preventing Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Against
       Women: Taking Action and Generating Evidence. Geneva, Switzerland:
       World Health Organization.

57.	   Ellsberg, M., et al. (2014). “Prevention of Violence against Women and
       Girls: What Does the Evidence Say?” The Lancet, Volume 385, Issue 9977,
       1555-1566. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61703-7.

58.	   What Works. (2014). A Summary of the Evidence and Research Agenda for
       What Works. What Works to Prevent Violence Global Programme.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                             44
59.	   Jewkes, R. (2002). “Intimate Partner Violence: Causes and Prevention.”
       The Lancet 359:1423-29.

60.	   Michau, L. (2012). Community Mobilization: Preventing Partner Violence by
       Changing Social Norms. Bangkok, Thailand: United Nations Women.

61.	   Prochaska, J.O., Velicer, W.F. (1997). “The Transtheoretical Model of Health
       Behavior Change.” Am J Health Promotion 12(1):38-48.

62.	   Abramsky, T., et al. (2014). “Findings from the SASA! Study: a Cluster
       Randomized Controlled Trial to Assess the Impact of a Community
       Mobilization Intervention to Prevent Violence against Women and Reduce
       HIV risk in Kampala, Uganda.” BMC Medicine 12:122.

63.	   Bronfenbrenner, U. (1994) Ecological Models of Human Development.
       In International Encyclopedia of Education, Vol 3, 2nd ed. Oxford:
       Elsevier. Reprinted in: Gauvain, M. and Cole, M. (Eds.), Readings on the
       development of children, 2nd ed. (1993) NY: Freeman, 37-43.

64.	   Heise, L. (1998). “Violence Against Women: An Integrated, Ecological
       Framework.” Violence against Women 4; 262-290.

65.	   Spangaro, J., Adogu, C., Ranmuthugala, G., Powell Davies, G., Steinacker,
       L.,& Zwi, A. (2013). What Evidence Exists for Initiatives to Reduce Risk and
       Incidence of Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict and Humanitarian Crises?
       A Systematic Review. PLOS ONE, 8(5).

66.	   Michau, L., and Naker, D. (2003). Mobilizing Communities to Prevent
       Domestic Violence: A Resource Guide for Organizations in East and
       Southern Africa. Nairobi, Kenya: Raising Voices (raisingvoices.org). doi: 
       10.1186/1745-6215-13-96

67.	   World Health Organization. (2007). WHO Ethical and safety
       recommendations for researching, documenting and monitoring sexual
       violence in emergencies. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO.

68.	   Ellsberg, M. & Heise L. (2005). Researching Violence Against Women:
       A Practical Guide for Researchers and Activists. Washington DC, United
       States: World Health Organization, PATH.

69.	   Ellsberg, M., Heise, L., Peña, R., Agurto, S., & Winkvist, A. (2001).
       Researching Domestic Violence Against Women: Methodological and
       Ethical Considerations. Studies in Family Planning,32(1), 1-16.

70.	   Department for International Development. (2012). Guidance on monitoring
       and evaluation for programming on violence against women and girls.
       Violence against Women and Girls CHASE Guidance Note Series.




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                               45
Appendix A: Criteria for Selecting Intervention                                    Organizations
Municipalities and Communities                                                         working to
Municipalities
                                                                                       implement
   •	Municipality wants to be part of the initiative
                                                                               community-based
   •	Municipality has a history of supporting work and collaborating in
                                                                                    interventions
     other sectors                                                                require longer-
   •	
    Multiple sectors within a municipality currently demonstrate                         term and
    responsiveness to intimate partner violence, for example, by                      sustainable
    providing protection services, access to legal system, mentalhealth                   funding.
    services, etc.
                                                                                      Investment
   •	 The municipality is capable of providing safety during the development
      and implementation of program activities
                                                                                 should prioritize
   •	Statistics on violence (or other important indicators) are available
                                                                               prevention efforts
   •	The program supports the municipality’s short- and long-term social,
                                                                                     that address
     political, and economic processes and goals                                     social norms
   •	Municipality employs stakeholders who are working on issues related         and concepts of
     to intimate partner violence or other types of violence                     gender equality
   •	Program leaders are well-respected and trusted in the community,             while engaging
     increasing the likelihood that they will be supported throughout the
                                                                               women, men, and
     implementation of the program
                                                                                  key community
Communities                                                                             members.
   •	There is an evidence base that can help inform the program design
     and implementation
   •	The community is geographically accessible
   •	There is safe access to the community
   •	There is a strong understanding of community dynamics that will help
     contribute to the design of this program
    There is a presence of community leaders, activists, and other
   •	
    networks to support the program
   •	Community leaders have experience in coordinating programs
   •	There is evidence of prior community mobilization, increasing the




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                                       46
     likelihood of participation
    Violence is addressed using a gender lens and with a good
   •	
    understanding of power dynamics
   •	There are sufficient services for women and adolescents who have
     experienced intimate partner violence
   •	It is feasible to implement the program within a timeline of at least
     three years

Appendix B: SASA! Criteria for Selecting
Intervention Partners in Central America
Choosing a local implementing organization is the most important factor to
a program’s success. Below are criteria to use when selecting intervention
partners.

Operational Capacity
   •	Prevention of IPV and SASA! fit within the implementing partner’s
     strategic plan, programs, and objectives of the organization
   •	Implementing partner’s management and administrative teams are
     prepared to support the capacity building of the organization, for
     example via conference calls and other electronic communication
   •	Implementing partner agrees to provide at least two senior staff to
     help train other team members on the Prevention Model for IPV/
     SASA!
   •	Implementing partner leaders and other staff agree to send the same
     staff to participate in training and follow-up visits
   •	Implementing partner has a legal status
   •	Implementing partner has been operating for at least two years
   •	Implementing partner has sufficient staff dedicated to the project to
     help ensure implementation of SASA!

Financial and Legal Status
   •	Implementing partner is transparent and can show accountability in
     executing programs over the last two years
   •	Implementing partner has a sufficient budget allocated to prevention
     programs



Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                      47
   •	Implementing partner has transparent financial and operating policies

Conceptual Understanding and Implementation Capacity
   •	Implementing partner staff analyze IPV using a gender and human
     rights framework
   •	Implementing partner understand what SASA! is and what is needed
     for successful adaptation and implementation of the program
   •	Implementing partner has experience designing and implementing
     prevention programs to address IPV or other forms of violence using
     a gender and human rights framework
   •	Implementing partner is capable of producing high-quality narrative
     reports
   •	Implementing partner staff working on implementing programs has
     experience working with IPV prevention programs
   •	Implementing partner has established respectful relationships within
     the target community and has activists or advocates to ensure a
     successful implementation
   •	Implementing partner has experience with advocacy at the political
     and community level

Leadership and Team Capacity
   •	The implementing partner has the human and financial resources to
     sustainably support the implementation of IPV prevention activities
   •	The presence of strong institutional support at various levels of the
     organization to support the adaptation of SASA!
    Implementing partner has established networks with other civil
   •	
    society organizations and government institutions
    Implementing partner has experience understanding community
   •	
    dynamics, including safety and security issues




Community-Based Approaches to Intimate Partner Violence                      48
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
"Community mobilization efforts are successful because they permeate multiple levels
 of society. Through educational and behavior change interventions, these programs
  foster collective action and build community capacity to challenge gender norms,
                   leading to reductions in Intimate Partner Violence."
