2
    Report No: AUS10650

.




    Republic of Turkey
    Natural Capital Accounting
    Valuing Water Resources in Turkey
    A Methodological Overview and Case Study

.
    September 2016



.
    GEN03

    EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

.




.




                                    3
    Disclaimer:

.

    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
    interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
    Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
    World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


.




    Copyright Statement:

.

    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
    violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
    its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance
    Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
    1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                      4
                                                      Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ......................................................................................................... 7
Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................................... 8
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 9
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 14
II. Overview of the Water Sector in Turkey ................................................................................. 15
   Water availability and uses ....................................................................................................... 15
   Problems and threats ................................................................................................................. 17
   Organizational setup for WRM in Turkey ................................................................................ 18
   National Development Plan and Policies Related to Water Resources .................................... 20
   Policy request and need for water valuation and accounting .................................................... 21
III. Overview of the Economic Values of Water .......................................................................... 24
   Why is economic valuation necessary? ..................................................................................... 24
   The Total Economic Value framework ..................................................................................... 25
   Existing water valuation literature: a brief overview ................................................................ 28
IV. Methods for Estimating Water Values ................................................................................... 30
   Overview of valuation methods ................................................................................................ 30
   Water valuation literature in Turkey: a summary ..................................................................... 34
   Summary of the applicable methods to estimate water values .................................................. 39
V. Valuation Applications in Beyşehir Lake Subcatchment ........................................................ 40
   Objectives and profile of the case study area ............................................................................ 40
   Valuation context for Beyşehir Lake ........................................................................................ 46
   Valuation results ........................................................................................................................ 47
VI. Conclusions and Recommendations ....................................................................................... 54
References ..................................................................................................................................... 57
Annex Table .................................................................................................................................. 66




                                                                        5
List of Tables
    Table 1. Turkey's water resources ......................................................................................... 15

    Table 2. Main agencies and stakeholders involved in Turkish water sector ........................ 19

    Table 3. Overview of water valuation studies conducted in Turkey .................................... 37

    Table 4. Components of TEV and commonly-used valuation methods ............................... 39

    Table 5. TEV framework for Beyşehir Lake ........................................................................ 47

    Table 6. Irrigated crops with water from Beyşehir Lake (2015) .......................................... 48

    Table 7. Estimated economic value of water for agriculture (million TL, 2015) ................. 48

    Table 8. Number of visitors in different areas of Beyşehir Lake (2015) .............................. 49

    Table 9. TEV components of Beyşehir Lake ........................................................................ 53


List of Figures
    Figure 1. TEV of water resources ......................................................................................... 26

    Figure 2. Taxonomy of environmental valuation methods ................................................... 30

    Figure 3. Konya Closed Basin and Beyşehir Lake Subcatchment ....................................... 41

    Figure 4. Beyşehir Lake water balance ................................................................................. 43

    Figure 5. Surface water resources in Konya Closed Basin before water development
         projects (in early 1900s) and in 2012 ............................................................................ 44

    Figure 6. Water level fluctuations of Beyşehir Lake ............................................................ 45


List of Boxes
    Box 1. An Alternative Way of Understanding the Sectoral Use of Water: The Water
        Footprint of Turkey ....................................................................................................... 16

    Box 2. Main plans and programs relevant to water management ......................................... 20

    Box 3. The System of Environmental Economic Accounting-Central Framework ............. 22

    Box 4. Total economic value of wetlands ............................................................................. 27




                                                                6
                      Abbreviations and Acronyms

ACM        Alternative Cost Method
CEM        Choice Experiment Method
COI        Cost of Illness
CVM        Contingent Valuation Method
DD         Derived Demand
DGWM       Directorate General of Water Management
DSİ        State Hydraulic Works
EU         European Union
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
HPM        Hedonic Price Method
IPA        Instrument for Pre-Accession
IPCC       Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IWRM       Integrated Water Resource Management
KOP        Konya Plain Irrigation Project
KOSKİ      Konya Water and Sewerage Authority
MDGs       Millennium Development Goals
MoD        Ministry of Development
MoEU       Ministry of Environment and Urbanization
MoFAL      Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock
MoFWA      Ministry of Forestry and Water Affairs
MP         Market Pricing
NCA        Natural Capital Accounting
OECD       Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PF         Production Function
PWFA       Physical Water Flow Accounts
RBMP       River Basin Management Plan
RCM        Replacement Cost Method
RM         Residual Method
SEEA-CF    System of Environmental-Economic Accounting - Central Framework
SDGs       Sustainable Development Goals
TA         Technical Assistance
TCM        Travel Cost Method
TEV        Total Economic Value
TurkStat   Turkish Statistical Institute
UN         United Nations
WAVES      Wealth Accounting and Valuation of Ecosystem Services
WFD        Water Framework Directive
WRM        Water resources management
WTP        Willingness to Pay
WWF        World Wide Fund for Nature




                                        7
                                   Acknowledgements
This report is a product of the World Bank’s Turkey Environment and Natural Resources
Technical Assistance (TA) Program. It was written by Lelia Croitoru, Buket Bahar Dıvrak and
Jian Xie, with suggestions from Esra Arıkan (water sector overview). Taner Kimençe, Bahar Sel,
and Ahmet Muslu of the Directorate General of Water Management helped review the draft version
of the report, and provided useful comments. İzzet Arı and Mustafa Bulut of the Ministry of
Development and Sebahattin Sarı, Hüseyin Şentürk, and Gülsevil Bahçeli of the Turkish Statistical
Institute (TurkStat) also contributed to discussions of the water valuation study.
A number of experts in Turkish government institutions provided their assistance in the case study
of Beyşehir lake subcatchment. Among them, Mehmet Şener, Neşe Tatar, Ali Özdemir, İshak
Ertaş, Asım Yıldırım, Serdar Koyuncu, Uğur Gözel, Dündar Keleş, Turgay Çiçekdağı, Fadim
Yavuz Özdemir, Bilgehan Nas, Başak Avcıoğlu Çokçalışkan, Mustafa Özgür Berke, and Ercan
Sütlü assisted in data collection for the Beyşehir Lake subcatchment. Nuri Akyalçın, deputy
regional director of DSİ Fourth Regional Directorate, and Hakan Karabıyık, agricultural engineer
at Konya Provincial Directorate of Food, Agriculture and Livestock shared their knowledge and
experience in the Beyşehir Lake case study area and contributed to the discussions on the case
study. Serkan Gürlük, assistant professor at Uludağ University, contributed to Turkish literature
research on water valuation and provided information on academic studies.
The team would like to thank the peer reviewers Glenn-Marie Lange and David Treguer as well
as Tamara Sulukhia, Eavan O'Halloran, Mustafa Ugur Alver and Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene
for their valuable comments.
The Turkey TA Program is managed by Jian Xie and Esra Arıkan, under the guidance and support
of Kulsum Ahmed. The TA Program also benefits from the financial and technical support of the
World Bank’s Wealth Accounting and Valuation of Ecosystem Services (WAVES) Global
Partnership program. Ülker Karamullaoğlu and Sydnella E. Kpundeh provide administrative
assistance to the program.




                                                8
                                   Executive Summary
Water is an essential component of Turkey’s economy and environment. The country’s annual
average potential of economically exploitable water resources is 112 billion m3. Annual freshwater
consumption is about 44 billion m3, of which 74% is used for agriculture, 15% for domestic uses,
and 11% towards industrial ones. Besides its contribution to economic production, water and its
related ecosystems (e.g. lakes, wetlands, coastal zones, etc.) provide a wide range of benefits such
as flood protection, pollution abatement, and biodiversity conservation.
Water resources are under strong pressure in terms of both quantity and quality. Throughout
the country, water resources are unevenly distributed in time and space, and the rivers often have
irregular flows due to climate conditions and variations in topography. Surface and groundwater
resources are fairly limited in the highly urbanized and industrialized western part of Turkey. In
addition, recent studies demonstrate that in the near future, Turkey will become hotter, more arid,
and unstable in terms of its precipitation patterns, meaning that water will inevitably become a
very sensitive and critical issue. The above factors, along with population growth (100 million
people by 2030), are expected to reduce water availability in many areas. This is particularly
important for basins such as Marmara Basin, K. Menderes Basin and Asi Basin, where water
availability is already less than 1000 m3/capita. In addition, water pollution due to the discharge
of untreated wastewater from urban and industrial areas is another problem associated with the
growing economy.

Freshwater productivity in Turkey (US$20/m3) is low compared to that of high-income
countries (US$47/m3), and of some upper middle-income countries of the region, such as
Belarus, and Bosnia and Herzegovina (US$50-58/m3) (World Bank, 2016). As the largest user
of water, agriculture has extensive irrigation systems, however the existing irrigation
practices are not very efficient. Water delivery systems in irrigation schemes are comprised of
classical open canals and canalettes resulting in high losses due to leakage and evaporation.
Similarly, at the farm level, surface irrigation methods that have low water efficiency are widely
used. Without significant improvement in irrigation efficiencies, it is indisputable that water
availability would become a serious constraint for Turkey.
The Turkish government is considering a set of policy issues related to water resource
management (WRM), including estimating the economic value of water and incorporating
this into strategic decision-making on water allocation and pricing. There is a request for
developing a tool for water valuation and accounting. According to a diagnostic analysis the
World Bank carried out in 2014, there is a wide range of policy questions related to water resource
management, from water’s economic contributions to national growth, to tradeoffs among
competing users in managing water resources, to water pricing and cost recovery, to planning and
prioritizing investments to compensate for or offset the loss of water due to depletion. The need
for water-related policy analysis and decision-making from the agencies responsible for
development planning, water resource management, and environmental protection are a strong
motivation for the development and application of the water valuation and accounting tool.
Economic valuation of water is a basic step in making well-informed policy decisions on
WRM. Government agencies, namely the Ministry of Development (MoD) / TurkStat, Ministry
of Forest and Water Affairs (MoFWA), are keen on conducting valuation to better understand


                                                 9
water resources’ economic contributions to the economy and to accordingly modify the national
accounts. Furthermore, MoD and MoFWA are willing to integrate water valuation as a key
component in the river basin management processes, which would contribute to analyzing the
challenging issues of WRM such as assessing trade-offs, allocation planning, investment
prioritization, ecosystem conservation, setting standards for water quality, water pricing,
compensation for damage or use, and adaptation to climate change. To support the government
agencies in natural resources management, the World Bank launched a natural capital accounting
(NCA) program in Turkey. The program aims to improve the valuation and accounting systems
of natural resources.
The identification of water goods and services is based on the Total Economic Value (TEV)
framework, which includes use and non-use values. Use values originate from actual water use
and include three categories: direct use values (e.g. water for irrigation, municipal and industrial
uses, recreation), indirect use values (e.g. nutrient retention, pollution abatement, flood control),
and option values (e.g. potential future uses of water ecosystems). Non-use values are not related
to any use of water resources, but reflect the economic value that can be attached to the mere
existence of a water-related aspect. They include existence, bequest, and altruistic values, and refer
to the conservation of biodiversity, cultural heritage, and other potential uses of the resource.
The economic valuation of water benefits can be based on a wide range of valuation methods.
The literature review conducted for this study shows a wide range of methods applicable for
estimating different water values. They include market-based approaches (e.g. market pricing,
replacement cost, avertive expenditures), revealed preference methods (e.g. Travel Cost, Hedonic
Pricing, residual method, productive functions) and stated preference methods (e.g. Contingent
Valuation Method and Choice Experiments). These methods have been applied worldwide to
estimate values mostly related to surface water, such as water for irrigation, recreation, and
biodiversity. In Turkey, water valuation is a relatively new field, with limited expertise and
applications: most efforts concentrate on valuing recreation, while some estimate improvements
in water quality. Little has been done to estimate other values (e.g. water for irrigation, industry,
drinking) and no studies have been found related to indirect use values (e.g. flood control, pollution
abatement).
The study presented in this report focused on water valuation with the objectives of
introducing the concept and methods of water valuation, and demonstrating their use
through actual application of valuation methods to Turkey’s water resources . As part of the
NCA program, the valuation studies were carried out in the forestry and water sectors. The forestry
valuation study was done in 2015. The present study addressed the issue of economic valuation
of water in Turkey by: 1) providing a comprehensive analysis of methods that can be used to
estimate each water value; 2) reviewing existing efforts to estimate water values at the international
and national levels; and 3) applying existing methodology to demonstrate the value of different
water uses through a case study in Beyşehir Lake subcatchment.
A case study was quickly carried out in Beyşehir Lake subcatchment, the largest freshwater
lake in Turkey. Located in the southwest of Konya Closed Basin, Beyşehir Lake subcatchment
covers about 414,000 ha and has a total population of 120,000 people. It is the main surface water
in the Konya Closed Basin, with water transfer and irrigation facilities being operated by water
authorities since the early 1900s. Agriculture, tourism, and industry are the subcatchment’s main
economic sectors. About 330-340 million m3 water is taken every year from the Lake for the


                                                 10
irrigation of Konya Plain. The subcatchment also provides water for the small-scale irrigation
projects in the eastern and northeast part of the Lake. The Lake and its water body systems are the
source of drinking water for the Beyşehir district and some of the area’s small towns.
Despite several protection statuses implemented in the Lake area, the Beyşehir Lake
subcatchment suffers from serious threats. Decreasing water levels due to excessive abstraction
of water for irrigation; pollution from agricultural, industrial and urban wastewaters; lack of
effective coordination between different authorities; and unsustainable fishing practices and
unplanned urbanization which threaten both the sustainability and the services provided by the
Lake. In particular, the government authorities’ main challenge is to balance water demands for
irrigation with the need to preserve the Lake for fish and wildlife habitat. Valuing the Lake’s water
services would help in better understanding the uses of water and pointing out economic, efficient,
or cost-effective solutions to its problems.

The TEV framework and several valuation methods were applied to estimate the economic
value of water benefits provided by the Beyşehir Lake subcatchment. The exercise focused on
estimating the gross benefits the Lake provided during 2015. Valuation was based on data obtained
from interviews with local authorities conducted during April-May 2016, complemented by
secondary information. Due to limited time and budget constraints, the results are orders of
magnitude that often underestimate the real value of these benefits.
The valuation shows that the TEV of Beyşehir Lake reaches TL271 million, or 13% of
Beyşehir subcatchment’s GDP in 2015. Water supply for agriculture appears to be the most
important component, followed by water for municipal uses. However, this is because the quantity
of water used by agriculture is much higher than that for municipal use; in fact, the unit value of
water allocated for irrigation (TL0.5/m3) is considerably lower than that for municipal use
(TL5/m3). In addition, the Lake’s economic value is about seven times higher than its financial
value, suggesting the high importance of preserving this resource. The gap between the two values
is largely explained by the difference between the economic value of the water supply per different
uses (irrigation, municipal) and its financial value. In this light, the analysis demonstrates that the
economic value of water is much higher than its financial value for both municipal (TL5/m3 vs.
TL2.7/m3 on average) and agricultural uses (TL0.5/m3 vs. TL0.03/m3).
Even though incomplete, these estimates show the Lake’s additional importance in terms of
non-market benefits, such as recreation, biodiversity and pollution abatement. These values,
together with all of the other water benefits, need to be preserved and even improved whenever
possible. In this light, a recent survey found that Beyşehir residents have a positive WTP for
projects to improve the Lake’s water quality, of at least TL4 million in 2015. Although
conservative, this value calls for the need for action to improve and preserve the benefits of the
largest freshwater lake in Turkey.
The study further identified the need for the following actions:

      Nurture the political will and institutional arrangements to support the incorporation
of valuation into decision-making. High-level political will and commitment, particularly from
the National Government, are fundamental to ensure that valuation is integrated into decision-
making processes. Other measures are equally important, such as helping to promote coordination
among stakeholders—by forming an Expert Advisory Group under the coordination of MoD, and


                                                  11
comprised of experts and officials from relevant government agencies (TurkStat, MoFWA,
MoEU), academia, and civil society organizations—in order to ensure that NCA efforts are
effectively carried out inter-ministerially. The Expert Advisory Group would also explore new
developments related to NCA studies at the global scale; pioneer the discussions in the country;
and help to harmonize different approaches and methodologies for Turkey.

       Adopt natural capital valuation and accounting as supporting tools in implementing
the 2030 Agenda and delivering the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with 17 SDGs requires better and more integrated
information on how the economy, environment, and society interact. In that sense, NCA and the
SDGs are highly compatible. Both recognize the need for understanding the interactions and trade-
offs between the social, environmental and economic dimensions of sustainable development.
NCA can help deliver the SDGs by making explicit the links between the economy and the
environment, enabling sustainable policy decisions and actions. Furthermore, NCA can also
support the process of monitoring and reporting the progress on the SDGs. Turkey, a successful
implementer of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), is keen on implementing SDGs and
improving its performance on sustainable development. MoD, as the overall coordinator of the
2030 Agenda in Turkey, is in the preparation stages of the 11th Development Plan and in updating
the country’s long-term vision aligned with the 2030 Agenda and SDGs. In this context, it is crucial
to integrate NCA and valuation efforts into Turkey’s SDGs implementation roadmap and adopt
these tools for delivering SDGs.

       Carry out in-depth valuation studies, covering a wider range of water values and river
basins. In Turkey, water valuation efforts have been uneven, concentrating mostly on valuing
recreation and to a lesser degree on the purification function of water bodies. Little work has been
found on the value of water for irrigation, industry and municipal use and none on indirect use
values (e.g. flood control, pollution abatement) or the costs of water degradation (i.e. impacts of
water pollution and overexploitation). Moreover, the existing studies have been concentrated in a
few river basins. To better understand the importance of water resources and water-related
ecosystems, and to be able to prioritize and design interventions aimed at reducing problems, there
is a need for a more comprehensive set of studies that would cover both a wider range of values
and a wider range of river basins.

       Improve the valuation of water benefits in Beyşehir Lake subcatchment through
extended data collection and site-specific studies concerning the economic value of water uses
(i.e. agricultural, municipal, recreational, and biodiversity). The TEV of Beyşehir Lake was
estimated to be about TL271 million, or 13% of the Beyşehir subcatchment’s GDP in 2015, with
the greatest value being generated by water supply for agriculture, followed by water for municipal
uses. However, the unit value of water allocated for irrigation (TL0.5/m3) is estimated to be
considerably lower than that for municipal use (TL5/m3), even though water use by agriculture is
much higher than that for municipal use. The analysis thus suggests that water allocation is
inefficient. To confirm this conclusion and improve allocation, a more comprehensive assessment
of the economic benefits of water resources - focusing particularly on the value of water for
irrigation, municipal use, recreation and biodiversity - and of the trade-off between water uses
and food security as well as rural development is required. A better understanding of the value of
water in its various uses will help design systems that improve the total benefits of water use by


                                                12
improving its allocation; the allocation experiences of other countries can provide a useful starting
point for such efforts.

       Develop national guidelines on water valuation and accounting to facilitate future
studies and scale/implement existing efforts nationwide. These guidelines should propose a
stepwise approach for practitioners at all levels and have a general context of “ecosystem
valuation” with differentiated aspects of forest, water, and marine valuation. Prior to that, national
circumstances (e.g. data limitations, government priorities, institutional capacity, etc.) have to be
properly analyzed.

        Establish a national water accounting system. The fragmented structure of water
management and administrative units in Turkey makes the establishment of water accounting a
challenge. Furthermore, earlier efforts to develop water accounts remained as “pilot projects” and
have not yet result in proper institutionalization. In that sense, Turkey still needs to gain experience
and conduct further studies to improve its existing water accounting framework in a standardized
and consistent way. Existing physical water accounts can be improved with new modules, and
data should be collected beyond the current administrative boundaries, and standardized across all
river basin levels. Data quality frameworks should be developed and the quality of existing water
statistics should be assessed. Extra effort is needed for additional data compilation in water-related
economic sectors like fisheries, energy, forestry, tourism and agriculture. Monetary accounts need
to be based on the economic value of water in terms of its exploitation, depletion, and contribution
to the national economy. In the end, physical and monetary water accounts will be incorporated
into a national water accounting system.

       Integrate water valuation into RBMPs. Turkey is making concerted efforts to prepare
RBMPs for 25 river basins aligned with the EU-WFD, with the main goal of reconciling economic
development and ecosystem maintenance. In particular, the Turkish government prioritizes water
allocation planning in some river basins where increasing conflicts exist between competing water
uses. Water valuation could provide valuable knowledge in terms of the benefits from actual and
alternative uses as well as the costs of degradation, thus helping to prioritize problems and find
solutions for improved water management. Water valuation could also provide useful insights in
designing economic instruments (subsidies, taxes, and pricing mechanisms) to increase water
efficiency, particularly in water stressed regions like Konya Closed Basin and in western basins
where water quality is low.

In Turkey, it is particularly important to conserve water and improve its allocation among different
uses. This study has demonstrated that water valuation is an important tool for improving water
management at both the river basin and national levels. However, to better understand the
valuation results and their policy implications in the implementation of the polluter pays principle,
pricing, and full cost recovery, as well as the efficient allocation of water resources by sector (and
more) further studies and consultations with stakeholders are needed.




                                                  13
                                                 I. Introduction
Water is among the most important natural resources in Turkey. Annual freshwater consumption
is about 44 billion m3, of which 74% is used for agriculture, 15% for domestic needs and 11% for
industrial uses.1 Besides its contribution to economic production, water and its related ecosystems
(e.g. lakes, wetlands, coastal zones, etc.) provide a wide range of benefits such as flood protection,
pollution abatement and biodiversity conservation.

Despite its importance, water is facing several threats. According to DSİ (2015), population growth
and natural factors such as climate change, are expected to reduce water availability from 1519 m3
per capita today to 1120 m3/capita by 2030. In addition, water pollution (e.g. by untreated industrial
wastewater discharge in rivers2) could induce a significant reduction in water quality. Given this
context, conserving the quantity and quality of water resources is essential for the country’s long-
term growth and sustainability.

Understanding water’s contribution to the economy and environment is a crucial step towards its
conservation. In Turkey, as in many other countries, the value of non-market services such as
biodiversity, pollution reduction, and recreation is only partly known; worldwide, studies primarily
focus on areas of special importance, such as Ramsar sites or national parks (e.g. Birol et al., 2010;
Wang et al., 2004). Even water resources’ contribution to the economy is not fully understood,
with efforts concentrating particularly on valuating water used for agriculture (e.g. Petrie and
Taylor 2007; Mukherjee and Schwabe, 2012; Tabieh et al., 2015) and much less around industry
and other uses (e.g. Harpman, 2006; Stone and Whittington, 1984). These gaps highlight the
importance of an economic valuation of each type of water use as a precondition for making well-
informed decisions on water policies related to its exploitation and allocation.

The Turkish Government is currently making efforts to improve water valuation and accounting,
and has collaborated with the World Bank in its natural capital accounting (NCA). To assist the
Government, the Bank conducted a rapid study on water valuation methodology and its
applications from February - May 2016. The purpose of this report is to introduce the concept and
methods of water valuation, and to demonstrate their use through actual application to Turkey’s
water resources.

The report contains six chapters. Following this introduction, Chapter 2 provides an overview of
Turkey’s current water sector. Chapter 3 introduces the concept of total economic value, and
Chapter 4 further discusses the valuation methods for each type of water use. To demonstrate the
applicability of valuation in Turkey, Chapter 5 applies these methods to Beyşehir Lake
subcatchment in Konya Closed Basin, based on readily available information. Finally, Chapter 6
provides some conclusions and recommendations.




1Data refer to 2015, when freshwater consumption was about 40% of its total exploitable potential (based on DSI).
2According to TurkStat, 1.9 billion m3 of industrial wastewater was discharged to receiving bodies in 2014, of which only 11 %
was treated.


                                                             14
                  II. Overview of the Water Sector in Turkey

Water availability and uses
Turkey’s per capita internal availability of freshwater is only half of the world average. The
country averages an annual 112.5 billion m3 of economically exploitable freshwater, which
represents 1519 m3 per person each year (DSİ, 2015). When taking into account the TurkStat’s
projected population growth—to around 100 million people by 2030—the per capita exploitable
water is expected to drop to approximately 1120 m3/person/year.
Due to high variations in topography and climate, Turkey’s water resources are distributed
unevenly across the country. Some basins (e.g., Konya Closed Basin) have annual precipitation
with almost less than half the national average. Furthermore, due to differentiated socio-economic
characteristics, there are regional variations in water supply and demand, which makes it difficult
for some basins to meet demand during critical periods. Three out of the 25 river basins - Marmara
Basin, K. Menderes Basin and Asi Basin – have a water availability of less than 1000 m3 per capita;
other six river basins, including Konya Closed Basin which covers the Beyşehir Lake pilot study
area, are close to the water stress threshold. These basins are mainly concentrated on the western
and central parts of the country where highly populated and industrialized cities are located
(TUSIAD, 2008).
The table below outlines the basic data related to Turkey’s water availability and uses. Among the
total economically exploitable water available each year, 74% is used for agriculture, 15% for
domestic needs and 11% for industrial uses (DSİ, 2015).

                                  Table 1. Turkey's water resources
                      Turkey’s Water Resources

                      Mean annual precipitation             643 mm/year
                      Total surface area                    783.577 km2
                      Annual precipitation                  501 million m3
                      Evaporation                           274 billion m3
                      Leakage to aquifers                    41 billion m3
                      Surface Water

                      Annual surface runoff                 186 billion m3
                      Annual exploitable surface water       98 billion m3
                      Groundwater

                      Groundwater reserve                    18 billion m3
                      Annual exploitable groundwater         14.6 billion m3
                      Total Exploitable Water (net)         112.6 billion m3

                      Actual consumption
                      Agricultural use (irrigation)         32 billion m3 (74%)
                      Domestic use                           7 billion m3 (15%)
                      Industrial use                         5 billion m3 (11%)
                      Total Actual Consumption              44 billion m3

                             Source: DSİ, 2015 based on the data from 1935 - 2008.



                                                      15
A recent study (WWF-Turkey, 2014a) estimated the water footprint in Turkey, a concept that
measures the quantity of freshwater used for producing a good or service within the entire supply
chain (or including both direct and indirect water use). The study found that agriculture is the main
contributor of the country’s water footprint of production (and using 89%), followed by domestic
(7%) and industrial water uses (4%). Box 1 summarizes the main findings of the study.

Box 1. An Alternative Way of Understanding the Sectoral Use of Water: The Water Footprint of Turkey
“Water footprint” is a relatively new concept that can be used to establish a better understanding of the critical role
played by water and its sound management for economic growth. It measures the quantity of freshwater used for
producing a good or service, covering the whole process from manufacturing raw materials, to direct operations, and
consumer use of a product. Therefore, the concept includes not only direct water use, but also indirect water use
generated by the production process. As such, it is an alternative indicator of water use, and differs from the one used
by traditional water statistics in that it looks at consumptive water use instead of water withdrawals.

By analyzing a country’s water footprint, decision makers can follow water’s path through economic activity with a
basis of knowledge that can be used to inform their decisions on allocation, trade, comparative advantages, and
ecosystem support.
The Water Footprint of Turkey report puts forward Turkey’s water footprint with a specific focus on the relationships
between water, trade, and production. The report’s key findings are:

- Turkey’s total water footprint of production amounts to approximately 139.6 billion m 3 per year. Agriculture is the
primary contributor of the water footprint of production, at 89%. Domestic water use accounts for about 7%, and
industrial production represents approximately 4% of the total water footprint.

-Water footprint of agriculture consists of 92% crop production and 8% livestock grazing. A closer look at the water
footprint of crop production shows that the primary crops contributing to the water footprint of production for Turkey’s
crops are cereals (38%), followed by fodder crops (31%).

-The low share of the water footprints of industry and the domestic water supply in Turkey’s total water footprint does
not indicate that the impact on water resources is also low. While assessing the water footprint of agriculture, the focus
is on green and blue water footprints (water quantity implications). However, when considering water footprints of
industrial production and domestic water supplies, the focus is altered and shifts to grey water footprint, which is an
indication with implications on water quality.

-Turkey’s water footprint of consumption amounts to approximately 140 billion m3 per year. In other words, this is
the total amount of freshwater used in producing the goods and services consumed within Turkey.

-As the figures show, the water footprint of consumption is almost equal to the water footprint of production. Similarly
the virtual water that enters the country through imports equates approximately to the export of virtual water. This
means that Turkey’s virtual water budget is in balance, and that it is important to preserve Turkey’s water resources
for its economic growth and sustainability.

-Examining Turkey’s blue, green and grey water footprint rates of consumption and production shows that the green
water footprint is the biggest component. This situation highlights the importance of rainfall and thus climate
variability for the country’s production and consumption.

-The agricultural sector contributes the most towards the overall blue and green water use in production, while the
industrial sector is the primary contributor towards Turkey’s grey water footprint. The service sector makes use of
comparatively negligible volumes of water. (WWF-Turkey, 2014a).


Irrigation systems for agricultural production have been well developed; the area of irrigated land
has increased by about 250% since the 1970s. Today, of the 28 million ha of arable land, almost



                                                           16
6.2 million ha is irrigated by DSİ projects, and the objective is to increase irrigated areas to 8.5
million hectares by 2023 (DSİ, 2015). However, the majority of irrigation is done through gravity
irrigation, which has low water efficiency. The use of water saving irrigation techniques (sprinkler
and drip irrigation systems) has gained momentum in the last decade but these still occur in limited
proportion (about 10%) to the overall irrigation practices. The Turkish government has provided
subsidies and interest-free loans to farmers for the promotion of water saving irrigation
technologies since 2009. Today, modern irrigation systems are especially being used in areas with
high climate vulnerability and water scarcity like Konya Closed Basin. Water consumption per ha
amounts to more than 7,000 m3 (OECD, 2010).

Municipalities and villages are the second most important water user (after agriculture), with a
total of 5.7 billion m3 water abstracted from natural resources—the per capita use of water in
municipalities is 203 liters per day (TurkStat, 2014a and b). Based on the data supplied in
TurkStat’s Sectoral Water and Wastewater Statistics Press Release, in 2014 the total amount of
water abstracted by industry (manufacturing industry establishments, mining establishments,
organized industrial zones and thermal power plants) was about 9.1 billion m3 and 90% of this
water was used for cooling purposes. About 1 billion m3 of the above mentioned amount was
directly withdrawn from freshwater resources (TurkStat, 2014a).

Hydropower generation is another important water using sector. According to DSİ, Turkey’s gross
theoretical hydropower potential is 433 billion kWh/year. As of 2015, technically feasible
hydropower potential is reported as 216 billion kWh/year, while economically feasible potential
stands around 180 billion kWh/year with the development of new projects. There are currently 562
hydropower plants with the total installed capacity of 26.161 MW, and average annual electricity
production is about 90 billion kWh, providing approximately 60% of the total economically
feasible potential in 2015 (DSİ, 2015).

Problems and threats

The challenges to water resource management are intensifying as the Turkish economy and
population grows, and water resources are under more and more pressure in almost all river basins,
both in terms of quality and quantity. Turkey's water management experiences over the past
decades—with some dramatic and irreversible habitat losses and environmental and social
impacts—revealed that water management requires more than just hydraulic engineering and
technical solutions, it necessitates integrated water resource management involving institutional,
economic, environmental and social aspects.

The water use in Turkey is much less efficient than that in high-income countries. For example,
GDP per ton of water used in Turkey is only about 40% of that of high-income countries. The
inefficient use of water in agriculture results in over-abstraction of water from both surface and
groundwater in several river basins. Currently, water delivery systems in irrigation schemes are
comprised of classical open canals (39%), canalettes (44%) and piped systems (17%), and water
losses from leakage and evaporation in open canals is high compared to that in closed systems
(DSİ, 2014). Additionally, surface irrigation methods (flooding, furrow, border, etc.) are widely
applied in many regions (almost 90% of total irrigated areas), while water-saving sprinkler and




                                                17
drip irrigation systems are applied in a small portion of areas (Topçu, 2011). Irrigation efficiency,
measured at scheme scale, is about 51% in irrigated areas operated by DSİ (MoD, 2015).

Pollution of water resources is another problem generated mostly by industrial and urban
wastewater. In 2014, about 12.7 billion m3 wastewater was discharged to receiving bodies from
residential areas (municipalities and villages) and industries (manufacturing industry
establishments, mining establishments, organized industrial zones and thermal power plants).
Approximately 79% of the total residential wastewater is treated to a certain degree, and 61% of
industrial wastewater (excluding cooling water) is treated before discharging to natural water
bodies (TurkStat, 2014a). Without an integrated planning and cumulative impact assessment, over-
abstraction, water pollution, and infrastructure and urban development within or near water bodies,
are threatening the ecological integrity and health of freshwater ecosystems.

Turkey is one of the most vulnerable countries in Europe and Central Asia to climate change.
Scientific climate modelling studies indicate that Turkey will get hotter, more arid and unstable in
terms of precipitation patterns in the near future. According to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), regional and global simulations project an
increase in duration and intensity of drought in Mediterranean Region. The IPCC Report also
indicates that declines in flows are projected for Turkey and water allocation between upstream
and downstream countries will become a challenging issue for regions exposed to prolonged
droughts, such as the Euphrates-Tigris river basin (Kovats et al., 2014). Therefore, the climate
trend would inevitably make water a very sensitive and critical issue, which poses a potential
problem to the economy and environment in Turkey.

Organizational setup for WRM in Turkey

WRM in Turkey involves a large number of stakeholders including governmental agencies,
institutions, and non-governmental or private groups such as water user associations. They can be
categorized at three levels: the decision-making level, executive level, and user level. Table 2
shows the organizational setup for WRM, with the main government agencies and stakeholders
involved in different levels of water management.

On the national level, MoD, MoFWA, Ministry of Environment and Urbanization (MoEU),
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock (MoFAL) are all at the decision-making level. State
Hydraulic Works (DSİ), Directorate General of Water Management (DGWM), Directorate
General of Environmental Management (DGEM), municipal water authorities, and other
governmental organizations are at the executive level, whereas water use organizations such as
irrigation unions and cooperatives are at the water user level.




                                                 18
                           Table 2. Main agencies and stakeholders involved in Turkish water sector

                                                                Government Agencies

                        Decision-Making Level                           Executive Level                        User Level
                               (National)                        (River basin and Provincial)                 (Provincial)
                        Ministry of Development (MoD)         State Hydraulic Works (DSİ)           Households
                        Ministry of Forestry and Water        Directorate General of Water
   Primary Agencies




                        Affairs (MoFWA)                       Management (DGWM)                     Commercial entities
                        Ministry of Environment and           Directorate General of
                        Urbanization (MoEU)                   Environmental Management              Water user associations (irrigation
                        Ministry of Food, Agriculture and     (DGEM)                                unions and cooperatives)
                        Livestock (MoFAL)                     Directorate General of Agricultural
                                                              Reform (DGAR)
                                                              Municipal water authorities
                                                              Bank of Provinces
                        Ministry of Foreign Affairs           Local governments
   Secondary Agencies




                        Ministry of Health                    Other general directorates under
                        Ministry of Energy and Natural        different ministries
                        Resources                             Regional Development Agencies
                        Ministy of Tourism                    River Basin Management
                        Ministry of EU Affairs                Commissions
                        Water Institute
                        TUBİTAK
                        TurkStat
                                                             Non-governmental Agencies
                                                            Universities & research institutes
                                                                National & local NGOs
                                                              International organizations
                                                              Trade & industry chambers
                                                                 Agriculture chambers
                                                                  Source: the authors

MoFWA is the key authority for the management of water resources with its two general
directorates; DSİ and DGWM. DSİ, established in 1954, is in charge of development, planning,
and management of surface and groundwater, and land resources with 26 regional directorates in
Turkey, whose boundaries correspond primarily to the river basin boundaries. DSİ’s
responsibilities cover the observation, field investigation, master plan, feasibility, design,
construction and management plans for irrigation, hydropower, domestic water supply and flood
control purposes. Whereas, DGWM, a relatively new agency, is responsible for developing
policies for protecting and sustaining water resources, and coordinating and preparing river basin
management plans (RBMPs) together with relevant stakeholders. DGWM is also in charge of
developing water quality standards and water quality monitoring systems for the whole country.

At the user level in urban areas, the municipal water and sewerage administrations in metropolitan
municipalities are in charge of constructing, operating, and maintaining water supply and treatment
facilities, and also responsible for networks of industrial facilities within the boundaries of these
areas. The General Directorate of the Bank of Provinces is also responsible for supplying
municipal water to all municipalities by assisting in financing, developing and constructing water
supply and sewerage projects.




                                                                           19
National Development Plan and Policies Related to Water Resources

Turkey has various national strategies, plans, and programs dealing with WRM (see the Box
below). The 10th Development Plan of Turkey is one of the main plans to set clear objectives and
targets for the sustainable use and effective management of water resources. It does so through
insights on critical topics like basin-level planning, integration of quantity and quality measures,
enhanced coordination among different government authorities, and increased water efficiency.
Fundamental objectives within the Plan are defined as the preservation and development of
quantity and quality water and land resources, and development of a management structure
providing sustainable use of these resources, especially in the highly demanding agriculture sector.

The 10th Development Plan devotes a “transformational program” (2014-2018) for improving the
efficiency of water use in agriculture. The targets of this program include: increasing the percentage
of arable land subject to DSI investments for irrigation from 62% to 68%; raising irrigation
efficiency from 42% to 50%; expanding the use of water saving modern irrigation systems by 10%
per year; and decreasing the use of groundwater by 5% during the plan period. The program also
indicates the importance of considering regional water constraints and environmental protection
in the design of agricultural support policies and encourages the development of drought resistant
crops (MoD, 2014b). Another “transformational program” is designed to promote domestic
resource-based energy production. Its main objective is to increase the share of domestic resources
in primary energy production, putting into operation an additional 10,000 MW hydraulic capacity
by the end of 2018 (MoD, 2014b).

                    Box 2. Main plans and programs relevant to water management
                       National                                         Regional/ River Basin Level

        10th Development Plan and Priority                           Regional Development Plans by MoD
         Transformation Programmes                                    Watershed Master Plans by DSİ
        National Environment Strategy and Action Plan                River Basin Protection Action Plans by DGWM
        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan               River Basin Management Plans by DGWM (in
        Turkey EU Integrated Environmental                            the preparation process)
         Approximation Strategy                                       Water Allocation Plans (in the preparation
        National Basin Management Strategy                            process)
        National Flood Management Action Plan                        Special Provisions for Drinking Water
        National Climate Change Strategy                              Catchments by DGWM (in the preparation
        National Climate Adaptation Strategy                          process)
        National Action Program on Combatting
         Desertification
        National Wetlands Strategy
                                                    Source: the authors

In the EU Accession process since the beginning of the 2000s, Turkey is also taking steps towards
re-organizing its water sector in terms of institutional structure, policy, and legislative framework.
Improved legislation, increased institutional capacity for the components of EU Water Acquis, and
improved infrastructure for the delivery of drinking water and waste water treatment are priority
action fields for the Turkish government in the EU Harmonization process. Furthermore, the
government has been putting significant effort into the preparation of RBMPs, drought and flood
management plans, and sectoral water allocation plans over the past couple of years. They have
also prepared a draft Water Law to eliminate overlapping responsibilities for different government



                                                         20
authorities in order to ensure effective coordination and enable the public’s participation in water
management practices.

Water pricing is one of the most critical areas in need of reform in the Turkish water sector. Water
pricing for agriculture, domestic, and industrial uses varies among sectors, and is determined by
different authorities in Turkey. Area-crop based charging is widely applied in irrigation, whereas
volumetric charges are common for domestic and industrial uses. In general, operation,
management, amortization, rehabilitation, and expanding costs are reflected in water tariffs;
whereas environmental and resource costs are hardly covered.

Concerning the water pricing mechanism in irrigation, with the financial support of the World
Bank, in 1993, DSİ transferred its operation and maintenance responsibilities for the irrigation
systems to the water user associations under the Accelerated Transfer Programme. The water user
associations (irrigation unions and cooperatives) determine the water charges based on expected
operation, maintenance, and investment cost for the year (OECD, 2010). Each association sets its
tariff independently and uses different methods depending on region and scheme: the “area -crop
based” charging system, in which the charge per hectare is determined by the type of irrigated
crop, is used mostly for gravity irrigation, while “volumetric pricing” is widely used in pumping
schemes (Topcu, 2011).

Turkey’s candidacy for the EU brings a new dimension to the water pricing issue. EU -WFD
introduces economic principles and methods for the management of Europe’s waters, and clearly
integrates economics into water management and policy-making. To achieve its environmental
objectives (good water status for all water) in the most effective manner, the WFD introduces three
key economic principles: 1) Polluters pay principle (water users pay for the full costs of the water
services they receive); 2) Cost-effectiveness (Member states should use economic analyses in
managing their water resources, and assessing both the cost-effectiveness and overall cost of
alternatives when making key decisions); 3) Applying economic instruments (e.g. water pricing).
EU-WFD clearly states that Member states should develop an understanding of and measurement
for the “environmental and resource costs” associated with damage or negative impacts to the
aquatic environment. In this context, Turkey is obligated to move towards the full cost recovery
principle in their pricing mechanisms, both for agriculture and domestic/industrial water use.


Policy request and need for water valuation and accounting

As concluded in a diagnostic note prepared by the World Bank (World Bank, 2014), the Turkish
government is considering a set of policy issues related to WRM, ranging from the economic
contribution of water to national growth, to tradeoffs among competing users to manage water
resources, to water pricing and cost recovery, to planning and the prioritization of investments to
compensate or offset the loss of water due to depletion. The needs for water-related policy analysis
and decision making are a strong motive for the development and application of the water valuation
and accounting tool.

Economic valuation of water and its application to making strategic decision on water allocation
are a basic step in making well-informed decision in the water sector. Government agencies,



                                                21
namely MoD and its affiliated TurkStat, MoFWA, are keen on conducting valuation to explore
and to better understand the economic contribution of water resources to the national growth and
to modify the national accounts accordingly. Furthermore, MoD and MoFWA are willing to
integrate water valuation as a key component in river basin management processes which would
contribute to analyze the challenging issues of WRM, such as assessing trade-offs, allocation
planning, investment prioritization, ecosystem conservation, water quality standard setting, water
pricing, compensation for damage or use, and adaptation to climate change. These agencies have
shown a strong interest in developing a tool of water valuation and water accounts for policy
analysis.

Water accounting provides a conceptual framework for organizing economic and hydrological
information, enabling a consistent analysis of the contribution of water to the economy and of the
impact of the economy on water resources (Box 3). In Turkey, TurkStat, with its 26 regional
offices, is the leading authority for overall data collection, statistical accounts, analysis and
reporting services. In case of water and environmental accounts, the Department of Environment,
Energy and Transport Statistics has been in charge of collecting and analysing data sets based on
an OECD core set of environmental data and indicators since 1990. Data on water, wastewater,
waste, air emissions, environmental employment, environmental expenditure and revenues,
environmental accounts are collected via questionnaires filled in by municipalities and other
agencies. TurkStat has implemented some pilot projects for the development of Physical Water
Flow Accounts (PWFA), which refer to the abstraction of water resources from the environment
into the economy, the water flows within the economy and finally, the flows of water back to the
environment. But there are no monetary water accounts or hybrid water accounts as yet established
in Turkey.

            Box 3. The System of Environmental Economic Accounting-Central Framework
The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 2012- Central Framework (SEEA-CF), adopted by the United
Nations Statistical Commission as an international statistical standard in 2012, is a multipurpose conceptual
framework that describes the interactions between the economy and the environment, and the stocks and changes in
stocks of environmental assets. The SEEA-CF includes the physical flow accounts, asset accounts, environmental
activity accounts and combined physical and monetary accounts for natural resources.

Water has been identified by the United Nations Statistics Division as a priority area for implementation of the SEEA.
SEEA-Water, a SEEA 'sub-system', provides compilers and analysts with agreed concepts, definitions, classifications,
tables, and accounts for water and water-related emission accounts.

SEEA-Water covers the following information on water: stocks and flows of water resources within the environment;
pressures imposed on the environment due to water abstraction, and emissions added to wastewater and released into
the environment or removed from wastewater; supply of water and its use as an input in the production proces and by
households; water re-use within the economy; costs of collection, purification, distribution and treatment of water, as
well as service charges paid by users; financing of these costs, that is, who is to pay for the water supply and sanitation
services; payment of permits for access to abstract water or to use it as a sink for the wastewater discharge; the
hydraulic stock in place, as well as investments in hydraulic infrastructure made during the accounting period (UN,
2012)

Further details on SEEA-CF and SEEA-Water can be reached at http://unstats.un.org/unsd/envaccounting




                                                           22
The Turkish Government is currently making efforts to improve water valuation and accounting,
and has collaborated with the World Bank through a natural capital accounting (NCA) program.
The program conducted a study on water valuation methodology and its applications in a case
study of Beyşehir Lake subcatchment from February to May 2016. This report is an output of the
study and it aims to introduce the concept and methods of water valuation, and to demonstrate
their use through actual application to Turkey’s water resources.




                                             23
               III. Overview of the Economic Values of Water
Water resources provide a wide range of benefits. Many of them, however, are not traded on
regular markets, while others have prices that do not necessarily reflect their economic value.
These failures often result in increased pressure on water resources through the degradation of
their quality (e.g. due to discharge of untreated wastewater in rivers), reduction of available
quantity (e.g. due to groundwater over-extraction) or increase in available quantity (e.g. due to
flooding).


Why is economic valuation necessary?

Water is a unique natural resource. Its special characteristics distinguish it from most other
resources and commodities, and pose significant challenges for its allocation and management.
According to Young and Loomis (2014), these characteristics include:

   Hydrological and physical attributes: (1) Mobility. Water tends to flow, evaporate and seep
    as it moves through the hydrologic cycle; often, water flow covers substantial distances and
    crosses national boundaries. This mobility makes it difficult to establish and enforce exclusive
    property rights on water. (2) Variability. Typically water supplies are variable in time, space,
    and quality; this variability is usually unpredictable and outside human control. At the extreme,
    floods and droughts can have devastating effects on people, assets and local economies. (3)
    Absorption capacity. Water has the capacity to absorb wastes and pollutants, as well as to dilute
    and transport such hazards to different locations. (4) Externalities. For example, the quantity
    and releases of water from users located upstream in a watershed can affect downstream water
    users. These interdependencies, called “externalities,” are side effects of individual economic
    activities that are not internalized by the upstream individual producer or consumer activities.

   Water demand characteristics. Water resources provide a variety of benefits to different end
    users: municipal, industrial, agricultural, and environmental (fishing, boating and ecosystem
    services). The demand for water varies according to the user: those related to municipal water
    are fairly stable and predictable over time; the needs of agriculture vary in response to
    temperature and rainfall patterns over the course of seasons each year; industrial water demand
    also varies from weekdays to weekends. In addition, some water uses are consumptive
    (agriculture, industry), while others are not (hydro-power, recreation). All of these differences
    call for specialized management approaches, which need to be based on sound knowledge of
    the economic value of each water use.

   Social and cultural attitudes. The social and cultural values related to water often are in
    conflict with their economic values. Some people believe they have a right to use water for
    legal social, religious, or cultural reasons. At times, these perceptions may conflict with the
    appropriate management of water.

   Collective action problems. Water decision makers are confronted with many problems related
    to water. One such issue arises when each individual act of water use taken alone has a
    negligible impact; but the sum of many individual decisions can be of major importance (“the


                                                 24
     tyranny of small decisions”; Kahn, 1966). This problem is common in groundwater extraction
     by many individual wells, nonpoint pollution of chemicals carried by runoff from farmer fields,
     and reservoir sedimentation due to unsustainable agricultural practices upstream. Effective
     public regulation of small-but-many decisions is difficult, but it is increasingly necessary.
     Economic estimation of the damages to water resources could provide a useful signal to
     identify areas where the need for action is urgently required.

The above characteristics show that the sustainable management of water presents significant
challenges. Market failures3 (e.g. absence of or distorted market prices) and policy failures (e.g.
subsidizing electricity for groundwater extraction) are leading to pressures on water resources
through the degradation of its quality (e.g. untreated wastewater discharge in rivers) and reduction
of quantity (e.g. depletion of scarce resources).

In this context, economic valuation has an important role in providing signals of water scarcity
that are otherwise not available. Monetary valuation of water-related benefits and costs can be
used in many ways, for example: to estimate the cost of environmental damage related to water
resources; to estimate the benefits of improved water quality; to assess the economic feasibility of
investments in water supply, storage and conveyance facilities; and to make the best choice of
investments for allocating limited water availability among different sectors.


The Total Economic Value framework

Ecosystems provide a wide variety of services. The TEV framework has been developed through
environmental economics to capture the economic value of the services provided by any ecosystem
or natural resource (Pearce and Moran, 1994; TEEB, 2010). It has been used to estimate the
economic value of forests (Merlo and Croitoru, 2005; World Bank, 2015), coral reefs (Access
Economics, 2007), water (Gürlük, 2010), and wetlands (Franco et al., 2008). TEV includes use
and non-use values. The paragraphs below and Figure 1 summarize the main types of values linked
to water resources.




3 Due to market failures, many valuable services may not be traded directly or even indirectly through markets. Examples of
services that are indirectly traded may include the amenities associated with housing located near water bodies. Water values that
may not be even indirectly traded include biodiversity conservation for future generations. Other benefits, while traded, have prices
that do not necessarily reflect their full economic value (e.g. water for agriculture).




                                                                25
                                     Figure 1. TEV of water resources




             Source: adapted from Birol et al. (2006); Turner and Schaafsma (2015); Brouwer et al. (2009)

Use values are benefits derived from the actual water use, and comprise three types of values:

(1) Direct use values, which arise from direct interaction with aquatic resources:

      Water supply, which can be used for irrigation (e.g. agricultural lands, gardens, or lawns),
       municipal uses (e.g. household uses for sanitation, drinking, cooking, as well as
       commercial and other public uses); and industrial uses (production processes which can be
       consumptive, such as beverage and food industries, and non-consumptive, such as hydro-
       power, cooling, navigation)
      Recreation, or the benefits associated with leisure activities such as swimming, diving,
       boating, recreational fishing and enjoying the aesthetic view of aquatic resources.
      Wildlife and plant harvesting, or the benefits of tangible goods extracted from water, either
       for consumptive uses (e.g. commercial fishing, algae, reeds) or non-consumptive uses
       (shells for decoration).

(2) Indirect use values, which are benefits associated with services provided by aquatic resources,
but which do not entail direct interaction. These include:

      Nutrient retention, through the capacity of water bodies to retain excess nutrients.
      Pollution control, or the ability of the ecosystem to trap sediments and retain pollutants.
      Flood control, through the ecosystem’s ability of capturing, storing, and slowly releasing
       water over time, thus reducing the occurrence of floods.


                                                         26
         Micro-climatic stabilization, which is the capacity to stabilize climatic conditions such as
          an area’s temperature and humidity.

(3) Option values are benefits originating from having the option of using water resources in the
future4. They include:
     Potential future uses of direct and indirect uses. These are benefits associated with the
        current generation’s option of using the wetlands in the future, for example for fish
        consumption, recreational opportunities, etc.
     Future value of information of biodiversity. Benefits derived from potential future use of
        wetland plants as inputs in the production of pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, etc.

Non-use values are benefits unrelated to the current use values, but reflect the economic value that
can be attached to the mere existence of a water-related aspect. They can be divided in three types
of value, which may overlap:

(4) Existence values, refers to the values individuals may place upon the conservation of water
resources, though they may never use them directly themselves, such as conservation of certain
species of fish or mammals, and preservation of a site for its cultural value.

(5) Bequest values, related to the values that individuals place for a future generation’s opportunity
to enjoy an aquatic resource.

(6) Altruistic values, related to the fact that even if individuals themselves do not use or intend to
use the aquatic ecosystem, they may still be concerned that the environmental good in question be
available to others in the current generation (Birol et al., 2006).

While this study is primarily focused on water, it is worth noting that the notion of water as a
resource (e.g. water bodies, such as rivers and lakes) is closely linked to that of wetlands (e.g.
deltas, mangroves, marshes). For example, rivers often form deltas, which can be highly valuable
ecosystems for extractive materials, and especially for protective functions. Because of this close
relationship, some of the economic values related to water are common for wetlands also (Box 4).

                                        Box 4. Total economic value of wetlands

Wetlands 5 include many types of ecosystems, such as mangroves, unvegetated sediment, salt/brackish
marsh, freshwater marsh, and freshwater woodland, and provide a wide variety of goods and services useful
to humans. While specific goods and services depend on the type of wetland, a general classification of the
TEV related to wetlands is similar to that of water resources, including (Brander et al., 2006):
   - Direct use values, derived from the uses made of a wetland’s resources and services, for example wood
for energy and building, water for irrigation, fishing and hunting, and harvesting of other natural materials
(e.g. algae, non-wood products).

4 Whether these belong to the use or non-use values categories remains controversial in the environmental literature.
5 The Ramsar convention on wetlands defines wetlands very broadly as (Article 1.1): areas of marsh, fen, peatland or water, whether
natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine
water the depth of which at low tide does not exceed six meters, and points out (in Article 2.1) that wetlands may incorporate
riparian and coastal zones adjacent to the wetlands, and islands or bodies of marine water deeper than six meters at low tide lying
within the wetlands (http://www.ramsar.org).


                                                                 27
  - Indirect use values, associated with the indirect services provided by the wetland’s natural functions,
such as: flood protection, storm protection, shoreline stabilization, groundwater recharge, carbon
sequestration and micro-climate stabilization.
   - Non-use values, which are related to the mere existence of a wetland, such as biodiversity and cultural
heritage.

It should be noted that some of the values cited above are common also to water resources, such as water
supply for irrigation and fishing, while others are specific to wetland ecosystems, such as shoreline
stabilization (i.e. the capacity of wetland vegetation to provide soil stability through their extensive root
systems), storm protection (i.e. the ability of coastal wetlands to dissipate wave energy, thus protecting
against storm damages) and carbon sequestration (i.e. carbon storage within the live and preserved plant
biomass).

The public good characteristics of many of the goods and services wetlands provide often result in their
being undervalued in decisions related to their use and conservation. As a result of this situation, there is
now substantial literature about the economic value of wetlands (e.g. Barbier et al., 1997; Brouwer et al.,
2003). Brander et al. (2006) conducted a meta-analysis of 191 studies related to wetland valuation, from 25
countries representing all continents. Results showed that, depending on the type of ecosystem, wetland
values range widely, from as low as US$400/ha for mangroves to as high as US$9000/ha for unvegetated
sediment ecosystems. In addition, the biodiversity service of wetlands was found to have the highest
average value (US$17,000/ha/year), while use of wetlands for collecting fuel wood and other raw materials
has the lowest value (US$73-300/ha/year).


It should be stressed that the TEV is only part of an ecosystem’s total value. TEV is an
anthropocentric concept that stresses values bringing benefits to human beings, whether directly
or indirectly. Many also consider water and other ecosystems to have intrinsic value independent
of human preferences and whether they contribute to human welfare (Goulder and Kennedy, 1997;
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2003). In addition, certain sites may also have value for
traditional, historical, or religious reasons; this is called socio-cultural value. Some of these values
can, only in part, be captured within the TEV through contingent valuation surveys.


Existing water valuation literature: a brief overview

Considerable effort has been expended in recent decades on estimating the partial value or the
TEV of water resources. Existing literature is extremely diverse in terms of types of water values
estimated, area of focus, and valuation methods used. Most studies focus on estimating values
related to surface water. Among them, the majority concentrate on estimating a single water
service, such as any of the following: water supply for irrigation (e.g. Petrie and Taylor, 2007;
Mallios et al., 2009); for domestic use (e.g. North and Griffin, 1993); for industrial use (e.g. Stone
and Whittington, 1984); recreational value (e.g. Fleming and Cook, 2008; Chen et al., 2008;
Nandagiri, 2015); flood control (e.g. Harrison et al., 2001; Schultz and Fridgen, 2001) and marine
biodiversity (e.g. Birol et al., 2006; Birol et al., 2008). A significant number of studies however
value two or more services of water resources (e.g. Birol et al., 2010; Gürlük and Ward, 2009) and
a small number estimate the TEV of all water services (e.g. Gürlük, 2010). Substantially less work
attempts to estimate values related to groundwater—most of these address the cost of groundwater
depletion (World Bank, 2007; Tentes and Damigos, 2012) and the benefits of improving


                                                     28
groundwater quality (Groom and Koundouri, 2011).

In terms of area of focus, most water valuation examples relate to the use of water for irrigation
and recreation; such studies have been conducted in several countries on all continents (e.g. United
States, Philippines, South Africa, Australia, and Greece). Valuations of other benefits, such as
flood control, water for navigation, and industry are more difficult to find, with examples
concentrated primarily in North America.

A broad range of valuation methods has been applied to estimate different water values. Valuation
methods range from market pricing (e.g. to estimate the fish, algae and other materials harvested
from water) to demand-curve approaches (e.g. travel cost method to value recreational value;
contingent valuation method and choice experiments to value biodiversity) and non-demand curve
approaches (e.g. expenditures to prevent reduction of benefits due to reduced water quality). A
thorough discussion of the valuation methods and their empirical application to different water
services is the topic of the next chapter.




                                                29
                    IV. Methods for Estimating Water Values
Estimating the TEV of an ecosystem involves placing a monetary value on each of the benefits it
provides. A wide range of valuation methods exists to assess the environmental benefits related to
water, as described below.

Overview of valuation methods

Several classifications exist for environmental valuation methods (Dixon et al., 1994; Barbier,
2007; FAO 2004; Markandya, 2014; Mendelsohn and Olmstead, 2009; Brouwer et al., 2009). Here
we follow Brouwer et al. (2009), who distinguish market-based and non-market based methods
(Figure 2). Market-based methods use market behavior and transactions as a basis for valuation.
In contrast, non-market based methods estimate the value of environmental benefits when markets
are non-existent or distorted. When no data is available, benefit transfer methods are used to enable
the application of existing estimates to new contexts.

                       Figure 2. Taxonomy of environmental valuation methods
                                     Valuation methods




      Market based                                                 Non-market based




         Market pricing                  Revealed preference                          Stated preference

        Replacement cost
                                                  Travel cost                              Contingent valuation

      Avertive expenditures
                                                 Hedonic price                              Choice experiments


                                               Residual method

                                             Production functions

                                                 Cost of illness
                                                Benefits transfer

                  Source: adapted from Brouwer et al. (2009); Birol et al. (2006); Markandya (2014).


(a) Market-based methods

Market-based methods use evidence from markets to estimate an environmental benefit. They
include:


                                                         30
        Market pricing (MP). This is the simplest valuation approach, which estimates the value
         of goods based on their market price. In some cases, it may be necessary to adjust market
         prices to correct for distortions, such as subsidies or taxes (“shadow pricing”). This method
         is commonly used to estimate the value of tangible goods extracted from water (e.g. fish
         catch, algae) for which markets exist. In addition, it can be used to derive the economic
         value of water in countries with free water markets. For example, market pricing has been
         applied to estimate the economic value of water for irrigation in the United States (Loomis,
         1992; Bunch, 2004; Brown, 2006) and Australia (Grafton et al., 2011a); and the value of
         water for municipal uses in Chile (Anderson et al., 2012).

        Replacement cost method (RCM). This method estimates the value of an ecosystem
         service based on the cost of replacing it. It assumes that the environmental damage is
         measurable, and that the value of the ecosystem service is no greater than the cost of
         replacing it. It has been occasionally applied in the context of water resources, for example
         to estimate the benefit of flood protection through the cost of afforestation on coastal areas
         (Barbier, 2009).

        Avertive expenditures. This method (also called “defensive expenditures”) assumes that
         individuals spend money on eliminating or reducing damages caused by adverse
         environmental impacts. This is the case with double-glazed windows for reducing traffic
         noise, extra filtration or boiling used to purify polluted water, and air conditioning for
         avoiding polluted air 6 . Several applications exist in the context of water resources,
         reflecting different cost aspects: household-level costs associated with groundwater
         contamination in the United States, such as the purchase of bottled water or water filters,
         and cleaning and repairing water systems (Abdalla, 1994); the additional cost of purchasing
         bottled water in Lebanon (Sarraf et al., 2004); or the cost of boiling water in Bolivia
         (Strukova et al., 2011).

(b) Revealed preference methods

These methods are used to estimate non-market values based on observations of actual consumer
behavior in markets for the goods or services of interest, or in surrogate markets for related goods
or services. Commonly used methods in the water context include:

        Travel cost method (TCM). The TCM is used to estimate use values associated with
         ecosystems or sites (such as forests, wetlands, parks, and beaches) that are used for
         recreation (hunting, fishing, hiking, or watching wildlife). The basic premise of the TCM
         is that the time and travel cost expenses people incur to visit a site represent the “price” of
         their access to the site. The information on the value of an environmental benefit can be
         obtained by posing direct questions to consumers about their willingness to pay (WTP).
         Thus, in TCM people's WTP to visit the site can be estimated based on the number of trips



6These expenses can be considered minimum estimates of the benefits of mitigation, since the benefits derived from avoiding
damage are higher than, or at least equal to, the costs incurred for avoiding it (Markandya, 2014).


                                                             31
         that they make at different travel costs.7 The travel cost itself is not the recreational benefit,
         but it reveals preferences for the ecosystem service, based on which demand for a site is
         derived. This method has been widely applied in Western Europe as well as the United
         States (Flemming and Cook, 2008), Australia, Philippines, and other countries (Choe et al.,
         1996).

        Hedonic price method (HPM). This method assumes that any good can be described as a
         bundle of characteristics and the levels they take; and that the price of the good depends on
         these characteristics/levels. For example, the price of a house will reflect its relevant
         characteristics (e.g. number of bedrooms, size), in addition to local environmental
         characteristics (e.g. water quality or quantity, aesthetic views). It follows that an implicit
         price exists for each characteristic. Thus, the value of water quality or quantity can be
         determined by isolating its contribution to the total price of the marketed good. This method
         has been applied to estimate the economic value of water for irrigated agriculture in the
         United States (Petrie and Taylor, 2007; Mukherjee and Schwabe, 2012), Greece
         (Latinopoulos et al., 2004; Mallios et al., 2009), and Iran (Esmaeili and Shahsavari, 2011;
         Kakhki et al., 2010). Esmaeili and Shahsavari (2011) indicated that the availability of
         irrigation water was one of the most important variables influencing land prices.

        Residual method (RM). This method subtracts the costs of other inputs in production
         (purchased inputs and opportunity costs of owned inputs other than water) from total
         revenue, then ascribes the difference to the value of water. It can be based on a simple farm
         crop budget, or may extend to mathematical programming models portraying the optimal
         allocation of farm water and other resources (land, materials, labor) among several
         potential crops. It has been widely employed to derive the value of water for irrigation.
         Applications were found throughout the world, including in China (World Bank, 2007),
         South Africa (Speelman et al., 2008) and Jordan (Tabieh et al., 2015). Tabieh et al. (2015)
         analyzes farmers’ ability to pay for irrigation water in the Jordan Valley and concludes that
         increasing water prices could encourage more efficient water use and a shift to higher-
         value crops. However, it should be noted that applying this method could generate
         overestimates, because: (1) by its nature, the method attributes a considerable part of the
         net revenue as the value of water; and (2) from the empirical viewpoint, estimation of the
         opportunity costs of owned inputs is often overlooked in farm budgets, leading to an over-
         appreciation of the net revenue compared to its real value.

        Production function (PF). This approach can be used to value non-marketed goods and
         services that serve as inputs to the production of marketed goods. It relates the output of a
         particular marketed good or service (e.g. agricultural production, timber, fish catch) to the
         inputs necessary to produce them (e.g. labor, capital, land, soil quality, water quality and
         quantity). Thus, the implicit value of water can be calculated by measuring its contribution
         to profits. The production function can be constructed based on econometric models (e.g.
         crop water production functions), or mathematical programming or general equilibrium
         approaches (Johansson, 2005). Examples of this technique’s application were found in


7 The TCM encompasses a variety of models, ranging from the simple single-site TCM to regional and generalized models that
incorporate quality indices and account for substitute sites (CGER, 1997).


                                                           32
         China, to estimate the value of crop water yields (Liu, 2007), and Poland, to analyze
         industrial water demand for a power plant (Stone and Whittington, 1984).

        Cost of illness method (COI). A particular class of production function approaches used
         to estimate the monetary value of an environmental change through its impact on illnesses.
         It can be used to value the benefits of pollution reduction by estimating possible savings in
         direct out-of-pocket expenses resulting from illnesses (e.g. medicine, doctor and hospital
         bills) and opportunity costs (e.g. loss in earnings associated with sickness); or actual health
         impacts from the degradation of the environment through WTP to avoid illness. In the
         context of water resources, this method has been used to estimate costs resulting from
         water-borne diseases, such as diarrhea and malnutrition (e.g. World Bank, 2016 in
         Morocco and World Bank, 2012 in Iraq).

        Derived demand functions (DD). A household’s demand function can be employed to
         estimate the user’s WTP for water. Transactions concerning water are observed between
         water utility suppliers and individual water users at specific prices. When sufficient
         observations are made across variations of the real price, it is possible to infer the WTP
         and demand for water. The method has been used to derive the demand and value of water
         for municipal use in several countries such as Honduras, Madagascar and Vietnam (Nauges
         and Whittington, 2009).

        Alternative cost method (ACM). This method (also called “substitute” cost method) refers
         to the cost of available alternatives for a particular non-priced service or good. The non-
         priced good can be either a consumer good (e.g. parks) or an input factor (e.g. land, water).
         In the context of water resources, the input factor can be surface water for irrigation (which
         could be substituted by groundwater); water for hydropower generation (which can be
         replaced by thermal or renewable energy); or water for navigation (which can be
         substituted by rail or trucking). The method assumes that if the two alternatives provide an
         identical service, the value of the non-priced good (in this case, water) is the saved cost
         from using the alternative. Applications of this technique were found in the United States
         to estimate the economic value of water for hydro-power generation (Harpman, 2006), for
         navigation (Gibbons, 1986), and for irrigation (Holland and Moore, 2003).

(c) Stated preference methods

These methods rely on asking consumers to state their preferences directly, in terms of hypothetical
markets or payments, i.e., their WTP or, alternatively, their willingness to accept (WTA) cash
compensation for losing the benefit. The most commonly used methods include:

        Contingent valuation method (CVM). This method can be useful for eliciting the value of
         several aspects of water resources, including water quality, recreation, and biodiversity. It
         can be employed to estimate both use and non-use values.8 It has been used to estimate use
         values, such as the use of recycled wastewater in agriculture in Cyprus (Birol et al., 2008a)
         and irrigation water in the Chalkidiki rural area in Greece (Mallios and Latinopoulos,

8A survey instrument is used to measure individuals’ maximum WTP for an aspect of a water resource, presented to them in a
hypothetical market with a proposed improvement.


                                                           33
          2001). It has also been employed to estimate non-use values, such as biodiversity
          conservation in wetlands in Cyprus (Birol et al., 2008b) and Lake Sevan in Armenia (Wang
          et al., 2004).

         Choice experiment method (CEM). Similar to the CVM, this method can be used to
          estimate the economic value of use and non-use values of any environmental resource9.
          However, CEM enable estimation not only of the value of the environmental resource as a
          whole, but also of the implicit value of its attributes, their ranking and the value of changing
          more than one attribute at once (Hanley at al., 1998; Bateman et al., 2003). Concerning
          water resources, CEM has been applied to estimate the WTP for different functions, such
          as flood risk reduction, biodiversity conservation, and improved recreational access in
          Poland (Birol et al., 2009), biodiversity conservation in Greece (Birol et al., 2006), and
          improved water quality, quantity and biodiversity conservation in Cyprus (Birol et al.,
          2010).

(d) Other approaches

The direct and indirect techniques presented above are usually costly and time-consuming.
Fortunately, over the past three decades there has been a wealth of literature on non-market
valuation of water resources (Pendleton et al., 2007). Based on the available estimates of value at
the “study site,” one can estimate the value at another “policy site.” This approach, called benefits
transfer, is used to estimate economic values for ecosystem services by transferring available
information from studies already completed in another location and/or context.10


Water valuation literature in Turkey: a summary

Natural resource economics is a new field of research with limited experts and study examples in
Turkey. Apart from some projects being implemented by the central government agencies
responsible for natural reserve and forestry—namely DG Nature Protection and Natural Parks and
the DG Forestry, few works on natural capital accounting and water valuation have been done by
either academics or national/local governments.

One of the most well-known and comprehensive studies conducted by the government (DG Nature
Protection and Natural Parks) is the Valuation of Eco-services of Kayseri Sultansazlığı (Sultan
Marshes) Natural Park. This study quantified the ecological values of Sultansazlığı, a large
wetland complex with salty and freshwaters and one of the fifteen Ramsar Sites in Turkey. The
direct and indirect values of the site were estimated at TL1.4 billion in 2012 prices.



9 The environmental resource is defined in terms of its attributes (e.g. bathing water quality of coastal waters) and attribute levels
(e.g. high, medium, low). Profiles of the resource in terms of its attributes and attribute levels are then constructed, by combining
the levels of attributes into different scenarios. Two or three alternative profiles are then assembled in choice sets and presented to
respondents, who are then asked to state their preference (Hanley et al. 1998; Bateman et al. 2003).
10 This method is most reliable when the original site and the study site are very similar in terms of factors such as quality, location,

and population characteristics; when the environmental change is very similar for the two sites; and when the original valuation
study was carefully conducted and used sound valuation techniques (www.ecosystemvaluation.com).


                                                                  34
In recent years, in the context of Turkey’s EU candidacy, there have been increased efforts to
understand the role of water in economic development and to integrate water valuation into river
basin management processes. As an example, in 2012, WWF-Turkey, in cooperation with the
MoFWA, prepared a report which assesses Turkey’s water footprint with a specific focus on the
relationships between water, trade, and production.11

The Sectoral Water Allocation Plan in Seyhan Basin Project implemented by DGWM conducted
an economic analysis of water resources. The project aims to prepare a pilot sectoral water
allocation plan for the Seyhan Basin by making hydrological, environmental, economic and social
analyses in light of surface and groundwater resources, their usage, and potential future demands
in the basin. As part of the project, the TEV generated by water resources in Seyhan Basin is
estimated. In addition, a WTP study to estimate the value of the environmental flows of Seyhan
River is currently ongoing. It is expected to be finalized by September 2016.

Finally, an Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA) Project named Technical Assistance on Economic
Analyses within River Basin Management Plans and Water Efficiency Aspects in three Pilot
River Basins in Turkey is another important step towards economic analysis of water resources at
the river basin level. The project was developed by DGWM and aims to carry out an economic
analysis of water uses in selected basins and to assess current levels of the cost-recovery of water
services including environmental and resource costs in the light of EU-WFD. Yeşilırmak, Akarçay,
and Western Mediterranean Basins have been identified as pilot river basins within the Project,
which will start by early 2017.

In addition to the efforts carried out by the government, some academic studies have been
conducted to estimate different water values. Their findings are summarized below, and described
in greater detail in Table 3.

         Water for irrigation, urban use and hydropower generation

A few studies estimate these values. Some authors focus on valuing individual benefits, primarily
water for irrigation. For example, Tsur (2004) used a demand function to estimate the net value of
water for irrigating the main crops grown in the Harran Plain (Table 3). More recently, Aydogdu
(2016) conducted a CV survey to estimate farmers’ WTP for irrigation in the same region, and
concluded that the WTP was substantially higher than the existing water price. In addition, Bilgic
et al. (2008) estimated the WTP for treating potable water in Southeastern Turkey. They combined
averting behavior data (i.e. use of spring water instead of water from the municipal water network)
and stated preference data (i.e. CVM to estimate WTP to be able to drink tap water without
purchasing spring water) in a model to determine residents’ WTP for improved tap water quality.

Other authors estimate the combined value of water for several uses. For example, Tilmant et al.
(2008) used a production function approach to analyze the value of water for hydropower
generation and irrigated crops in several irrigation-hydroelectric reservoirs in Turkey and Syria.


11It shows that the water footprint of consumption, 140 billion m3, is almost equal to the water footprint of production, 139.6
billion m3. Similarly the virtual water that enters the country through imports approximately equals the export of virtual water,
which indicates that Turkey’s virtual water budget is in balance. (WWF-Turkey, 2014a)


                                                                35
Gürlük and Ward (2009) estimated the economic value of water for agriculture, urban use, and
recreation in the Nilüfer basin (Bursa province).

      Water-based recreation

This is the aspect best covered in the available studies. Valuation focuses on a variety of contexts
(nature parks, protected areas, coastal zones) and sometimes considers different types of visitors
(local, foreigners). Some authors apply the TCM to estimate the recreational benefit, for example
related to Kursunlu Waterfall Nature Park in Antalya province (Ortaçeşme, 2001), Great Meander
Delta National Park, on the Aegean coast (Başar, 2007), Lake Manyas of Kuşcenneti National
Park (Gürlük and Rehber, 2008), and Tuz Lake Protection Area, located within the borders of
Ankara, Konya and Aksaray (Demir, 2014). Other authors use CVM, for example in relation to
beaches near Mersin, on the eastern Mediterranean coast (Birdir et al., 2013). Yet, others combine
the two techniques to estimate the local and foreigners’ WTP for visiting Olu Deniz beach
(Blakemore et al., 2002; Blakemore and Williams, 2008).

      Improved water quality

A few studies attempt to estimate the value of improvements to water quality, coastal, and marine
biodiversity. They generally use CVM to estimate the WTP to improve water quality of different
lakes: Manyas Lake, one of the country’s Ramsar sites (Gürlük and Rehber, 2006), Beyşehir Lake,
the largest freshwater lake in Turkey (Özdemir and Baycan-Levent, 2010), and Izmit Bay, a coastal
area affected by decreasing water quality due to increased nutrient loads (Tolun et al., 2012). Only
one study was found to apply CEM to value the local residents’ WTP to improve water quality and
restore marine ecosystems, in Göcek Bay (Can and Alp, 2012).




                                                36
                                                   Table 3. Overview of water valuation studies conducted in Turkey
    Study                      Location                       Type of value        Valuation method                                            Description of results
                                                                                         used
                                                           Water for irrigation, urban use and hydropower generation
Tsur et al.      Harran plain, southeastern Turkey         Water for irrigation        Production function (based    The economic value of water was estimated at TL12 mil. – TL16 mil.
(2004)                                                                                 on linear programming)
Aygodgu          Harran plain, in the Southern Anatolian   Water for irrigation        CVM                           WTP was estimated at TL 235/ha, while the price paid was TL137/ha (2011)
(2016)           Project (GAP)
Tilmant et al.   Euphrates river basin, 5 reservoirs in    Water for irrigation and    Production function (based    Marginal water values were estimated at US$0.034 – 0.046/m3 for Keban,
(2008)           Turkey (Keban, Karakaya, Ataturk,         hydropower                  on               stochastic   US$0.026 – 0.039/m3 for Karakaya, US$0.019 – 0.027/m3 for Ataturk,
                 Birecik, Karkamis) and 2 in Syria                                     programming)                  US$0.007 – 0.014/m3 for Birecik reservoirs (2003)
                 (Tishreen, Tabqa)
Gürlük and       Nilüfer basin, located in Bursa           Water for agriculture,      Derived demand function       The average water values were estimated at TL31/m3 for urban use (city of
Ward (2009)      province                                  urban and recreation        (based on optimization        Bursa), and TL3.9-4.6/m3 for irrigated agriculture (Nilufer, Misi and Cayirova
                                                           (fishing, scenic view,      model)                        irrigation districts) (2003).
                                                           picnicking, bird
                                                           watching)
Bilgic et al.    Southern Anatolian Region (GAP)           Improved quality of         Avertive expenditures and     The WTP is NTL6.43 /household/month (2007)
(2008)                                                     potable water               CVM
                                                                                    Water-based recreation
Ortaçeşme        Kursunlu Waterfall Nature Park in         Recreational value          TCM                           The total recreational use value is estimated at US$50,000 (1999).
(2001)           Antalya province
Blakemore et     Beaches at St George's Bay (Malta),       Recreational value          TCM and CVM                   The average WTP per visit was estimated at £0.64 for St George's bay, £0.32
al. (2002)       Mamaia (Romania) and Olu Deniz                                                                      for Mamaia and £0.94 for Olu Deniz. In addition, the consumer surplus (CS)
                 (Turkey)                                                                                            was estimated at £0.62 per visit for British users, £0.46 per visit for Turkish
                                                                                                                     users and £0.69 for Romanian users. (2000)
Blakemore and    Olu Deniz beach                           Recreational value          TCM and CVM                   The WTP of British tourists is £0.9/visit for adults (2004)
Williams
(2008)
Başar (2007)     Dilek Peninsula - Great Meander Delta     Recreational value          TCM                           The total WTP was estimated at NTL 42 million (2006)
                 National Park, located on Aegean coast
                 of Turkey
Gürlük and       Kuşcenneti National Park at Lake          Recreational value (bird    TCM                           The CS of the park was about US$103 million annually, or US$3.75/visitor
Rehber (2008)    Manyas                                    watching)                                                 (2004)
Birdir et al.    Kizkalesi, Yemiskumu and Susanoglu        Improved beach quality      CVM                           The average WTP was Euro 2.33/visitor for Kizkalesi, Euro 2.22 for
(2013)           beaches located near Mersin, on the                                                                 Yemiskumu and Euro 1.77 for Susanoglu beaches (2011).
                 country’s eastern Mediterranean coast
Demir (2014)     Tuz Lake Protection Area, located         Recreational use value      TCM                           Using TCM, the average WTP = US$24/visitor, leading to a total recreational
                 within the borders of Ankara, Konya                                                                 benefit of US$5 million (2013).
                 and Aksaray of the Central Anatolia
                 Region




                                                                                              37
                                                              Improved water quality, biodiversity, and other values
 Gürlük (2006)    Lake Manyas National Park               Improved                  CVM                  The average WTP = 60 New Turkish Liras (NTL)/year, and the aggregate
                                                          environmental quality                          benefit to residents of the Lake was NTL 4.8 million/year (2004).
 Gürlük (2010)    Lake Uluabat, one of the Ramsar Sites   TEV                       CVM                  The TEV of benefits generated by Uluabat Lake Wetland Management Plan =
                  of Turkey located in southern Marmara                                                  US$80.8 per capita per year (2004).
                  region
 Özdemir and      Beyşehir Lake Basin, located in Konya   Improved water quality    CVM                  The WTP for improved water quality = TL18/household, with a total value of
 Baycan-Levent    Closed Basin                                                                           TL2 million per year (2010).
 (2010)
 Can and Alp      Göcek Bay, located in Fethiye-Göcek     Improved water quality    CEM                  The WTP is TL18/month/person for improvements in water quality, and
 (2012)           region                                  and marine life                                TL14.8/month/person for improvements in marine life (2010).
 Tolun et al.     Izmit Bay, at the east of the Marmara   Improved water quality    CVM, HPM             Based on CVM, the average WTP = EUR18.7 per person. In addition, the
 (2012)           Sea                                                                                    HPM indicated that an increase in water clarity from 2 to 3 m would increase
                                                                                                         the price of the average apartment (ca. 450 EUR/m2 ) by EUR 6.0/m2 (2009)
Note: The results presented in the last column are as given in the studies cited.




                                                                                          38
Summary of the applicable methods to estimate water values

While a wide range of techniques are available for valuing water benefits (Table 4), it is important
to note that the choice of specific valuation method depends on several factors: type of values to
be estimated (i.e. while use values can be estimated through most available techniques, non-use
values can only be estimated through stated preference methods); purpose of valuation (i.e. certain
purposes require valuation techniques based on the estimation of marginal values, while others
require valuation of total or average values); data availability (i.e. existence of data from secondary
resources); resources and time available (i.e. the various techniques can differ greatly in terms of
the resources and time required to undertake a study). The next chapter (Chapter V) selects the
appropriate valuation methods for which data are available, to demonstrate their applicability in
relation to Beyşehir basin in Turkey.

                    Table 4. Components of TEV and commonly-used valuation methods
        TEV                                 Type of benefit                               Economic valuation methods *

                        Water for irrigation                                         RM, PF, MP, DD, ACM, CVM
                        Water for municipal use                                      PF, DD, RM, MP, CVM
     Direct use
                        Water for industrial use a                                   PF, DD, ACM
       values
                                    b
                        Recreation                                                   HP, TCM, CVM, CEM
                        Wildlife and plant harvestingc                               MP
                        Nutrient retention                                           RC, COI
    Indirect use        Pollution abatement                                          RC, COI
       values           Flood control                                                RC, MP
                        Micro-climatic stabilization                                 PF
                        Potential future uses of direct and indirect uses            CVM, CEM
   Option values
                        Future value of information of biodiversity                  CVM, CEM
                        Biodiversity conservation                                    CVM, CEM
                        Cultural heritage                                            CVM, CEM
  Non-use values
                        Potential uses for future generations and for                CVM, CEM
                        contemporaries of the current generation
Source: adapted from Birol et al. (2006) and Brouwer et al. (2009).

Notes: a refers to production processes that can be consumptive (such as beverage and food industries) and non-consumptive (such
as hydro-power, cooling, navigation). b benefits associated with leisure activities such as swimming, diving, and recreational
fishing. c benefits from tangible goods extracted from water, either for consumptive uses (e.g. commercial fishing, algae, reeds) or
non-consumptive uses (shells for decoration). *Acronyms refer to production function (PF), residual method (RM), replacement
cost (RC), market prices (MP), cost-of-illness (COI), travel cost method (TCM), hedonic pricing method (HP), contingent valuation
method (CVM), and choice experiment method (CEM), alternative cost method (ACM), and derived demand (DD).
       V. Valuation Applications in Beyşehir Lake Subcatchment

Objectives and profile of the case study area

This chapter attempts to quickly apply the methodology presented above to a river basin in Turkey,
demonstrate economic valuation as a useful tool to improve water resources management, and
promote the future applications of water valuation in Turkey’s WRM decision-making. The
Beyşehir Lake subcatchment was selected for a quick case study for several reasons: (i) it is highly
important in terms of water availability, being the country’s largest freshwater lake; (ii) it is a
protected area, with high conservation value; (iii) it provides water to multiple users, thus
encountering problems from competing uses; (iv) data availability and the size of subcatchment
allowed a quick economic valuation to be conducted.

Data collection was quickly undertaken through desk review and interviews of a few local
government officials in charge of water management. Based on data availability, a few valuation
methods were employed to assign economic values to water in the subcatchment. Some
preliminary valuation results were presented and discussed.

Beyşehir Lake is located in the southwest corner of Konya Closed Basin, which is in the Central
Anatolian Plateau covering an area of 53,000 km2, roughly 7% of Turkey’s total surface area
(Figure 3). The Basin has semi-arid climate conditions and an annual average precipitation of
around 300-350 mm, almost half of Turkey’s average. Beyşehir Lake is the main surface water
resource for Konya Closed Basin.

The Beyşehir Lake subcatchment has an area of about 414,000 ha, and the lake itself, the largest
freshwater body in Turkey, has a water surface area of about 73,000 ha, with a mean and a max
depth of 5m and 9m, respectively. The Lake’s southern and northern shores are shallow and mostly
covered with swamp and reedbeds. The Lake is bordered by forested mountains in the west and
south, with lower parts of the maquis-covered slopes occupied by small areas of arable land and
orchards. North of the Lake is the indigenous Cedrus forest of Kızıldağ, whereas the eastern side
is flat, and mainly used for crop cultivation.

The lake is fed by 27 streams from the Dedegöl Mountains to the west, and by underground springs
coming from Sultan Mountains to the east. According to hydrogeological surveys conducted by
DSİ, due to the Lake’s karstic ground characteristics water is leaking through the holes into the
Manavgat Basin and connecting to the Mediterranean Sea, meaning that the Lake is either charged
or discharged by these groundwater flows. Depending on the season and year, the Lake’s water
level fluctuates often, and there are significant relationships between temperature, precipitation,
evaporation and the Lake’s water inflow and withdraw.




                                                40
       Figure 3. Konya Closed Basin and Beyşehir Lake Subcatchment




Source: MoEF 2010 for Konya Closed Basin, Nas, B., et al., 2010 for Beyşehir Lake Subcatchment


                                             41
Beyşehir Lake is surrounded by two National Parks—Beyşehir and Kızıldağ. The Lake is the
source of drinking water (reservoir) and a designated natural reserve area, it is also important for
large numbers of wintering waterfowl including Red-crested Pochard (Netta rufina), common
pochard (Aythya ferina) and common coot (Fulica atra). The following fish species were reported
in Beyşehir Lake: carp (Cyprinus carpio), pikeperch (Sander lucioperca), silver crucian carp
(Carassius gibelio), tench (Tinca tinca), big-scale sand smelt (Atherina boyeri), chub (Leuciscus
lepidus anatolicus) and rubb (Chondrostoma Beyşehirense) (Alaş, A., et al., 2010).

Beyşehir Lake lies within the administrative boundaries of Isparta and Konya provinces. There are
five major settlements located in the Lake Basin, namely the Beyşehir, Hüyük, and Derbent
districts of Konya and Yenişarbademli, Şarkikarağaç districts of Isparta. According to TurkStat,
the total population of the five major settlements in Beyşehir Lake Basin was about 120,000 in
2014. Of the five settlements, Beyşehir district has the largest population with 71,366 inhabitants
(TurkStat, 2014c).

Agriculture (crop production and livestock), fisheries, and tourism are the main economic sectors
in the subcatchment. Of these, agriculture is the most important, and consists of both irrigated
agriculture and dry land arable farming. Cereals (wheat and barley), chick peas, maize, sugarbeet,
fodder crops, potato, vegetables and fruits are the main crops cultivated in the subcatchment. Also,
Şarkikaraağaç and Hüyük are remarkable for apple and strawberry production

The Lake has been operated since the early 1900s for irrigation of the Konya Plain, and the
historical regulator facility (Stone Bridge) located in the Lake’s southeastern coast was constructed
in 1913. Today, the DSI’s 4th Regional Directorate is the main authority responsible for
management of the Lake. Within the Konya Plain Project (referred to by DSİ as KOP Project),
Çarşamba and Beyşehir Streams were turned into an artificial channel (BSA Channel-Beyşehir-
Suğla-Apa Channel) to transfer the Lake’s water to Konya Plain for irrigation. Out of irriga tion
season, water is being stored in Suğla Lake and Apa Dam; during the irrigation period it is diverted
to Çumra Plain. Each year, about 330-340 million m3 of water from the Lake is used for irrigation.
This includes approximately 320-330 million m3 for the irrigation of Konya Plain, and the
remaining for the Şarkikarağaç and Kıreli irrigation projects developed by DSİ. Apart from the
planned irrigation schemes developed by DSİ, farmers also supply water to their farmlands
independently either through pumping directly from the Lake and streams flowing to it, or from
groundwater wells. According to DSİ, 1361 groundwater wells operate in the subcatchment (361
licensed, and 1000 illegal).

In addition to this, in 2008 as part of the KOP Project, DSİ constructed a water diversion scheme
from a neighboring catchment to increase the water level of Beyşehir Lake, called the Gembos
Derivation Scheme. Today, an average of 130 million m3 of water is diverted annually to the Lake
via Gembos (from the interview with DSİ 4th Regional Directorate).

Beyşehir Lake also provides drinking water for the Beyşehir District and some surrounding small
towns, and some villages also use the streams and creeks feeding the Lake to supply their drinking
water. According to the 7th Regional Directorate of the Konya Water and Sewerage Authority
(KOSKİ) in Beyşehir, about 11 million m3 of water is used annually from Beyşehir Lake for
domestic/urban purposes (Interview with local expert in KOSKİ), providing water for 42,671



                                                 42
subscribers (KOSKİ, 2014). Figure 4 shows the water balance of Beyşehir Lake, based on
literature and interviews with local experts.


                              Figure 4. Beyşehir Lake water balance




                                    Source: Interview with local experts

The Beyşehir District’s wastewater treatment plant was constructed in 2005. However, due to high
operation and maintenance costs, the treatment plant has not functioned since 2008, and urban
wastewaters remain untreated and are directly discharged out of the subcatchment to a small
stream. Of the four other major settlements—Şarkikarağaç, Hüyük, Derbent and
Yenişarbademli—none have wastewater treatment plants, and discharge their untreated
wastewater to the streams flowing into the Lake except for Yenişarbademli, which discharges into
a doline near to the town.

Although it has protection status (several of them), the Beyşehir Lake has been suffering from a
number of problems: decreasing water levels due to excessive abstraction for irrigation; failures in
water management policies; lack of coordination between Nature Conservation and Water
Management authorities; unsustainable fishing practices; pollution caused from urban and rural
wastewaters; and unplanned urbanization. The problems in Beyşehir Lake are complex and
strongly interlinked with socio-economic and agricultural development in the entire Konya Closed
Basin; they threaten both the sustainability of the Lake ecosystem and the services provided by the
Lake.

The Konya Closed Basin is a typical example of a semi-arid region where groundwater resources
are under strong anthropogenic pressure (Figure 5). Over the past few decades, the basin has
experienced huge non-renewable groundwater abstraction for irrigation, along with groundwater
head declines and environmental degradations. Decisions to irrigate land, increase agricultural
production, and build reservoirs to expand irrigated land in the basin have resulted in several
environmental problems such as the loss of ecologically important wetland habitats (which are


                                                    43
also mostly groundwater dependent), decreasing fish stocks in inland waters, loss of reedbeds, etc.
By the 1970s nearly half of the basin had already been converted into arable land; today this
proportion is even higher. These areas include many former wetland and steppe habitats.

  Figure 5. Surface water resources in Konya Closed Basin before water development projects (in
                                     early 1900s) and in 2012




                                      Source: WWF-Turkey, 2014b

The over-exploitation of groundwater resources is one of the most important problems in Konya
Closed Basin. Based on the observations of the groundwater wells operated by DSİ 4th Regional
Directorate, groundwater levels have decreased more than 28 meters across the basin since 1980.
(Göçmez, G., 2004) According to an unpublished DSI inventory carried out in 2008, of a total of
94,000 wells in the basin, 68,000 were drilled and operated without permission. Today, the number
of illegal wells throughout the basin is estimated to be more than 100,000. Although DSİ has been
taking several steps to protect the basin’s groundwater resources over the last few years (e.g.
preparing master plans and setting up safe yields for groundwater use, developing new monitoring
and control mechanisms, training and awareness raising activities for farmers in cooperation with
other local authorities), illegal pumping and overexploitation of groundwater resources continue
to threaten the sustainability of the basin’s water resources.

Looking at the available water supply and the water use figures, the basin’s total annual utilizable
water potential is about 4.3 billion m3, and total annual water use is about 6.5 billion m3—meaning
there is a deficit of over 2 billion m3 in the basin’s water balance sheet annually. The water budget
deficit is mostly met through static groundwater reserves, and thus safe groundwater reserves have
already been exploited (WWF-Turkey, 2014b).

In addition to these figures, the second largest irrigation project (after South Eastern Anatolia
Project) is being implemented in the basin, namely the Konya Plain Projects (KOP). It consists of
18 projects including 14 large- and small-scale irrigation projects, 3 water supply projects, and 1
energy project. The KOP’s ultimate goal is to irrigate an area of 617,923 ha across the basin; today
almost half of this irrigation target has been realized. According to KOP Authority, the average
income generated per hectare of irrigated land across the basin is about TL5500 (KOP Authority,




                                                 44
2014)12 and the KOP Project will provide a total economic value of US$2.2 billion in irrigation,
US$300 million in energy, and US$70 million in drinking water for a total contribution of US$2.57
billion to the national economy as well as generating direct employment opportunities for 100,000
people (DSİ, 2014).

As a part of this Project, 10% of Göksu River’s annual flow (414 million m3/year) is being diverted
via an interbasin water transfer project to the Konya Basin to meet the increasing water demand
for agriculture. Today, 88% of Basin’s water resources are used in agriculture and 61% of water
used for irrigation is sourced from groundwater resources (WWF-Turkey, 2010). Spring irrigation
and gravity irrigation are commonly applied across the Basin, and according to Union of Konya
Irrigation Cooperatives, spring irrigation and drip irrigation only comprise some 30-40% and 10%
in the overall irrigation practices in the Basin respectively.

Decreasing water levels due to over-abstraction of water for irrigation is, perhaps, the Lake’s most
pressing problem. According to long-term statistics, the Lake’s water level fluctuates between
1121.03 m and 1125.6 m altitude. However, over the course of years, the Lake’s water level has
fallen dramatically and today it is sometimes reduced to only 50,000 ha in dry seasons. Since the
mid-2000s, relevant national and local stakeholders have been discussing ways to secure a
guaranteed minimum water level for the Lake. It’s important to note that, while the water level
fluctuates naturally with seasonal variations of 0.5-1 m, in recent decades a long-term general trend
of declining water levels has been observed due to overexploitation. There is therefore a serious
risk that Beyşehir Lake may reach critical water levels in the near future as the increased demand
for water and climatic change continues. Figure 6 demonstrates the Lake’s changing water levels
from 1965 to 2010 (Dursun, 2010).


                               Figure 6. Water level fluctuations of Beyşehir Lake




                                                      Source: Dursun 2010

A recent study conducted by the Department of Biology of the Middle East Technical University
shows that future climate conditions will bring major changes to the hydrology and ecology of the
Beyşehir Lake. The study revealed that climate models project a considerable decrease in
12This represents the farmers’ net income from agricultural production; it does not cover direct income payments from agricultural
policy.


                                                               45
precipitation for the near future (up to 20% reduction on an annual basis relative to the baseline
period of 1981-2010), and according to the hydrological model the total water supply to Beyşehir
Lake may be reduced up to 30%. Consequently, nitrogen and phosphorus loads to the Lake are
projected to decrease by as much as 36% and 53%, respectively, for the near-future scenarios.13
The samples collected from the Lake’s main tributaries revealed that the highest nutrient
concentrations were present in areas that have a relatively high proportion of agriculture (i.e. the
northern and eastern parts of the catchment) (Beklioğlu et al., 2014).

Beyşehir Lake provides a very critical freshwater ecosystem which plays an important role in
maintaining the area’s ecological balance, contributing to the hydrological regime of the basin and
preserving biological diversity. In that sense, over-abstraction of water for irrigating the Konya
Plain results in shrinking of the Lake, which also means the loss of some of the critical ecosystem
services it provides. Due to water fluctuations and decreasing water levels, shoreline vegetation is
being destroyed, especially in the southern coast of the Lake and around the islands. Given the fact
that wetland vegetation improves shoreline stabilization by reducing the effects erosion as well as
providing a nesting and breeding ground for water birds and some fish species, decreasing water
levels on Lake Beyşehir have negative impacts on the Lake’s composition of birds and fish species
in the long run.

Furthermore, decreasing water levels may also result in changes in the Lake’s water quality
parameters, such as turbidity, suspended sediment, and chlorophyll-a. According to Turkish Water
Pollution and Control Regulation, suspended sediment values should not exceed 5 mg/l to control
eutrophication on lakes. A study on the water quality of Beyşehir Lake in 2006 shows that the
lake’s suspended sediment concentrations were in compliance with this regulation, with a mean
suspended sediment concentration of 4.51 mg/l. The study also shows that the highest
concentrations of chlorophyll-a correspond to areas that receive untreated domestic wastewater via
streams from villages in adjoining areas of the Lake, with a particular emphasis on the streams at
the northern and eastern parts of the Lake (Nas et al., 2010).


Valuation context for Beyşehir Lake

Water-related goods and services in Beyşehir Lake subcatchment were identified based on the
TEV framework and presented in Table 5. The study estimates the economic value of the gross
benefits (annual flows) provided by the Lake during the year of reference 2015.14




13 The study also shows that the concentration of the inorganic forms of nitrogen and phosphorus in Beyşehir Lake is generally
very low. The TN:TP mass ratios ranged 3 to 24 in the two-year time series from within the Lake, indicating that primary production
in the Lake may be alternating between being phosphorus and nitrogen limited. The sampling period was April 2010- April 2012.
14 In other words, the study aims at estimating the individuals’ total Willingness to Pay (WTP) for the benefits derived by the lake.




                                                                46
                                   Table 5. TEV framework for Beyşehir Lake
               Total Economic Value                                               Type of benefit
                                                            Water supply for irrigation

                                                            Water supply for municipal use
                                Direct use values           Recreation
                                                            Wildlife and plant harvesting
       Use Values                                      -    Fishing
                                                       -    Reed cutting
                                                            Nutrient retention
                                                            Pollution abatement
                               Indirect use values
                                                            Flood control
                                                            Micro-climatic stabilization
                                                            Potential future uses of direct and indirect uses
                                 Option values
                                                            Future value of information of biodiversity
                                Existence values            Biodiversity conservation
     Non-use Values             Altruistic values           Cultural heritage
                                                            Potential uses for future generations and for contemporaries of
                                 Bequest values
                                                            current generation
                                                      Source: the authors

Data collection was based on interviews with local authorities during field visits conducted in
April-May 2016, complemented by secondary information gathered from scientific articles.
Locally available information relates mostly to tangible goods, e.g. areas, yields, and local prices.
However, a detailed valuation study could not be conducted due to limited time and resources for
the study, which, inevitably, create a degree of uncertainty. Data, especially related to ecosystem
services, is scarce and has not been collected at the catchment level. Furthermore, some data for
quantifying indirect use values does not exist, and future field surveys and analyses will be needed.
In these cases, some benefits were estimated by transferring unit values from other similar
contexts, while others could not be estimated at all. Thus, valuation results should be considered
only as orders of magnitude that underestimate the real value of these benefits.


Valuation results

This section presents the valuation methods and the results for Beyşehir Lake subcatchment. It
estimates the direct use values, indirect use values and non-use values related to the Lake.

Direct use values

Water supply for irrigation. Water from Beyşehir subcatchment is largely used for irrigated
agriculture. In 2015, about 347 million m3 of water 15 has been used to irrigate 64,490 ha of
agricultural land (Table 6). Around 56% of the irrigated area is located in Beyşehir subcatchment,
and the rest in Çumra region.



15About 320 million m3 originated from Beyşehir Lake and 27 million m3 from the groundwater of Beyşehir sub-catchment.
However, it is not possible to distinguish between the type of crops according to the irrigation source; therefore, the present
valuation considers all crops irrigated with water from both the lake and groundwater from Beyşehir sub -catchment.


                                                             47
                           Table 6. Irrigated crops with water from Beyşehir Lake (2015)
                                            Yields      Price        Agricultural       Net water use       Total water used      Water tariff
         Crops               Area (ha)
                                            (t/ha)     (TL/kg)     revenue (TL/ha)        (m3/ha)             (million m3)         (TL/ha)

                                 (a)          (b)         (c)          = (b) * (c)            (d)              = (a) * (d)
Beyşehir
Wheat                            7,620           4.7         0.9               4,000           4,500                   34.3     120
Barley                          17,710           3.0         0.9               1,950           4,000                   70.8     120
Sugarbeet                        3,740          59.5         0.7              11,300           8,000                   29.9     220
Fruit trees                         940         31.3         0.8              24,400           6,000                    5.6     360
Strawberries                        470         35.6         0.8              26,700           5,000                    2.4     360
Sub-total Beyşehir              30,480          n.a.        n.a.               4,700           4,700                  143.0     143
Çumra area
Wheat                            8,250           4.9         0.9               4,200           4,500                   37.1     120
Barley                           7,160           4.1         0.7               2,700           4,000                   28.6     120
Maize                            7,750           9.6         0.6               6,100           7,000                   54.2     220
Sugarbeet                        9,250          77.4         0.2              14,700           8,000                   74.0     220
Sunflower                        1,600           4.5         0.9               3,900           6,000                    9.6     140
Sub-total Çumra                 34,010          n.a.        n.a.               7,160           5,990                  203.6     171
Total                           64,490          n.a.        n.a.               5,990           5,380                  346.6     158
       Sources: Turkstat, 2015 Crop Production Statistics for area and yields; 2015 Konya Commodity Exchange for crop prices;
    communication with Konya agricultural directorate for the net water use; communication with the Regional Directorate of DSI
                    for water tariff; n.a. = not applicable. Note: the results may not add up exactly due to rounding.

  This section estimates the economic value of water used in the two regions. Valuation is based on
  the residual method, also called “maximum ability to pay”.16 For each region, we estimate the costs
  of production unrelated to water (e.g. fertilizers, soil preparation, planting, pesticides,
  maintenance, rent, etc); then we subtract these costs from the agricultural revenue and ascribe the
  difference to the value of water. These data, obtained from simple farm budgets, are summarized
  in Table 7.17 Accordingly, the economic value of water is estimated at TL186 million.

                 Table 7. Estimated economic value of water for agriculture (million TL, 2015)
   Estimated values                                             Beyşehir                Çumra                     Total
   Agricultural revenue (1)                                        143                    243                      386
   Cost of production                                               83                    150                      233
    - water-related costs                                           4                      29                       33
    - other costs (2)                                               78                    122                      200
   Economic value of water for irrigation (1 – 2)                   65                    121                      186
       Sources: Farm budgets per crop of irrigated lands for Çumra (Konya Provincial Directorate of Agriculture, 2015) and
                     communication with agricultural officer of the Konya Provincial Directorate of Agriculture.




  16 An alternative way to estimate this benefit is by ascribing the difference between the unit value of irrigated and non-irrigated
  land to the value of water. However, applying this method could be problematic for this area, because irrigated land is covered by
  several crops (wheat, barley, sugarbeet, strawberries, fruit trees, etc.), while non-irrigated land is cultivated only with wheat. In this
  case, the difference between the revenue of an average hectare covered by several high-value added crops and that of a hectare
  covered by rainfed wheat could not be attributed solely to the input of water (much of the difference results from other production
  inputs). At the same time, the difference between the revenue of a hectare cultivated with irrigated and non-irrigated wheat would
  underestimate the benefit of water used for other high value crops. Because of the above limitations, this section uses the residual
  method to estimate the value of water for irrigated agriculture.
  17 Based on Konya Provincial Directorate of Agriculture, these farm budgets relate to the year 2015 and refer to irrigated wheat (33

  farms, 2540 ha), rainfed wheat (33 farms, 2404 ha), irrigated barley (47 farms, 4767 ha), sunflower (24 farms, 1736 ha), maize (20
  farms, 2058 ha) and sugar beet (56 farms, 2734 ha). The main cost items cover soil preparation, planting, fertilizers, pesticides,
  irrigation, maintenance, harvesting, land rent and other fixed costs.


                                                                     48
Water supply for municipal use. Beyşehir Lake provides 11 million m3 of water for municipal use
(communication with the 7th Regional Directorate of KOSKİ). It serves 71,400 people, distributed
through 42,700 subscribers; about 80% of them are households (i.e. 34,100) and the remaining are
commercial establishments (i.e. 8,600). According to 7th Regional Directorate of KOSKİ in
Beyşehir, water consumption is about 18 m3/month per household. Consequently, water
consumption is estimated at 7.4 million m3 for households and 3.6 million m3 for commercial
establishments.

The tariff for municipal water is TL2.3/m3 for households and TL3.5/m3 for commercial
establishments. However, since these are nominal values, they do not represent the society’s WTP
for tap water. No study estimating the economic value of municipal water has been found for the
pilot area. However, the WTP for municipal water was estimated to be 85% higher than the actual
water tariff in Greater Baku, Azerbaijan (AZN15.1 vs. AZN8.3/m3) (Scandizzo and Abbasov,
2012) and about twice as much as in Bursa, Turkey (TL32 vs. TL16/m3) (Gürlük and Ward, 2009).
Assuming that the economic value for municipal water in Beyşehir is only 85% higher than its
nominal value (as in Baku), it is estimated at TL4.3/m3 for households and TL6.5/m3 for
commercial households.18 Applying these values to the total consumption of municipal water in
Beyşehir subcatchment, the economic value reaches TL55 million.

Water supply for industrial use. Several small- and medium-scale industries exist in Beyşehir
subcatchment related to food and fish processing, weapons and ammunition production, textile
and chrome processing. The towns Huğlu and Üzümlü are well known for their rifle factories,
which export 80% of Turkey’s shotgun products to more than 50 countries around the world
(interview with local experts). However, as no data is available related to the use of water for these
industries, no estimate can be provided at this stage.

Recreation. Natural and landscape characteristics of Beyşehir Lake and the neighboring national
parks (Beyşehir and Kızıldağ) provide several activities for recreation and tourism, such as bird
watching, swimming, sports fishing, and water surfing. In addition, cultural and historical heritage
sites make Beyşehir Lake a popular weekend destination for people living in Konya and other
nearby settlements. Overall, there are about 327,900 visitors annually to Beyşehir Lake (Table 8).
According to data gathered from national park management units, about 102,900 visitors have
been recorded paying entrance fees in different areas. The remaining 225,000 visitors are enjoying
the lake free of charge. The recreational benefit is estimated below, for both types of visitors.

                         Table 8. Number of visitors in different areas of Beyşehir Lake (2015)
              Visitors               Karaburun             Yakamanastır             Kızıldağ National               Total
                                       beacha              Nature Parka                   Park

      - paying entrance fees           42,300                  42,200                     18,400                   102,900

      - free of charge                              200,000                               25,000                   225,000

      Total                                         284,500                               43,400                   327,900

Note: a Part of Beyşehir Lake National Park.
Source: Communications with Beyşehir Lake National Park and Kızıldağ National Park management units

18
     This is in the same range as the total WTP for potable water found in Southeastern Turkey, of TL6.4 /m3 (Bilgic et al., 2008).



                                                                  49
(i)    Benefits for visitors paying entrance fees. These benefits include the actual payments made
by these individuals to visit the park, and the consumer surplus they enjoy on top of their actual
payment. These benefits are estimated as follows:

        Actual payments. Considering an entrance fee of TL3/visit according to Beyşehir Lake
         National Park management unit, the total amount paid at the entrance is estimated at
         TL308,600. In addition, there are three sightseeing cruise boats in the Lake, transporting
         about 100 passengers/day each from mid April–mid October who have paid TL7.5/person.
         The revenues collected from boating activities are estimated at TL405,000. Consequently,
         revenues collected from entrance fees and boating amount to TL713,600.

        Consumer surplus. The value associated with these benefits has not been estimated for
         Beyşehir Lake. However, several studies have been conducted in relation to other lakes in
         Turkey. Examples include Kursunlu Waterfall Nature Park in Antalya province
         (Ortaçeşme, 2001), Great Meander Delta National Park, on the Aegean coast (Başar 2007),
         Lake Manyas of Kuşcenneti National Park (Gürlük and Rehber, 2008) and Tuz Lake
         Specially Protected Area, located within the borders of Konya Closed Basin (Demir, 2014).
         Among these areas, Lake Manyas of Kuşcenneti National Park provides the most similar
         context to that of Beyşehir Lake, as both are large inland freshwater lakes. Based on this
         study, the consumer surplus is estimated at about TL17.8/visit (in 2015 prices). 19 Applying
         this value to the number of visitors paying entrance fees (102,900), the consumer surplus
         is estimated at TL1.8 million.

Based on the above calculations, the recreational benefit of visitors paying entrance fees totals
TL2.5 million (1).

(ii) Benefits for visitors that come free of charge. Though these visitors do not pay any fees to the
park, they benefit from several services such as landscape views, free picknicking and swimming.
These benefits have not been estimated for Beyşehir Lake; in lack of information, we assume that
they are similar with the consumer surplus estimated for the visitors that pay entrance fees, i.e.
TL17.8/visit. Accordingly, the recreational benefit for visitors arriving free of charge (225,000
people) is estimated at TL4 million (2).

Adding up the estimates obtained for all visitors (1 + 2), the total recreational benefit is estimated
at TL6.5 million in 2015.

Fishing. Fishing is the main source of income for several settlements located around the Lake.
During 2000-2015, this activity declined significantly from 2,000 licensed fishermen with a total
catch of 1,400–1,600 tons (Babaoğlu, 2007) to only 680 licensed fishermen with 256 tons catch.
The Lake is divided into two fishing zones: Sarkikaraagac fishing zone, located in Isparta province,
and Beyşehir fishing zone, situated in Konya province. Based on data gathered from the experts at

19
   The authors applied Travel Cost Method (TCM), based on zonal approach, and conducted 300 face-to-face
interviews during June-August 2004. The area was divided in 14 zones. The consumer surplus obtained for each zone
has been aggregated to arrive at the total consumer surplus for the area.


                                                       50
Konya Provincial Directorate of Agriculture, the most common fish caught in 2015 was pikepearch
(135 tons), followed by carp (105 tons) and silver crucian carp (16 tons). Local market prices are
TL14/kg of pikepearch, TL12/kg of carp and TL1/kg of silver crucian carp. Accordingly, the value
of fish catch is estimated at TL3.1 million. In addition, an interview with experts at Şarkikaraağaç
District Directorate of Agriculture indicated that in reality the illegal (unlicensed) fish catch is at
least twice the quantity of fish caught legally. Accordingly, the real value of fishing is estimated
at TL9 million.20

Reed cutting. Reed cutting was a source of income in the pilot area until 2010. 21 However,
decreasing water levels and shrinking of the Lake led wild boars to infest the lands and destroy the
reed beds. Nowadays, the quality of reeds does not meet the required standard for export and local
people harvest them only for traditional uses such as roofing.22 No information is available to
estimate the local value of reeds extracted from around the Lake.

Indirect use values

Pollution abatement. The Lake is believed to be important in performing water purification
functions. According to local water authorities, the settlements of Derbent (4,600 people), Hüyük
(16,300 people), and Şarkikaraağaç (25,800 people) do not benefit from operational wastewater
treatment plants, so their residents’ discharge untreated wastewater in the streams flowing into
Beyşehir Lake. The average discharge quantity is about 90 liters/capita/day in the region.23 Based
on the above, the total quantity of municipal wastewater discharged from these settlements
amounts to 1.5 million m3.

The pollution abatement function is estimated through the replacement cost method, assuming the
cost of wastewater treatment in the area. The annual cost of advanced wastewater treatment is
estimated at TL1.8/m3 of wastewater, based on information from KOSKİ. 24 Applying this cost to
the quantity of untreated municipal water discharged in streams flowing in Beyşehir, the total
replacement cost is estimated as TL2.8 million. Other indirect use values such as nutrient retention,
flood control 25 and micro-climatic stabilization could not be estimated, due to the non-market
nature of these benefits and data scarcity.

Non-use values




20 No estimate of consumer surplus for fishing has been found. Therefore, the result underestimates the total WTP for fishing in
the lake.
21 About 150-200 people were involved in reed cutting with an average of 400,000-500,000 ties harvested annually (WWF-Turkey,

2006) in mid 2000s and almost all of them were exported to Germany, Netherlands and Belgium through intermediate sellers.
22 General Directorate of Nature Conservation and National Parks is in charge of providing reed-cutting permission in accordance

with the Wetlands Regulation, based on an interview with local experts.
23 Communication with KOSKİ- Konya Water and Sewerage Authority
24 This cost includes: (i) the annual O&M cost, varying from TL0.5 to TL2.5/m3, with an average of TL1.5/m3 (a); (ii) the annualized

investment cost, estimated at TL0.3/m3 (based on a total capital cost of TL145/capita, discharged quantity of 90 liters/capita/day,
and lifetime of treatment plant of 20 years) (b). Adding up (a) and (b), the total annual cost of treatment is TL1.8/m3.
25 However, while the Lake’s capacity to control floods was an important function in the past, it is not believed to be a signif icant

benefit anymore: decreasing water levels and precipitation over time mean that floods are not a hazard in the pilot area.


                                                                 51
This section estimates the value of biodiversity as a non-use value. In other words, this is the value
that individuals place on the conservation of the Lake’s biodiversity, even though they may never
use it directly.

No CVM or CE study has been found for Beyşehir Lake estimating this value. However, Birol et
al. (2006) valued non-users’ WTP to conserve biodiversity in Cheimaditia Lake, a freshwater lake
and Ramsar site in Greece. The authors used the CEM to account for people’s preferences for
biodiversity under different management scenarios. They estimated the non-users’ WTP at 15.5
euro per person (2005 prices). Adjusting this estimate for Beyşehir Lake, a WTP for biodiversity
is TL5/person for 2015. 26

Beyşehir Lake is found at the border between the Konya and Isparta regions, whose population is
2.5 million people (Turkstat, 2015). By deducting the number of visitors to Beyşehir (327,900
people—see “recreation” section), the total population of “non-users” that live in close proximity
to the Lake is estimated at 2.2 million. Assuming that they are willing to pay TL5/person for
biodiversity conservation of Beyşehir Lake, the associated non-use values linked to biodiversity
are estimated at TL11 million. It should be stressed that this estimate has only indicative meaning,
being based on values and assumptions from studies conducted in another country (Greece), due
to a lack of specific data for the Lake.

Summary and discussion

Based on the above estimates, the TEV of Beyşehir Lake reaches TL271 million in 2015 (Table
9). Although a conservative number, it represents 13% of Beyşehir subcatchment’s GDP in the
same year. 27 In other words, every year the Lake provides economic benefits in the order of
TL2,300 per capita in the pilot area. 28




26 The adjustment was done in two steps: (i) annualizing this value at a 3% discount rate; (ii) applying benefits transfer procedure,
considering the GDP/capita ratio between the two countries and the consumer price index to reflect price differences between 2005
and 2015.
27 The estimation was conducted as follows: the gross value added per capita in Konya-Karaman region was TL11,935 in 2011

(Turkstat 2015). Based on the total population of Beyşehir sub -catchment (120,000 people), the GDP of this area is estimated at
TL1.43 billion in 2011. This represents 0.11% of Turkey’s GDP of the same year. Considering the same ratio in the country’s GDP
for 2015, and knowing that Turkey’s GDP is TL1,953 billion in 2015 (Turkstat 2016), the GDP of Beyşehir sub -catchment was
estimated at TL2.16 billion in 2015.
28 Obtained by dividing TL271 million by the 120,000 residents of Beyşehir sub -catchment.




                                                                52
                                           Table 9. TEV components of Beyşehir Lake
 TEV                                                         Valuation method                       Economic value   Financial value a
                                                                                                     (million TL)      (million TL)
 Direct use values
 Water supply for irrigation                                   Residual method                           186                10
 Water supply for municipal use                       Benefits transfer (of CVM results)                 55                 30
 Recreation                                   Market price and benefits transfer (of TCM results)         7                 0.7
 Wildlife and plant harvesting (fishing)                         Market price                             9                0.04
 Indirect use values
 Nutrient retention                                                                                      n.e.                0
 Pollution abatement                                          Replacement cost                            3                  0
 Flood control                                                                                           n.e.                0
 Micro-climatic stabilization                                                                            n.e.                0
 Option values                                                                                           n.e.                0
 Non-use values                                       Benefits transfer (of CVM results)                 11                  0
 Total                                                                                                   271                41
 Total (% of Beyşehir’s GDP)                                                                            13%                2%
Source: the authors. Notes: n.e. = not estimated; a estimated as actual revenues derived from water tariffs (for water supply in
agriculture and municipal uses); fees collected from visitors and sales of fishing licenses.

Needless to mention that the existing estimates for Beyşehir Lake could be refined when additional
data become available and additional field surveys or studies are carried out. For example, the
value of water for agriculture could be improved by using results of more complex farm budgets
that account not only for marketed inputs (e.g. fertilizers, harvest), but also for non-priced ones
(e.g. opportunity cost of time, as is the case of unpaid labor). Estimates of other benefits could be
also improved, by conducting primary surveys in the Lake’s area. This is the case of the value of
water for municipal use (e.g. by conducting CVM to derive the users’ WTP for municipal water),
the value of recreation (e.g. by performing TCM or CVM surveys that estimate the visitors’
demand for recreation) and the non-use value of biodiversity (e.g. by conducting CVM or CEM,
aiming at estimating non-users’ WTP for the lake’s biodiversity).

Despite being preliminary, the results of the quick water valuation in Beyşehir subcatchment,
however, are useful to policy analysis. In absolute terms, water supply for agriculture appears to
be the most important component, followed by water for municipal uses. However, this is because
the quantity of water supplied for agriculture (347 million m3) is much higher than that for
municipal use (11 million m3); in fact, the unit economic value of water allocated for municipal
use 29 (TL5/m3) is considerably greater than that for irrigation 30 (TL0.5/m3). This result has
important implications for policy in the basin.

In addition, the economic value of the Lake appears particularly significant when compared to its
financial value—the latter provided by actual revenues derived from goods provided by the Lake.
The gap between the two values is largely explained by the difference between the economic value
of the water supply for different uses (irrigation, municipal) and its financial value. In this light,
the analysis demonstrates that the economic value of water is much higher than its financial value
for both municipal (TL5/m3 vs. TL2.7/m3 on average) and agricultural uses (TL0.5/m3 vs.
TL0.03/m3). This result indicates that increasing tariffs could be potentially useful for water
conservation in the subcatchment.


29   Obtained by dividing the economic value of water for municipal uses (TL55 million) by the quantity supplied (11 million m3).
30   Obtained by dividing the economic value of water for agriculture (TL186 million) by the quantity supplied (347 million m3).


                                                                      53
                     VI. Conclusions and Recommendations
As presented in the diagnostic note of natural capital accounting prepared by the World Bank in
2014, the Turkish government is considering a set of policy issues related to WRM, ranging from
assessing water’s economic contribution to national growth, to tradeoffs among competing users
in managing water resources, to water pricing and cost recovery, to planning and prioritizing
investments to compensate or offset the loss of water due to depletion. The need for water-related
policy analysis and decision-making are a strong motivation for the development and application
of water valuation and accounting tools.

The economic valuation of water is a basic step in making well-informed decisions across the
water sector. Government agencies, such as the MoD, TurkStat and the MoFWA, are intent on
conducting valuation to better understand water resources’ economic contribution to the economy,
improve water accounting, and integrate water valuation in WRM processes at the river basin level.

Valuation, in particular, is a powerful tool that can be used in many ways, such as: 1) to estimate
the cost of environmental degradation related to water resources in different river basins, thus
helping to identify and prioritize the most important challenges related to water; 2) to estimate the
costs and benefits related to alternative options for improvement, thus helping to make the best
choice of investments for allocating limited water availability among different sectors; 3) to assess
the benefits of different water-related ecosystems (water bodies or wetlands), thus contributing to
a better understanding of their importance and the need for their conservation.

To respond to the Turkish government’s interest in water policy analysis, the present study
addressed the issue of the economic valuation of water by: 1) providing a comprehensive overview
of methods that can be used to value water by type of use; 2) reviewing existing efforts to estimate
water values at the international and national levels; and 3) demonstrating the application of some
valuation methods through a case study in Turkey. The study identified the need for the following
actions:

       Nurture the political will and institutional arrangements to support the incorporation
of valuation into decision-making. High-level political will and commitment, particularly from
the National Government, are fundamental to ensure that valuation is integrated into decision-
making processes. Other measures are equally important, such as helping promote the coordination
among stakeholders—by forming an Expert Advisory Group under the coordination of MoD
comprised of experts and officials from relevant government agencies (TurkStat, MoFWA,
MoEU), academia and civil society organizations, for example—in order to ensure that NCA
efforts are effectively carried out inter- ministerially. The Expert Advisory Group would also
explore new developments related to NCA studies at the global scale; would pioneer discussions
in the country; and would help to harmonize different approaches and methodologies for Turkey.

      Adopt NCA and valuation as supporting tools in implementing the 2030 Agenda and
delivering the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development with 17 SDGs require better and more integrated information on how the economy,
environment and society interact. In that sense, NCA and the SDGs are highly compatible. Both
recognize the need for understanding the interactions and trade-offs between the economic,


                                                 54
environmental and social dimensions of sustainable development. NCA can help deliver the SDGs
by making explicit the links between the economy and the environment, enabling sustainable
policy decisions and actions. Furthermore, NCA can also support the process of monitoring and
reporting the progress on the SDGs. Turkey, one of the successful implementers of Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), is keen on implementing SDGs and improving its performance on
sustainable development. MoD, as the overall coordinator of the 2030 Agenda in Turkey, is in the
preparation stages of the 11th Development Plan and is updating the country’s long-term vision
aligned with the 2030 Agenda and SDGs. In this context, it is curical to integrate NCA and
valuation efforts into Turkey’s SDGs implementation roadmap and adopt these tools for delivering
SDGs.

       Carry out in-depth valuation studies, covering a wider range of water values and river
basins. In Turkey, water valuation efforts have been uneven, concentrating mostly on valuing
recreation and to a lesser degree on the purification function of water bodies. Little work has been
found on the value of water for irrigation and municipal use, and none on indirect use values (e.g.
flood control, pollution abatement) or the costs of water degradation (i.e. impacts of water
pollution and overexploitation). Moreover, the existing studies have been concentrated in a few
river basins. To better understand the importance of water resources and water-related ecosystems,
and to be able to prioritize and design interventions aimed at reducing problems, there is a need
for a more comprehensive set of studies that would cover both a wider range of values and a wider
range of river basins.

      Improve the valuation of water benefits in Beyşehir Lake subcatchment through
extended data collection and site-specific studies concerning the economic value of water uses
(i.e. agricultural, municipal, recreational, and biodiversity). The TEV of Beyşehir Lake was
estimated to be about TL271 million, or 13% of the Beyşehir subcatchment’s GDP in 2015,
with the greatest value being generated by water supply for agriculture, followed by water for
municipal uses. However, the unit value of water allocated for irrigation (TL0.5/m3) is estimated
to be considerably lower than that for municipal use (TL5/m3), even though water use by
agriculture is much higher than that for municipal use. The analysis thus suggests that water
allocation is inefficient. To confirm this conclusion and improve allocation, a more comprehensive
assessment of the economic benefits of water resources - focusing particularly on the value of
water for irrigation, municipal use, recreation and biodiversity - and of the trade-off between
water uses and food security as well as rural development is required. A better understanding of
the value of water in its various uses will help design systems that improve the total benefits of
water use by improving its allocation; the allocation experiences of other countries can provide a
useful starting point for such efforts.

       Develop national guidelines on water valuation and accounting to facilitate future
studies and scale/implement existing efforts nationwide. These guidelines should propose a
stepwise approach for practitioners at all levels and have a general context of “ecosystem
valuation” with differentiated aspects of forest, water, and marine valuation. Prior to that, national
circumstances (e.g., data limitations, government priorities, institutional capacity, etc.) have to be
properly analyzed.




                                                 55
        Establish a national water accounting system. The fragmented structure of water
management and administrative units in Turkey makes the establishment of water accounting a
challenge. Furthermore, earlier efforts to develop water accounts remained as “pilot projects” and
have not yet result in proper institutionalization. In that sense, Turkey still needs to gain experience
and conduct further studies to improve its existing water accounting framework in a standardized
and consistent way. Existing physical water accounts can be improved with new modules, and
data should be collected beyond the current administrative boundaries, and standardized across all
river basin levels. Data quality frameworks should be developed and the quality of existing water
statistics should be assessed. Extra effort is needed for additional data compilation in water-related
economic sectors like fisheries, energy, forestry, tourism and agriculture. Monetary accounts need
to be based on the economic value of water in terms of its exploitation, depletion, and contribution
to the national economy. In the end, physical and monetary water accounts will be incorporated
into a national water accounting system.

       Integrate water valuation into RBMPs. Turkey is making concerted efforts to prepare
RBMPs for 25 river basins aligned with the EU-WFD, with the main goal of reconciling economic
development and ecosystem maintenance. In particular, the Turkish government prioritizes water
allocation planning in some river basins where increasing conflicts exist between competing water
uses. Water valuation could provide valuable knowledge in terms of the benefits from actual and
alternative uses as well as the costs of degradation, thus helping to prioritize problems and find
solutions for improved water management. Water valuation could also provide useful insights in
designing economic instruments (subsidies, taxes, and pricing mechanisms) to increase water
efficiency particularly in water stressed regions like Konya Closed Basin and in western basins
where water quality is low.

In Turkey, it is particularly important to conserve water and improve its allocation among different
uses. This study has demonstrated that water valuation is an important tool for improving water
management at both the river basin and national levels. However, to better understand the
valuation results and their policy implications in the implementation of the polluter pays principle,
pricing, and full cost recovery, as well as the efficient allocation of water resources by sector (and
more) further studies and consultations with stakeholders are needed.




                                                  56
                                         References
Abdalla, C. (1994). Groundwater values from Avoidance Cost Studies: Implications for Policy
and Future Research, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 76, No. 5, Proceedings
Issue pp. 1062-1067.

Access Economics. (2007). Measuring the Economic and Financial Value of the Great Barrier
Reef. Report, Access Economics PTY Ltd. For Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, 2005-
2006.

Alaş, A., Altındag, A., Yılmaz, M., Kırpık, M. and Ak, A. (2010) Feeding Habits of Tench
(Tinca tinca L., 1758) in Beyşehir Lake (Turkey), Turkish Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 10:1-2 (2010)

Aydogdu, M. (2016). Evaluation of willingness to pay for irrigation water: Harran plain
sampling in GAP region, Turkey. Applied Ecology and Environmental Research 14 (1): 349-
365.

Babaoğlu, M. (2007). Final Report of the Commission Established for Analysing the Beyşehir
Lake’s Problems and Measures

Barbier, E. B. (2007). Valuing ecosystem services as productive inputs. Economic Policy 22:
177–229.

Barbier, E.B. (2009). Ecosystems as natural assets. Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics,
4: 611–681.

Başar H. (2007). The Recreational Use and The Economic Value of Dilek Peninsula- Great
Meander Delta National Park by Travel Cost Method, Ministry of Environment and Forestry,
Directorate of Aegean Forestry Research, İzmir.

Beklioğlu, M., et al. (2014). 7th Framework Programme, REFRESH, Adaptive Strategies to
Mitigate the Impacts of Climate Change on European Freshwater Ecosystems, Collaborative
Project, Deliverable 5.2: Lake Beyşehir Modelling: final report

Bilgic, A., G. Eren and W. J. Florkowski. (2008). Willingness To Pay For Potable Water In The
Southeastern Turkey: An Application Of Both Stated And Revealed Preferences Valuation
Method. In 2008 Annual Meeting, February 2–6, 2008, Dallas, Texas. (No. 6755). Southern
Agricultural Economics Association.

Birdir, S. , Ü. Özlem, K. Birdir and A. T. Williams. (2013). Willingness to pay as an economic
instrument for coastal tourism management: Cases from Mersin, Turkey. Tourism Management
36 (2013) 279-283.

Birdlife International. (http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/sitefactsheet.php?id=765)



                                               57
Birol, E., K. Karousakis and P. Koundouri. (2006). Using a choice experiment to account for
preference heterogeneity in wetland attributes: The case of Cheimaditida wetland in Greece.
Ecological Economics 60: 145-156.

Birol, E., P. Koundouri, and Y. Kountouris. (2008a). Evaluating farmers’ preferences for
wastewater: quality and quantity aspects. International J. Water, Vol, 4, No. 1, 2008.

Birol, E., P. Koundouri, and Y. Kountouris. (2008b). Integrating Wetland Management into
Sustainable Water Resources Allocation: The Case of Akrotiri Wetland in Cyprus. Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management, Vol. 51, No. 1, 37-53.

Birol, E., N. Hanley, P. Koundouri and Y. Kountouris. (2009). Optimal management of
wetlands: Quantifying trade-offs between flood risks, recreation and biodiversity conservation.
Water Resources Research. Vol. 45.

Birol, E. P. Koundouri and Y. Kountouris. (2010). Assessing the economic viability of
alternative water resources in water-scarce regions: Combining economic valuation, cost-benefit
analysis and discounting. Ecological Economics 69 (2010) 839-847.

Birol, E., Karousakis, K., Koundouri, P., (2006). Using a choice experiment to account for
preference heterogeneity in wetland attributes: the case of Cheimaditida wetland in Greece. Ecol.
Econ. 60 (1), 145–156.

Blakemore, F. and A. Williams. (2008). British Tourists’ Valuation of a Turkish Beach Using
Contingent Valuation and Travel Cost Methods. Journal of Coastal Research. Volume 24, Issue
6: pp. 1469 – 1480.

Blakemore B., A Williams, C. Coman, A. Micallef and O. Unai. (2002). A Comparison of
Tourist Evaluation of Beaches in Malta, Romania and Turkey. World Leisure Journal. Volume
44, Issue 2, pages 29-41.

Brown, T. (2006). Trends in Water Market Activity and Price in the Western United States.
Water Resources Research 42: 1-14.

Bunch, J. (2004). Thirsty Aurora Inks $5.5 Million Water Pact. Denver Post. March 9, B1.

Can, Ö. and E. Alp. (2012). Valuation of environmental improvements in a specially protected
marine area: A choice experiment approach in Göcek Bay Turkey. Science of Total Environment
439, p. 291-298.

Chen, W., H. Hong, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Hou and M. Raymond. (2008). Recreation demand and
economic value: An application of travel cost method for Xiamen Island, China Economic
Review, Volume 15, Issue 4, p. 398-406.

Choe, K., D. Whittington and D.T. Lauria. (1996). “The Economic Benefits of Surface Water
Quality Improvements in Developing Countries: A Case Study of Davao, Philippines.” Land



                                               58
Economics, 72(4):519-537

Dehnhardt, A. (2015). The replacement value of flood plains as nutrient sinks: a case study of
the river Elbe. http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~carsonvs/papers/621.pdf

Demir, A. (2014). Recreational use value of Tuz Lake in Turkey. Journal of Food, Agriculture &
Environment Vol.12 (2): 1092 - 1096 .

Dixon, J.A., L.F. Scura, R.A. Carpenter and P.B. Sherman. (1994). Economic analysis of
environmental impacts. Earthscan. London.

DSİ, (www.dsi.gov.tr)

DSİ (2014). DSİ Activity Report 2014, Ankara.

DSİ (2015). DSİ Activity Report 2015, Ankara.

Dursun, S. (2010). Effect of Global Climate Change on Water Balance of Beyşehir Lake
(Konya-Turkey). Proceeding from BALWOIS 2010- Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia- 25-29 May
2010.

Esmaeili, A. and Z. Shahsavari. (2011). Valuation of Irrigation Water in South-Western Iran
Using a Hedonic Pricing Model. Applied Water Science 1: 119-124.

FAO (2004). Economic valuation of water resources in agriculture. From the sectoral to a
functional perspective of natural resource management. FAO Water Reports 27.

Fleming, C. and A. Cook. (2008). The recreational value of Lake McKenzie, Fraser Island: An
application of the travel cost method. Tourism Management Volume 29, Issue 6, December
2008, p. 1197-1205.

Franco, D., I. Mannino, E. Piccioni, L. Favero, E. Mattiuzo, G. Zanetto. (2008). The Total
Economic Value of wetlands in a European region.
http://www.danielfranco.org/pdf/vet%20gen.pdf

Gibbons, D.C. (1986). The Economic Value of Water. Resources for the Future. Washington
D.C.

Goulder, L. and D. Kennedy. (1997). Valuing ecosystem services: philosophical bases and
empirical methods. Washington D.C.

Göçmez, G., İşçioğlu, A., (2004). Konya Kapalı Havzası’nda Yeraltı Suyu Seviye Değişimleri,
Yeraltı suyunun Kullanımı, Problemler ve Çözüm Yolları, Yeraltı Suları Sempozyumu, 22–24
Aralık 2004, Konya, 9–18.




                                               59
Grafton R. Q., G. Libecap, S. McGlennon, C. Landry, and B. Obrien. (2011a). An Integrated
Assessment of Water Markets: A Cross-Country Comparison. Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 5(2): 219-239.

Grafton R. Q., G. Libecap, S. McGlennon, B. Obrien. and C. Landry. (2011b). A Comparative
Assessment of Water Market: Insights from the Murray-Darling Basin of Australia and Western
US. Working paper No. 8/2011. International Center for Economic Research.

Gürlük, S. (2005). The estimation of ecosystem services’ value in the region of Misi Rural
Development Project: Results from a contingent valuation survey. Forest Policy and Economics
9 (2006) 209– 218.

Gürlük, S. (2010). Economic Value of an Environmental Management Plan: Case of Uluabat
Lake. J. Biol. Environ. Sci, 4 (11), 59-65.

Gürlük, S. and E. Rehber. (2008). A travel cost study to estimate recreational value for a bird
refuge at Lake Manyas, Turkey. Journal of Environmental Management 88 (2008) 1350–1360.

Gürlük S. and E. Rehber. (2006). A Study on Environmental Valuation of the Lake Manyas,
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2009; 15 (1): 9-15.

Gürlük, S. and F. Ward. (2009). Integrated basin management: Water and food policy options for
Turkey. Ecological Economics 68 (2009) 2666–2678.

Gürlük, S. (2010). Economic Value of an Environmental Management Plan: Case of Uluabat
Lake, Journal of Biology and Environmental Scienes, (2010), 4 (11), 59-65.

Hansen, K., R. Howitt, and J. Williams. (2012). An Econometric Test of Water Market Structure
in the Western United States. Paper presented at the Allied Social Science Association Annual
Meeting, Chicago, IL.

Harpman, D. (2006). Exploring the Economic Value of Hydropower in the Interconnected
Electricity System. Economics Technical Report Number EC-2006 -03. U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation.

Holland, S. and M. Moore. (2003). Cadillac Desert Revisited: Property Rights, Public Policy and
Water Resource Depletion. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (1): 131-
155.

IPCC. (2014). Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A.
Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland.

Johansson, R. (2005). Micro and Macro-Level Approaches for assessing the value of irrigation
water. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3778, December 2005.




                                               60
Kakhki M.D., Shahnoushi N. and N. Khajehroshanaee. (2010). Valuation of Water and its
Sensitive Analysis in Agricultural Sector A Hedonic Pricing Approach. American Journal of
Agricultural and Biological Sciences 5 (1): 20-24.

Kahn, A. (1966). The tyranny of small decisions: market failures, imperfections and the limits of
economics. Kvklos 19: 23-47

Konya Commodity Exchange (2016). www.ktb.org.tr. Accessed in May 2016.

Konya Provincial Directorate of Agriculture (2015). Farm budget of irrigated lands for Konya.

KOP Authority and Ministry of Development (2014). KOP Action Plan, Konya.

Kovats, R.S., R. Valentini, L.M. Bouwe, E. Georgopoulou, D. Jacob, E.Martin, M. Rounsevell,
and J.-F.Soussana (2014). Europe in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, [Barros, V.R., C.B.Field,
D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada,
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L.
White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1267-1326.

Latinopoulos, P., V. Tziakas, and Z. Mallios. (2004). Valuation of Irrigation Water by the
Hedonic Price Method: a case study in Chalkidiki, Greece. Water, Air and Soil Pollution. Focus
4(4): 253-262.

Liu, J. (2007). Modelling Global Water and Food Relations – Development and Application of a
GIS-based EPIC Model. Diss. ETH No. 17069.

Loomis, J. (1992). The 1991 State of California Water Bank: Water Marketing Takes a Quantum
Leap. Rivers: 3(2): 129-134.

Mallios, Z. and P. Latinopoulos. (2001). Willingness to pay for irrigation water: a case study in
Chalkidiki, Greece. In: Lekkas, T. D. (ed.) Proceedings 7th International Conference on
Environmental Science and Technology, Ermoupolis, Greece.

Mallios, Z., A. Papageorgiu, D. Latinopoulous and P. Latinopoulous. (2009). Spatial Hedonic
Pricing Models for the Valuation of Irrigation Water. Global Nest Journal 11(4): 575-582.

Markandya, A. (2014). Economic principles and overview of valuation methods for
environmental impacts.
https://www.czp.cuni.cz/Vzdel/letni_skola/program/Markandya_Economic%20principles%20an
d%20overview%20of%20valuation%20methods%20for%20environmental%20impacts.pdf.

McConnell, K.E. and M.A. Rosado. (2000). Valuing Discrete Improvements in Drinking Water
Quality through Revealed Preferences. Water Resources Research 36 (6):1575-1582.



                                                61
Mendelsohn, R., and S. Olmstead. (2009). The economic valuation of environmental amenities
and disamenities: methods and applications. Annual Review of Environment and Resources
34:325–347.

Merlo, M. and L. Croitoru. (Eds.) (2005). Valuing Mediterranean Forests. Towards Total
Economic Value. CABI Publishing. p. 406.

Millenium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA). (2003). Ecosystems and Human Well-being: a
Framework for Assessment. Island Pres, Washington D.C.

Ministry of Development. (2014a).10th Development Plan, Ankara

Ministry of Development (2014b). 10th Development Plan Priority Transformation Programmes,
Ankara

Ministry of Development (2015). Main Indicators of Agriculture and Food, Ankara

Ministry of Environment and Forestry (2010). TUBİTAK-MAM, Konya Closed Basin
Protection Action Plan Final Report, Ankara

Mukherjee, M. and K. Schwabe. (2012). Valuing Access to Multiple Water Supply Sources in
Irrigated Agriculture with a Hedonic Pricing Model. Paper presented at the 2012 Agricultural
and Applied Economics Association Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA.

Nandagiri, J. (2015). Evaluation of Economic Value of Pilikula Lake using Travel Cost and
Contingent Valuation Methods. Aquatic Procedia 4 (2015) 1315 – 1321.

Nas, B., et all,. (2010). An Application of Landsat-5TM Image Data for Water Quality Mapping
in Lake Beyşehir, Turkey, Water Air Soil Pollut (2010) 212:183-197

Nauges, C. and D. Whittington. (2009). Estimation of Water Demand in Developing Countries:
An Overview. The World Bank Research Observer.

OECD (2010). Agricultural Water Pricing: Turkey. Erol Çakmak, Middle East Technical
University, Turkey. http://www.oecd.org/turkey/45016347.pdf

Ortaçeşme V., et al. (2001). An Estimation of the Recreational Use Value of Kursunlu Waterfall
Nature Park by the Individual Travel Cost Method.

Ozbafli, A. and G. Jenkins. (2013). Estimating the willingness to pay for reliable electricity
supply: a choice experiment study.

Ozdemir, F. Y. and T. Baycan-Levent. (2010). A Contingent Valuation Approach to
Community-based Watershed Management in Beyşehir Lake Basin. Conference Paper at the
50th Congress of the European Regional Science Association: "Sustainable Regional Growth and



                                                62
Development in the Creative Knowledge Economy", 19-23 August 2010, Jönköping, Sweden.

Pearce, D. and D. Moran. (1994). The Economic Value of Biodiversity. Earthscan. London.

Pendleton L, P. Atiyah and A. Moorthy. (2007). Is the non-market literature adequate to support
coastal and marine management. Ocean &coastal management, 2007, 50, 363-378.

Petrie, R. and L. Taylor. (2007). Estimating the Value of Water Use Permits: A Hedonic
Approach Applied to Farmland in the Southeastern United States. Land Economics: 83(3): 302-
318.

Sarraf, M., B. Larsen and M. Owaygen. (2004). Cost of Environmental Degradation. The Case of
Lebanon and Tunisia. June 2004.

Sahin, B., H. Yilmaz, Y. Ust, A. F. Guneri and B. Gulsun. (2009). An approach for analyzing
transportation costs and a case study. European Journal of Operational Research 193 (2009) 1-
11.

Scandizzo, P. and R. Abbasov. (2012). The Value of Water in the Greater Baku Area: an
Integrated Water Management Study, prepared for the World Bank.

Speelman, S., S. Farolfi, S. Perret, L. D'haese, M. D'haese. 2008. Irrigation Water Value at
Small-scale Schemes: Evidence from the North West Province, South Africa.

Stone, J.C. and D. Whittington. 1984. Industrial Water Demands. In Modelling Water Demands,
edited by J. Kindler and C.S. Russell. Academic Press, London, UK.

Strukova, E. 2011. Health Losses Associated With Inadequate WSSH In Bolivia. Prepared for
the World Bank.

The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB). 2010. The economics of valuing
ecosystem services and biodiversity. By Unai Pascual, Roldan Muradian (Coordinating Lead
Authors), TEEB.

Tabieh, M., E. Al-Karablieh, A. Salman, H. Al-Qudah, A. Al-Rimawi, T. Qtaishat. 2015.
Farmers’ Ability to Pay for Irrigation Water in the Jordan Valley. Journal of Water Resource and
Protection, 2015, 7, 1157-1173.

The Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (www.ramsar.org)

Tilmant, A., D. Pinte, and Q. Goor. 2008. Assessing marginal water values in multipurpose
multireservoir systems via stochastic programming. Water Resour. Res., 44, W12431,
doi:10.1029/2008WR007024.

Tolun, L., S. Ergenekon, S. Murat Hocaoglu, A. Suha Donertas, T. Cokacar, S. Husrevoglu, C.
Polat Beken, and A. Baban. (2012). Socioeconomic response to water quality: a first experience
in science and policy integration for the Izmit Bay coastal system. Ecology and Society 17(3):


                                                63
40.

Topcu S., (2011). Water for Agriculture: A Major and Inefficient Consumer, Turkey’s Water
Policy, National Frameworks and International Cooperation, Kibaroglu, Aysegul; Scheumann,
Waltina; Kramer, Annika (Eds.), Springer, 2011

Tsur, Y. (2004). Pricing Irrigation Water in Turkey. In: Tsur, Y., R. Terry, R. Doukkali and A.
Dinar (Eds.). Pricing Irrigation Water. Principles and Cases from Developing Countries. RFF
Press. Washington D.C.

TurkStat (2011) Gross Value Added Per Capita by Classification of Statistical Regional Units,
Level 2, 2004-2011.

TurkStat (2014a). Sectoral Water and Wastewater Statistics, (www.tuik.gov.tr)

TurkStat (2014b). Municipal Water Indicators, 2014, (www.tuik.gov.tr)

TurkStat (2014c). Address Based Population Registration System (www.tuik.gov.tr)

TurkStat (2015). Crop Production Statistics (www.tuik.gov.tr)

Turkstat (2016) Gross Domestic Product.
http://www.tuik.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=21511

Turner, K. and M. Schaafsma (Eds.) 2015. Coastal Zones Ecosystem Services. From Science to
Values and Decision World Bank. 2016. (forthcoming). The Cost of Environmental Degradation
in Morocco. Washington D.C.

TUSİAD (2008). Water Management in Turkey: Problems and Recommendations, 2008,
İstanbul

Um, M. J., Kwak, S. J., & Kim, T. Y. (2002). Estimating Willingness To Pay For Improved
Drinking Water Quality Using Averting Behavior Method With Perception Measure.
Environmental and Resource Economics, 21(3), 285–300.

UN, 2012, SEEA-Water, System of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water,
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division

Young, R. and J.B. Loomis. (2014). Determining the Economic Value of Water. Concepts and
Methods. Second Edition. RFF Press.

Wang, H., B. Laplante, X. Wu and C. Meisner. (2004). Estimating Willingness-to-Pay with
Random Valuation Models: An Application to Lake Sevan, Armenia. Estimating Willingness-to-
Pay with Random Valuation Models:An Application to Lake Sevan, Armenia. World Bank.
Washington D.C.




                                               64
World Bank (2007). Economic Value of Water and Policy Intervention in Hai Basin. China
Institute of Water Resources and Hydropower Research.

World Bank (2012). Cost of Environmental Degradation. Republic of Iraq. Ministry of
Environment.

World Bank (2014). Natural Capital Accounting for Sustainable Growth in Turkey: A Diagnostic
Note, Ankara.

World Bank (2015). Valuing Forest Products and Services in Turkey: a Pilot Study of Bolu
Forest Area. June 2015.

World Bank (2016). The Little Green Data Book. The World Bank. Washington D.C.

WWF-Turkey (2006). Socio-economic and Stakeholder Analysis of Konya Closed Basin,
Ankara.

WWF-Turkey (2010). Turkey’s Future: Identification of the impacts of climate change in Konya
and Göksu Basins, hydrological and agricultural modelling, Ankara.

WWW-Turkey (2014a). Water Footprint of Turkey, İstanbul.

WWF-Turkey (2014b) Konya’da Suyun Bugünü Raporu, İstanbul.




                                             65
                                                                                   Annex Table

                        Summary of economic valuation techniques and their applicability to different water uses
                                                                Applicability to different types
                                                                           of value

Valuation method                   Description                                          Option,                                     Examples of applications
                                                                Direct     Indirect
                                                                                        bequest
                                                                                          and
                                                                                       existence

INDIRECT TECHNIQUES

Residual method       Calculates the value of water as the        √                                To estimate the value of water for irrigation in Jordan (Tabieh et al. 2015), China (World
                      net income after all other relevant                                          Bank 2007) and South Africa (Speelman et al. 2008).
                      costs are accounted for.

Production function   Estimates the change in output from a       √           √                    To estimate the value of water for irrigation in Turkey (Tsur 2004; Gürlük and Ward 2009)
approach              unit increase in water input in a given                                      and China (Liu 2007); for irrigation and hydro-power generation in Turkey and Syria
                      sector.                                                                      (Tilmant et al. 2008); for irrigation, municipal and environmental uses in Turkey (Gürlük
                                                                                                   and Ward 2009); for industrial uses in Poland (Stone and Whittington 1984).

Hedonic price         Derives the value of water based on         √           √                    To estimate the value of water for irrigation in the United States (Petrie and Taylor 2007;
                      price differential paid for land with                                        Mukherjee and Schwabe 2012), Greece (Latinopoulos et al. 2004; Mallios et al. 2009), Iran
method                water resources                                                              (Esmaeili and Shahsavari 2011; Kakhki et al. 2010). To estimate the value of municipal water
                                                                                                   in Philippines (North and Griffin 1993). To estimate the impact of water quality on real estate
                                                                                                   value in Izmit Bay, Turkey. (Tolun et al. 2012). To estimate the flood risk reduction benefits
                                                                                                   of floodplains in the United States (Harrison et al. 2001; Schultz and Fridgen 2001)

Travel cost           Estimates the costs incurred in             √           √                    To estimate the recreational value of wetlands in the United States (Fleming and Cook 2008;
                      reaching a recreation site as a                                              China (Chen et al. 2008); India (Nandagiri 2015), Turkey (Gürlük and Rehber 2008; Demir
method                                                                                             2014; Blakemore and Williams 2008); Romania, Malta and Turkey (Blakemore et al. 2002).
                      proxy for the value of recreation.


Avertive              Costs incurred to prevent the effects       √           √                    To estimate the benefits of improved drinking water quality in Espirito State, Brazil
                      of reduced water quality                                                     (McConnel and Rosado 2000), South Korea (Um et al. 2002) and Turkey (Bilgic et al. 2008).
expenditures                                                                                       To estimate the costs associated to groundwater contamination in the United States (Abdalla
                                                                                                   1994) and Lebanon (Sarraf et al. 2004).




                                                                                            66
Cost of illness      Values an environmental change                 √                    To estimate the cost of treatment of water-borne diseases such as diarrhea and malnutrition
                     through its impact on illness (e.g.                                 in Morocco (World Bank 2016) and Iraq (World Bank 2012).
                     medicine, doctor, hospital bills)

Alternative cost     Estimates the cost savings from using                               To estimate the value of water for irrigation in the US (Holland and Moore 2003); for hydro-
method               an alternative to water (e.g. use of                                power generation in the United States (Harpman 2006) and for navigation in the United
                     thermal energy instead of water to                                  States (Gibbons 1986). Sahin et al. (2009) estimated the cost of alternative forms of
                     generate electricity)                                               transportation (road, railway, sea) in Turkey.

Replacement cost     Potential expenditures incurred in                     √            To estimate the value of flood plains as nutrient sinks in Germany (Dehnhardt 2015).
                     replacing restoring the function that is
                     lost.

Market-based         Derives the value of water based on            √                    To estimate the value of water for irrigation based on transactions of water rights in the
                     transactions of water rights.                                       United States (Loomis 1992; Bunch 2004; Brown 2006) and Australia (Grafton et al. 2011).
transactions
                                                                                         To derive the value of municipal water in the United States (Hansen et al. 2012), Australia
                                                                                         (Grafton et al. 2011b) and Chile (Anderson et al. 2012).

DIRECT TECHNIQUES

Contingent           It involves directly asking people, in a   √       √       √        To estimate the use value of recycled wastewater in agriculture in Cyprus (Birol et al.
                     survey, how much they would be                                      2008a) and of irrigation water in Chalkidiki rural area in Greece (Mallios and Latinopoulos,
valuation method     willing to pay for specific                                         2001) and to value residential water use in Perth, Australia (Thomas and Syme 1988). In
                     environmental services.                                             Turkey, it was used to estimate the WTP for irrigation water in Harran plain (Aydogdu
                                                                                         2016); for improved water quality of Beyşehir lake (Ozdemir and Baycan-Levent 2010); for
                                                                                         improved water clarity in Izmit Bay (Tolun et al. 2012); for conservation of forest and river
                                                                                         ecosystem in Misi area (Gürlük 2005); for estimating the recreational benefit of coastal
                                                                                         beach near Mersin (Birdir et al. 2013), and for estimating the TEV of benefits produced by
                                                                                         an environmental management plan for Uluabat Lake (Gürlük 2010). It has been used to
                                                                                         estimate also non-use values, such as biodiversity conservation in wetlands in Cyprus (Birol
                                                                                         et al. 2008b) and Lake Sevan in Armenia (Wang et al. 2004).

Choice Experiments   It asks people to make choices based       √       √       √        To estimate the WTP for different wetland functions, such as flood risk reduction,
                     on a hypothetical scenario; values are                              biodiversity conservation and improved recreational access in Poland (Birol et al. 2009),
                     inferred from the hypothetical choices                              biodiversity conservation in Greece (Birol et al. 2006); improved water quality, quantity
                     or tradeoffs that people make.                                      and biodiversity conservation in Cyprus (Birol et al. 2010); WTP for improved electricity
                                                                                         service in North Cyprus (Ozbafli and Jenkins 2013); and the WTP of local residents and
                                                                                         tourists to improve water quality and marine life in Göcek Bay, Turkey (Can and Alp 2013).




                                                                                    67
