                                       O V E R V IE W


Toward a Blue Economy: A Promise for
 Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean
Standard Disclaimer: This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement: The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all
of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-
750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/. All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-
2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.

Suggested Citation: Patil, P.G., Virdin, J., Diez, S.M., Roberts, J., Singh, A. (2016). Toward A Blue Economy: A Promise for
Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean; An Overview. The World Bank, Washington D.C.



Artist Statement

We refer to Mother Earth as our blue planet. Have you            The many images inside the globe suggest how full our
ever wondered why? We grow up looking at maps, and               oceans are. Our global ocean is full of life—coral reefs,
our eyes fix on the familiar, six continents full of countries   whales and sea turtles that drive tourism; and fish of all
with people, mountains, forests, and rivers. When we spin        shapes and sizes that feed billions. Yet, as we know, the
our desktop globes fast, however, a transformation takes         ocean—and its underlying value—is under threat from
place and the world spins blue!                                  climate change and other human-induced threats.

Our world is indeed a blue planet with over 70 percent of        The colors associated with each of the seventeen United
its surface covered by oceans and seas, our global ocean.        Nations Sustainable Development Goals, including the
Much of it is unknown and unexplored, a new frontier for         one for oceans, SDG14, surround our ocean-centered
discovery. Yet many things take place on and within the          globe. Our global ocean will likely be vital in their
ocean space, ranging from commerce and trade to fishing          achievement.
and leisure.
                                                         Through the magnifying glass we invite you to take a
Our cover art depicts our planet from the perspective of closer look at our global ocean and in particular at the
our major oceans, viewing our world bottom up and Caribbean Sea and its transformation toward a blue
centering on the Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica. economy.
What emerges is the shape of the world from our ocean-
centered view, which shows just how much blue covers
Earth.



Cover Credit: Helena Eitel, Pawan Patil, and Ocean Art Hub (www.oceanarthub.org)
                                                                                            O V E R V IE W
          REPORT NO: AUS16344
          SEPTEMBER 2016




                Toward a Blue Economy:
               A Promise for Sustainable
               Growth in the Caribbean
                                                  Pawan G. Patil
                                                   John Virdin
                                                Sylvia Michele Diez
                                                  Julian Roberts
                                                   Asha Singh




A CO L L A B O R AT I V E PA R T N E R SH I P


                                                                 Organisation of
                                                                 Eastern Caribbean States
The Growing
Ocean Economy
                     C
                                 overing more than two-thirds of the planet, the global ocean is
                                 fundamental to human well-being. It provides seafood and oth-
                                 er nutrition essential for more than a billion people.1 Its shipping
                                 routes connect countries and communities around the world. Sub-
                                 marine cables that cross its floor carry 90 percent of the electronic
                     traffic on which communications rely. The ocean regulates the earth’s climate,
                     producing oxygen that we breathe and absorbing man-made emissions of
                     carbon dioxide. Ecosystems such as coral reefs help protect coastal commu-
                     nities from storm surge and wave damage, while mangroves, sea grasses, and
                     salt marshes are significant natural carbon sinks.2

                     Estimates of the ocean’s contribution to the world economy range from US$1.5
                     trillion to US$3 trillion a year, about 3-5 percent of all economic activity in the
                     world.3 Driven by a growing global population and the need for new sources
                     of growth, the ocean is becoming more and more an economic frontier, a
                     dynamic three-dimensional environment where resources are rich and varied
                     and shift from depths to surface or migrate over long distances.

                     Traditional economic activity of the ocean is projected to continue to rise—
                     seaborne trade by 3 to 4 percent annually to 2030, global tourism by almost
                     4 percent annually to 2025.4 At the same time, the ocean is spawning a host
                     of emerging industries, such as offshore wind, tidal, and wave energy; aqua-
                     culture (the “farming” of fish and other seafood); seabed mining; and marine
                     biotechnology, the making of drugs from saltwater life forms. Some of these
                     industries are already quite visible. Turbines can be seen harnessing the winds
                     off growing numbers of coastlines; their capacity has risen from practically
                     nothing twenty years ago to more than 7 gigawatts today, with projections
                     suggesting ten times that volume by 2050.5 All in all, OECD projections show
                     ocean-based industries as a group outperforming the growth of the global
                     economy in the years ahead, doubling their contribution to GDP by 2030.


                                                                 Growth in Ocean
                                                                 Economy




                                                                 Declining Health of
                                                                 Ocean Environment




                     1	   IPPC 2013, FAO 2014a.
                     2	   United Nations 2016.
                     3	   Global Ocean Commission 2014a and Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2015.
                     4	   OECD 2016.
                     5	   Ibid.




Photo Credit: OECD    TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                       SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN                                5
                                      Ocean                                   But the promise of this growth is accompanied by
                                                                              mounting threats to the ocean environment. Already
                                                                              construction has reshaped coastlines across the globe in
                                                                              recent decades, filling in wetlands and wiping out crucial
                                                                              ecosystems such as mangrove forests and reefs. Growing
          Enviromental Health                            Economic Bene ts     volumes of plastic and untreated sewage have polluted
                                                                              coastal waters. Some 29 percent of the fish stocks as-
                                                                              sessed are considered by the Food and Agriculture Orga-
                                                                              nization (FAO) as overfished. Ocean ecosystems that are
                                                                              so vital to the livelihoods of so many people—about 38
                                                                              percent of the world population now lives within 100 ki-
                                 Blue Economy                                 lometers of saltwater—have been changed in ways that
                                                                              threaten to reduce their benefits to future generations.

Now this threat has given rise to a new concept or framework for action to reduce the risks: the transition of the
current ocean economy to a “blue economy” with “blue growth.” This vision foresees even higher numbers of peo-
ple making their livings from the ocean but in ways that protect its resources and ecological integrity. Economic
activities will be balanced to promote a sustainable, healthy ocean that can benefit not only the people directly
using it, but indirectly the entire population of the world. If economic activities are managed in this way, the ocean
holds the potential to make a much greater contribution to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The effort will
also increase the resilience of low-elevation communities that face the threats of sea-level rise and other impacts of
climate change. In essence, the transition to a blue economy involves shifting from the long-standing conventional
wisdom of focusing on the costs of protection to instead recognizing the benefits of its ecosystems, incorporated as
part of the measures of sustainable growth. The blue economy concept recognizes that while only some activities
in the ocean economy depend on the status of the underlying ecological systems (such as fishing), all have the
potential to degrade them (such as shipping, off-shore oil production and seabed mining). Therefore, the impact
of all ocean economy activities on the underlying ecosystems need to be minimized or else jobs and economic
growth depending on the living resources will be put at risk.

The Caribbean Sea




    Gulf of Mexico




                                                                            Caribbean Sea




Source: Transboundary Water Assessment Programme 2015.




                            TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
          6                 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
The Caribbean
This report examines how the transition to a blue economy might transform the 37 countries and territories
that share the Caribbean Sea.6 At 2.75 million square kilometers, the Caribbean Sea covers less than 1 percent of
the world’s ocean area, but it is a crucial resource in the Caribbean, in particular for the 40 million people who
inhabit its small island states. Indeed, for some of those countries, the ocean and the national economy are all
but indistinguishable.

The hypothesis of this report is that the Caribbean Sea’s ecosystems and natural resources form a unique asset
for the region’s countries and territories, and that understanding and measuring the economic activity that is
tied to this “natural capital” asset is essential for sustainably growing the region’s economies.

The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012: A Snapshot*
                                                                                                                                    INDICATIVE ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES (US$
                                                                                                                                         BILLIONS IN 2012 U.S. DOLLARS)
       TYPE OF                                                                               ECONOMIC SECTOR/
                                         OCEAN SERVICE
       ACTIVITY                                                                                  INDUSTRY
                                                                                                                                    ISLAND STATES                      MAINLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                             TOTAL
                                                                                                                                   AND TERRITORIES                     COUNTRIES

                                                                                   Fisheries                                                    0.37                          4.62            5.0
                                 Seafood
 Harvesting of                                                                     Aquaculture                                                  0.04                          1.86            1.90
 living resources
                                                                                   Pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and                                                                            n.a.
                                 Marine biotechnology                                                                                           n.a.                           n.a.
                                                                                   others

                                 Minerals, sand, and gravel Seabed mining                                                                        n.a.                          n.a.           n.a.
 Extraction
 of nonliving                                                                      Oil and gas                                                  5.64                         34.25            39.9
 resources,                      Energy
 generation of                                                                     Renewables (marine)                                           n.a                           n.a.           n.a
 new resources
                                 Freshwater                                        Desalination                                                  n.a                           n.a            0.2

                                                                                   Shipping                                                      n.a                           n.a           311.3
                                 Transport and trade
 Commerce,                                                                         Port infrastructure and services                              n.a                           n.a            n.a
 tourism, and
 trade                                                                             Tourism                                                      47.1                           n.a            47.0
                                 Tourism and recreation
                                                                                   Coastal development                                           n.a                           n.a            n.a

                                                                                   Blue carbon (that is, coastal
                                 Carbon sequestration                                                                                           0.02                          0.07            0.09
                                                                                   vegetated habitats)
 Indirect
 contribution                    Coastal protection                                Habitat protection, restoration                               n.a                           n.a            1.5*
 to economic
 activities and                  Waste disposal for land-                          Assimilation of nutrients, solid                              n.a                           n.a            n.a
 environments                    based industry                                    waste

                                 Existence of biodiversity                         Protection of species, habitats                               n.a                           n.a            n.a

 TOTAL                                                                                                                                         53.17                                         407.0
Note: * Detailed notes on the estimates of the Caribbean ocean economy can be found in the full report.
** Average of estimated value over the time period 2000 to 2050 has not been adjusted to 2012 U.S. dollars.*




6	   The full list is Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Domi-
     nica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Mexico, Montserrat, Nicaragua, Panama, Puerto Rico, St. Barthelemy, St.
     Eustatius, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Maarten, St. Martin, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, U.S. Virgin Islands, and República Bolivariana de Venezuela.




                                                                                                                                           OVERVIEW                         7
Countries across the eastern Caribbean in particular have suffered a series of setbacks in recent years. These
include the erosion of trade preferences and official foreign assistance; turbulence in the business cycles of
their most important partners in tourism and foreign direct investment; and recurrent natural disasters, such
as Hurricane Ivan in 2004 and the Haiti earthquake of 2010. With greater clarity on how to make the transition
towards blue economies, these countries can also gain greater resilience to external shocks.

For now, the region’s ocean economy is not well measured or well understood. Best estimates suggest that
Caribbean waters generated revenues of US$407 billion in 2012, while the area contains just 1 percent of
the global ocean. This consists almost entirely of market-based activities, since the non-market values of many
ecosystem services are not easily valued monetarily. These revenues are dominated by the value of ocean
cargo shipped through Caribbean waters (considered part of the ocean economy supported by the Caribbean
Sea), by tourism, and by oil and gas production. For the island states and territories, gross revenues generated
in 2012 directly from the ocean economy totaled about US$53 billion, mainly from ocean transport, tourism,
and oil and gas production.7 Capture fisheries have declined slightly in recent years, and aquaculture has risen
slightly.8

Underpinning the region’s ocean economy is a three-faceted base of natural capital: living resources such
as fish, non-living resources such as minerals, and ecosystems and ecosystem processes in which living and
non-living ocean assets interact as a functioning unit, such as tourism around coral reefs. Each region of the
world has a different mix of natural capital. Here are the key elements in the Caribbean:

           ■■ Living resources 
                               that become catch for the region’s fishing fleets include the spiny lobster, the queen
              conch, panaeid shrimps, reef fish, deep slope and bank fish, coastal large pelagic species, such as king
              mackerel, and offshore large pelagic species such as yellowfin tuna.

           ■■ Non-living  resources include significant reserves of oil and gas in waters under the jurisdiction of
              República Bolivariana de Venezuela, Colombia, and Trinidad and Tobago. A number of countries in
              the region, including the Bahamas and Barbados, are exploring for oil. Concerning valuable minerals,
              to date there is little evidence that the Caribbean seabed has significant deposits that could be com-
              mercially mined.

           ■■ Ecosystems and ecosystem processes 
                                                 refer  to the highest level of species diversity in the tropical At-
              lantic. The Caribbean is a global hotspot of marine biodiversity, notably in the 220 kilometer-long
              MesoAmerican Reef system.9 An estimated 0.35 percent of the Caribbean’s large marine ecosystem
              is covered by mangroves (shrubs and small trees that thrive in saline or brackish water)10 and 0.64
              percent by coral reefs.11




7	    World Bank 2016.
8	    FAO 2014d.
9	    Roberts et al. 2002 and Miloslavich et al. 2010.
10	   U.S. Geological Survey.
11	   Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme 2015.




                          TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
          8               SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Threats to the Caribbean Sea’s Natural Capital
As economic activity in the world’s oceans continues to grow, all three of these forms of capital are already heav-
ily drawn down. This has led the world community to respond and set one of the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, SDG 14 for ocean conservation and sustainable use, adopted by the UN General Assembly in September
2015. At the same time, countries and institutions around the world have increased efforts to better safeguard
ocean ecosystems. For example, the World Bank increased its active investment portfolio in projects aiming to
increase the ocean’s natural capital to some US$6.4 billion by 2015, with support for sustainable fisheries and
aquaculture rising from practically zero in 2004 to almost US$1 billion by 2015. Still, much remains to be done.
In 2016 UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon underlined the continuing threat with a warning that “the oceans’
carrying capacity is near or at its limit” and that “urgent action on a global scale” is needed to protect them.12


Growth in the World Bank’s Investments in the Ocean’s Natural Capital
                      Sustainable Fisheries, Aquaculture and                           Active Sustainable Fisheries & Aquaculture Portfolio, incl. ICZM (IBRD/IDA/GEF)
                              Habitat Conservation                               800
                                   US$1 billion                                  700
                                                                                 600
                                                                                 500
                                                                 (Million USD)




                                                                                 400
                                                                                 300
                                                                                 200
                                                                                 100
                                                                                  0
                                       US$5.4 billion                                  FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14
                            Pollution Reduction E.g. watershed                             GEF Fisheries  Governance & mgt, marine Fisheries     Other
                            management, coastal infrastructure
                                                                                           Aquaculture    Integrated coastal zone mgt & planning


The Caribbean Sea’s natural capital is being changed in particular by three human-driven trends, all of which
are occurring in the context of rising greenhouse gas emissions and emerging impacts of climate change, such
as ocean acidification and higher sea surface temperatures.


Fishing effort (Caribbean Sea)
                      250M

                      200M
E ective e ort (Kilowatt)




                      150M

                      100M

                            50M

                             0M
                              1950                     1960                            1970                    1980                1990                   2000
                                                                                                       Years
Source: Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme 2015.



12	 United Nations 2016.




                                                                                                                                          OVERVIEW                  9
                          Overfishing: According to the FAO, the catch of the region’s fishing industry declined from 430,000 metric tons
                          in 1998 to below 300,000 in 2010.13 This reflects not a deliberate wind-down but overexploitation: Even though
                          fishing activity has increased in recent years, yields declined. In addition, fishing has caused extensive damage
                          to corals and depleted certain herbivore species, leading to overgrowth of algae on coral reefs throughout the
                          Caribbean.

                          Coastal development: Coastal population has grown throughout the region in recent decades, with over 41
                          million people now living within 10 kilometers of the sea, and some 166 million within 100 kilometers.14 Tour-
                          ists come to the region largely for sea-related attractions, resulting in mass construction of waterside resorts,
                          marinas, and other visitor facilities. This growth has placed tremendous pressure on coastal ecosystems as con-
                          struction crews clear natural habitats, fill in wetlands, and dig waterways for better access to the sea. In addition,
                          the number of people visiting reefs and swimming in the water has increased. About 75 percent of the region’s
                          reefs are considered to be at risk from human activity;15 many of the mangrove forests that once lined most
                          Caribbean coasts have already been devastated.


Caribbean Mangrove Coverage




Source: Mapping Ocean Wealth http://oceanwealth.org/



                          Pollution: Agricultural runoff and untreated sewage have done major damage in the region; an estimated 85
                          percent of wastewater entering the Caribbean Sea is untreated.16 These flows deliver excess nutrients for algae,
                          which crowd out other life forms to create “dead zones.” Marine trash is another pollutant: An estimated 0.16
                          to 0.42 million metric tons of plastic entered the sea in 2010. This number is projected to increase gradually to
                          0.29–0.79 million per year by 2025 as the population grows.17 Other unwelcome intruders in the region’s waters
                          consist of invasive species such as the Indo-Pacific Lionfish, competing with native species and changing coral
                          reef ecosystems.18

                          Taken together, these trends impose a significant risk on the growth of the region’s ocean economy. The de-
                          cline of marine natural capital may hold back entire sectors and industries from their full potential. As coastal
                          construction and pollution degrade coral reefs and beaches, international tourists may choose to go elsewhere,
                          taking their spending with them. Depleted fish stocks threaten the incomes of the crews of fishing boats and
                          workers at fish processing plants in the home ports.


                          13	   Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme 2015.
                          14	   Burke and Maidens 2004.
                          15	   Ibid.
                          16	   UNEP-CEP 2010 and Corbin, Daniel, and Vogeley 2014.
                          17	   Jambeck et al. 2015.
                          18	   FAO 2011.




                                                       TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                                   10                  SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
The goal, then, is to decouple economic growth from environmental decline.

Decoupling Economic Growth and Degradation of the Caribbean Sea
  8
                                                         Plastic marine debris
  7                                                      GDP Wider Caribbean Region
  6                                                      Island tourism
    5
    4
    3
                                                                                      Shoreline protection lost due to coral reef degradation
    2
                                                                                      Cumulative mangrove loss
    1
    0
        2010             2011              2012           2013   2014   2015   2016
Source: Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme 2015.




Toward a Blue Economy
The concept of a “green economy” and “green growth” has gained wide currency in the world in recent de-
cades. Common policy recommendations for this type of growth focus on better efficiency, new technologies,
new markets, and the boosting of investor confidence. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
has featured a number of diverse “green economy success stories” worldwide, including urban planning in
Brazil, organic agriculture in Uganda, green infrastructure in rural India, and ecosystem service payments in
Ecuador.19

As the concept gained prominence before the Rio+20 summit, UNEP and a group of partners proposed to ap-
ply it to the ocean, envisaging a “blue economy.” At the summit, this concept emerged in disparate discourses
on the human-marine relationship, describing the ocean as natural capital—a “good business” resource and
a source of small-scale fishing livelihoods. There followed a number of national strategies and international
summits on the blue economy. There is still no single accepted definition of the term, but the Economist Intel-
ligence Unit defined the concept like this: “A sustainable ocean economy emerges when economic activity is
in balance with the long-term capacity of ocean ecosystems to support this activity and remain resilient and
healthy.”20

In the blue economy, ecological systems such as fish stocks, coral reefs, beaches, and mangrove forests are
recognized as underlying and sometimes invisible assets which help support the more visible produced capital
(machinery and structures) and intangible capital (skills and expertise with which labor is applied).21 This view
does not dismiss the intrinsic values of these ecological systems, nor does it suggest that their economic values
are of greater priority. Rather, the goal in applying the blue economy concept as a lens is to emphasize the
connection between the ocean’s ecological systems and the human activity that takes place in the ocean
economy. The concept recognizes that some activities in the ocean economy depend on the underlying eco-
logical systems (the natural capital), while all have the potential to degrade them.

Increasingly, policy frameworks seek to simultaneously expand the natural and the produced capital of the
ocean. The blue economy concept essentially provides a lens through which to measure, identify, and en-
courage opportunities, for a net benefit to the aggregate ocean economy and environment, consistent with
principles of social equity and with a priority on poverty reduction.




19	 Sukhdev, Stone, and Nuttal 2010.
20	 Economist Intelligence Unit 2015.
21	 World Bank 2006, 2012b.




                                                                                                     OVERVIEW                    11
A Conceptual Framework for the Blue Economy
A conceptual framework explains graphically the main factors to be studied and the presumed relationships
among them, creating intellectual “bins” for a collection of discrete events and behaviors.22

It illustrates the inputs to the ocean economy from underlying natural capital, the outputs from that economy
which affect the levels of this natural capital, and the flow of benefits the economy can sustainably provide.
Many of these natural capital assets are renewable and, if properly managed, can yield a sustained flow of
benefits. For example, fish stocks are a living resource for the production of seafood in the ocean economy.
Ocean economic activities provide outputs on the ecosystems, for example, construction and expansion of
ports, marinas, harbors, or shipping channels that alter sea grass beds and mangroves.23


The Blue Economy—A Conceptual Framework



                                                             The Ocean Economy




            Seafood         Marine       Energy      Transport       Tourism and    Carbon        Coastal      Waste      Biodiversity’s
                         biotechnology               and trade        recreation sequestration   protection   disposal   existence value


                      Inputs                                                                                       Outputs         Policy
                Flow of Material                                                                                Flow of Materials Reforms
                & Services over                              Natural capital assets                              & Impacts over
                     time                                                                                             time


                                                                                                                          = Change
                                                                                         Ecosystems
                                                                                         &Ecosystem
                                          Living Resources       Non living Resources     Processes



This conceptual framework aims essentially to capture the value of changes in the natural capital assets togeth-
er with changes in economic activity. It allows measurement of net benefit to society, consistent with notions
of an economy where material flows to and from an industry are circular. Such interactions happen horizontally
between different sectors of the ocean economy, and between different ecosystems of the ocean; they also
happen vertically between the economic sectors and ecosystems, which in aggregate affect the outcomes of
the blue economy.

The conceptual framework also helps to analyze specific aspects of the human-ocean relationship, for instance,
waste disposal.

The diagram below shows circular interaction, with outputs in the form of waste disposal impacting ecosys-
tems such as coral reefs, beaches, and water quality, which are inputs or factors of production for the tourism
sector. While the value of the waste disposal segment has not been quantified, it is well established that the
tourism sector depends heavily on healthy ocean ecosystems as an input. Thus investment in responsible waste


22	 Miles and Huberman 1994.
23	 OECD 2016.




                        TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       12               SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
disposal systems will have multiple benefits for a nation's
economy as well as environment: improved sanitation, The Blue Economy Conceptual Framework:
preservation of ecosystems, and a general safeguarding Tourism, Waste Disposal, and Ecosystems
of the natural capital that enables tourism.
                                                                                     The Ocean Economy
There are many other ways in which smart economic
and environmental policies can blend together to cre-                              Tourism and       Waste
ate positive outcomes for both people and nature. For                               recreation      disposal
example:
                                                                     Inputs                                    Outputs
         ■■ 
            Fish  caught through sustainable fishing prac-             Ha of                                    Flow of
             tices bear an eco-label that commands a price          ecosystems                                 Pollutants
                                                                     (e.g. coral        Natural capital        over time
             premium at retail stores, allowing fishers to         reefs), water            assets
             remain in business and recoup the higher cost            quality             Ecosystems &
             of their environmentally responsible catch                                    Ecosystem
             methods.                                                                       Processes

         ■■ 
            Shellfish are grown in aquaculture farms rath-
             er than being caught in the wild, enhancing
             coastal water quality and natural stocks; as valuable seafood, they generate jobs and raise GDP.

         ■■ 
            Offshorewind and other marine renewable energy systems employ local people and light their
             homes while reducing carbon fuel emissions and making minimal impact on the environment.

         ■■ 
            Green   hotels built on a coastline save the natural life that grows at water’s edge and provide lodging
             that brings in more business from tourists.

         ■■ 
            Coastal communities are “fortified” against flooding, not by constructed barriers but by restoration of
             mangrove forests, an approach that may be three to five times cheaper than breakwaters.

Before implementation, each policy like this could be measured as the net present value of the change in the
entire blue economy, charging costs to the inputs from or outputs to the natural capital over time. This tool
would give policy makers a means of judging whether the economic returns from a proposed step to grow the
ocean economy justify the investment costs in a given context (including the changes to natural capital assets),
in comparison to business as usual.

Many coastal nations have already introduced a mix of sector- and industry-specific policies to guide economic
activities in the ocean. Increasingly countries are working together to develop integrated cross-border policies
to safeguard the underlying ecosystems they share, including coordinated actions by government agencies.
Building from these experiences, policies that promote a blue economy can increase the net present value of
the entire economy in a given ocean space.

Policies for the transition to a blue economy would be developed based on coastal and marine spatial plan-
ning, with the oceans envisaged as “development spaces.” This planning is a public process for allocating ocean
uses over space and time to achieve specific economic, ecological, and social objectives.24 In the same way
that land zoning regulates land uses, coastal and marine spatial planning can create ocean zoning, with maps
categorizing marine space for particular uses. A recent review of spatial planning all over the world noted 59
ocean plans in preparation or completed as of mid-2014. Case studies of five of the plans found a total US$310
million in new economic value, largely through offshore wind development in the northern United States and
Belgium. Among other things, the plans help to reduce conflicts between different ocean users, such as wind
energy developers and fishers. For example, fishers gained protection of key fishing grounds from wind farms
or other uses.25




24	 Ehler and Douvere 2007.
25	 Blau and Green 2015.




                                                                                             OVERVIEW            13
Raising the Financing Needed for the Transition
Some form of the conceptual framework suggested above could generate valuable tracking metrics and in-
dicators for both economic growth and sustainability of natural capital. These metrics could leverage greater
investment in the blue economy by giving greater confidence to potential investors. Modeling of scenarios
might suggest the future direction or magnitude of change in the transition towards a blue economy. The net
present value of sector output at a given point in time from each of the ocean economy’s sectors, together
with measures of natural capital assets, could be aggregated into a “Blue Economy Index.”

Clear ocean investment principles could help ensure that financing meets both economic and environmental
objectives, consistent with internationally accepted principles on equity and social justice, and with a priority on
poverty reduction. There is precedent for this: over 70 percent of international project finance debt in emerg-
ing markets comes from 83 banks and organizations committed to the Equator Principles, a risk management
framework for incorporating environmental and social considerations into finance.26

The box that follows lays out ten ocean investment principles for consideration in the region.


   Principles for Investment in a Caribbean Blue Economy

   Principle 1: Sustainable Development/Sustainable Livelihoods. Marine ecosystems are crucial to
   delivering goods and services that underpin the livelihoods of millions of people by contributing to food
   security, poverty eradication, income, employment, health, safety, equity, and political stability. Use of
   marine resources must be aligned to optimize the well-being of people today and in perpetuity.
   Principle 2: Marine Ecosystem Health. The diversity, productivity, and core functions of marine ecosys-
   tems must be maintained and protected with a goal of recovering natural levels of the natural capital
   upon which prosperity depends.
   Principle 3: Integrated Ocean Governance. Planning and managing human activities should proceed
   in a comprehensive manner that considers all factors necessary for the conservation and sustainable
   use of marine resources and the shared use of ocean spaces. The objective is a governance system that
   provides incentives to private and public sector leaders to support a healthy ocean and community
   well-being.
   Principle 4: Science-based, Precautionary, and Adaptive Decision Making. Ocean management deci-
   sions should be based on the best available information on the natural, social, and economic processes
   that affect ocean and coastal environments. When reliable information is not available, decision makers
   should proceed cautiously, seek to develop such knowledge, and refrain from activities that could lead
   to harmful effects. Adaptive management allows decision makers to respond to new information.
   Principle 5: Duty of Care and Accountability. All users of the marine environment should act responsi-
   bly and be transparent about their actions’ impacts on the environment.
   Principle 6: Inclusive and Transparent Decision Making. Full stakeholder awareness and participation
   contributes to credible, accepted rules that identify and assign responsibilities appropriately. Making
   decisions in a transparent and accountable manner will minimize disputes and promote international
   cooperation. For the blue economy to succeed, partnerships must be forged between government, the
   private sector, and civil society to ensure co-responsibility for ocean management.
   Principle 7: Ecosystem-Based Management. There is a need to move away from the current sector- and
   species-based approaches. The region needs marine spatial planning and networks of marine protected
   areas, and other area-based management measures to promote biodiversity conservation. These
   processes must be participatory, accountable, transparent, equitable, and inclusive, so as to meet present
   and future human needs, including the needs of minorities and the most vulnerable groups in society.
   Principle 8: Ocean Solutions that will Reduce Climate Change Risks and Allow the Development
   of Climate Change-Related Opportunities. Sustainable energy is fundamental to the transition to a
   low-carbon economy and sustainable development globally. It is critical to ensuring progress in areas
   such as food, water, health, gender equality, and poverty alleviation.


26	 http://www.equator-principles.com/




                        TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       14               SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
   Principle 9: Sharing of Benefits Derived from the Blue Economy. The benefits from use of common
   ocean resources and the responsibilities for their continued health and productivity should be shared by
   all citizens. Governments should oversee marine resource use with the interests of the whole community
   and intergenerational equity in mind.
   Principle 10: The Right to Development. Human development in harmony with the environment is
   fundamental to the achievement of sustainable development. The value of the resources provided by
   the oceans must be recognized and opportunities for their economic development optimized to meet
   society’s needs and promote the well-being of coastal communities.




As another example of the role of finance, the Seychelles recently highlighted the role that capital can play in
the blue transition, with an agreement that allows the country to redirect a portion of debt payments from
Paris Club creditors to fund ocean conservation. That work includes creation and management of more than
400,000 square kilometers of new marine protected areas in collaboration with the NatureVest arm of The
Nature Conservancy.27

In recent years, various small island states around the world have championed the blue economy in a number
of international forums, putting forward a position paper for the Summit in Apia in 2014, for example. Seychelles
has created a Ministry of Finance, Trade and the Blue Economy, and neighboring Mauritius has developed a
roadmap for the ocean economy in 2013, orienting the country’s growth strategy around development of its
2.3 million square kilometers of ocean space.28 In late 2014 Indonesia’s President Joko Widodo proposed a poli-
cy to make his country a “global maritime axis.”29 Similarly, the Commonwealth is helping developing countries
work to derive more GDP from ocean sectors and increase marine sources of protein.30


The Caribbean States Join In
Joining in this trend is a growing number of Caribbean states. On April 13, 2015, extensive discussion took
place at the inaugural Caribbean Region Dialogue with the G20 Development Working Group, conducted at
International Monetary Fund headquarters in Washington, D.C. Attending the dialogue were finance ministers
and central bank governors from the region, discussing what a blue economy could contribute toward broad-
er policy objectives such as poverty reduction, food security, energy security, disaster risk reduction, climate
change mitigation, and ocean conservation.

Transitioning to a blue economy in the Caribbean will require policies that treat the ocean as a unique “devel-
opment space,” shaped by its ecology. Such polices would be developed through marine spatial planning that
generates maps to categorize sea area for particular uses, in some cases translating into ocean zoning. One
barrier to development of blue economy policies is the fragmented nature of ocean governance in the Carib-
bean. More than 30 regional and sub-regional organizations have some role, implementing a diverse collection
of multilateral agreements, projects, and national laws.31

In efforts toward order and consistency, governments and development partners have launched a number
of regional initiatives concerning the Caribbean Sea’s natural capital. Since 2009, the UN Development Pro-
gramme has been implementing the Caribbean Large Marine Ecosystem project to better assess the status
of ecological systems and the region’s natural capital and support policy recommendations for conservation.
In 2013, nine Caribbean states and territories signed the Caribbean Challenge Initiative Leaders Declaration,
committing to conserve and manage at least 20 percent of the marine and coastal environment by 2020.32 They
also laid plans for sustainable financing mechanisms for the long term. Coverage of marine protected areas,




27	http://www.nature.org/newsfeatures/pressreleases/debt-swap-to-finance-marine-conservation-in-the-seychelles.xml
28	 Mauritius Prime Minister’s Office 2013.
29	http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/12/30/maritime-axis-development-boost-ri-s-gdp.html#sthash.ifwdCRi8.dpuf
30	 Roberts 2015.
31	Ibid.
32	Ibid.




                                                                                                                      OVERVIEW   15
meanwhile, has been growing, from just 6,463 square kilometers in 1983 to 143,096 square kilometers in 2014,
or some 4 percent of the Caribbean Sea.33

At the sub-regional level, members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States adopted in 2013 a policy
framework for the blue economy in their geographical area. It is known as the Eastern Caribbean Regional
Oceans Policy and Action Plan. At the national level, a number of states have introduced policies to support
the transition, such as the Bahamas’ integrated policy framework that aims for coordinated management of its
ocean space across some 34 different government bodies. St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
and Antigua and Barbuda have also introduced their own programs.


Case Study: Grenada
                                           CARRIACOU                              Grenada stands out for a set of policies it introduced in
                                                                                  2014 to develop the blue economy as the pillar of the
                 Caribbean Sea                                                    country’s future growth. Indeed, the country is setting
                                                                                  an example for how a small island nation can translate
                                                                                  aspirations into action.

                                                                                  As with many Caribbean states, Grenada’s economy and
                                                                                  history have been shaped by its small land mass (just 345
                                                                                  square kilometers and three major islands), limited nat-
                                                                                  ural resources, fragile ecosystems, and vulnerability to
                                                                                  storms. In 2004 Hurricane Ivan destroyed 90 percent of
                                                        Caribbean Sea             the properties in Grenada;34 the country has spent dearly
                                                                                  in ensuing years to repair the damage.

                                                                                  As of 2014, Grenada had a population of 106,000, with a
                    GRENADA                                                       gross national income per capita of US$7,910.35 Growth
                                                                                  has been sluggish in recent years. Unemployment
                                                                                  stands at 10 percent, and among youth it is three times
                                                                                  that level. The official poverty rate is 38 percent.

                                                        Agriculture was historically a core of Grenada’s economy,
                                                        but today it employs only about 11 percent of the labor
force and continues to decline. In the past quarter century, tourism has emerged as the main driver of growth,
rising from 15 percent of GDP in 2005 to 26 percent in 2015.36 In promotional campaigns, the country now styles
itself as “Pure Grenada: The Spice of the Caribbean.”

With beaches, coral reefs, pristine waters, and an active underwater volcano known as Kick Em Jenny, Grenada
has become an important destination for cruise ships. Thousands more visitors fly into its modern international
airport. Many visitors come for sunbathing, swimming, diving, sailing, and other water sports. Away from the
shorelines, Grenada offers charming historic towns, hill hiking, and a wide variety of restaurants. Bringing in the
annual equivalent of about US$230 million as of 2015, tourism has already created numerous benefits to the
island’s people, including greater economic stability, improved health care, and better education. While overall
economic growth is stuck at moderate rates, the tourism industry is projected to continue expanding.

Even as it struggled in recent years to rebuild after Hurricane Ivan, Grenada had been turning in a green di-
rection. It established plans for an energy system that will be 100% renewable by 2030, using geothermal,
waste-to-energy, wind, and solar resources.37 A fuel levy has put a price on carbon and given the government
some much-needed extra revenues.38 Concerning climate change, Grenada has committed to do its part
by reducing its greenhouse emissions by 30 percent of 2010 levels by 2025. It has adopted a “Climate Smart


33	 Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme 2015.
34	 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. http://www.cepal.org/en/headquarters-and-offices/eclac-caribbean
35	 World Bank 2014.
36	 World Travel and Tourism Council.
37	 Statement by Dr. The Right Honourable Keith Mitchell at plenary meeting of the UN Summit for the Adoption of the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
38	Ibid.




                         TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       16                SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Agriculture” policy. Arboreal crops such as nutmeg and other spices can sequester carbon and make a vital
contribution to soil and watersheds. They are also drought resistant.

Grasping the importance of the ocean in the future pros-
perity of its people, Grenada in 2014 become the first
country in the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States to
develop a detailed vision for blue growth as the country’s
future. In May that year, its government announced a com-
prehensive set of blue projects and policies.39 The goal is to
optimize the country’s coastal, marine, and ocean resourc-
es to become a world leader and international prototype
for blue growth and sustainability. Coordinating this trans-
formation is a National Ocean Governance Committee that
includes senior officials from key ministries and authorities.

Much of the program aims to safeguard the natural won-
ders that draw tourists to Grenada. With coastal devel-
opment and pollution threatening its reefs, Grenada has
committed to set up marine protected areas by 2020 to
conserve at least 25 percent of its near-shore marine area
and at least 25 percent of its land. Other efforts include community-based ecosystem adaptation, in particular
coral restoration, mangrove rehabilitation, and programs to help some citizens into alternative livelihoods. A
Blue Growth Coastal Master Plan, bolstered by workshops and stakeholder inputs, lays out the future direction
of development.




                                                                                                               Photo Credit: Raymond Moldenhauer




The proposed plan provides for a sustainable mix of projects to spread economic activity across the three main
islands, including marinas, boutique resorts, hiking trails on Mount Saint Catherine (Grenada’s tallest peak), and
retirement communities for local people and expatriates. A new airport on the northern island Carriacou would
allow tourists to fly there directly from foreign countries. A “high-tech knowledge center” near St. George’s Uni-
versity and the country’s main airport would court international investors; a “medical tourism” hospital would
help foreigners coming to Grenada for treatment of health problems.40


39	http://nowgrenada.com/2014/05/pm-grenadas-blue-economy-poised-rapid-growth/
40	 Grenada Blue Growth Coastal Master Plan. Grenada Blue Growth Coastal Master Plan.




                                                                                        OVERVIEW        17
                                                                                                           Photo Credit: Raymond Moldenhauer
Before it can proceed, each project must be rigorously vetted for its environmental implications and must fit
into the plan’s larger vision. The government is encouraging investment both through public-private ventures
and solely private ones.

Other elements of the blue initiative target the open seas of Grenada’s exclusive economic zone, which at
26,000 square kilometers is a full 75 times larger than the country’s land area.

Special attention is going to commercial fishing in the zone, which is dominated by large pelagic species such
as tuna. Fishing has long been a major earner of foreign exchange. Unlike other Eastern Caribbean countries,
Grenada has a successful high-value seafood export business, which sells fish to the United States and nearby
Martinique, a department of France. Development at the village of Gouyave, headquarters of Grenada’s fishing
industry, is aimed at strengthening the industry’s future prospects. A special insurance program would protect
small-scale fishing enterprises against the increasing disaster risks of climate change.




                TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     18         SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Emerging opportunities for the exclusive economic zone include wind energy, marine biotechnology,
ocean-related tourism, and aquaculture. Grenada is part of the Global Blue Growth Network, which strives to
better protect the marine environment and produce an additional 60 million tons of fish through sustainable
aquaculture by the year 2030.41

To help advance the transition in other parts of the region, Grenada also aims to establish a Blue Growth and
Oceans Governance Institute. It will house representatives from many of the leading global ocean research
centers and promote the country’s vision to optimize coastal, marine, and ocean resources internationally. One
special point of oceanic research is the underwater volcano, which affords special opportunities for volcanolo-
gy observations. Concerning international cooperation, Grenada has joined with Dominica and Marshall Islands
to promote a new initiative called “We Are the Oceans,” inspired by the United Nations Global Goals. The goal
is to educate youth across the world about ocean sustainability and make it part of every school’s curriculum
by 2030.

The potential of Grenada’s transition is significant. It will require governance and policies that integrate envi-
ronmental and economic concerns. Trade-offs will be inevitable where, due to limited space, the simultaneous
conduct of all proposed activities is not feasible. Financing will be key. To create a favorable environment for
that, Grenada organized Blue Week 2016 to promote investment in island states and least developed countries.
The gathering focused on integrating ocean health and wealth and bringing together ocean-related invest-
ment into a coherent package of bankable projects to increase the benefits for small island nations.


Policy Priorities for the Move to a Blue
Economy in The Caribbean
The current state of play in the Caribbean suggests a number of interrelated priorities for policies that could
carry the region toward a blue economy, guided by ocean principles:

Develop and strengthen regional and national policies to better integrate the governance framework for the
Caribbean Sea. The existing policy framework for ocean governance in most developing Caribbean states re-
mains highly balkanized. Conflicts between competing interests within individual countries is likely to increase.
Clear, coordinated mechanisms for integrated coastal and ocean management, implemented across relevant
sectors such as fisheries, tourism, transport, energy, and environment will be essential to resolve these conflicts.
With regard to tools, coastal and marine special planning is particularly important for establishing geographical
zones of sea uses within a given area and for protecting ecosystems. The Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean
Policy is a good step toward integrated ocean governance within the region.

Implement policies for a healthy, resilient, and productive marine environment in the Caribbean. Policies
should explicitly reflect the principle that both the general economy and the livelihood of coastal communities
depend on the health of the oceans. For Caribbean countries, maintaining the coral reefs and associated biodi-
versity is of particular importance to tourism and fisheries.

Provide education and raise awareness about the blue economy. Many small Caribbean states have chronic
gaps in the skills of marine research, planning, and decision making. Professional training programs will need
to shift gears to meet this demand. In the population at large, basic education about the ocean’s role in future
prosperity will raise awareness and create political will for the needed change.

Ensure maritime surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement. In many countries, illegal fishing by neighboring
states is a key concern. Small Caribbean states need enhanced capabilities for identifying threats to their mar-
itime space in a timely manner. They will achieve these by sharing and integrating intelligence, surveillance,
and navigation systems into a common operating picture. Regional cooperation on these issues will optimize
limited resources. For example, satellite-based remote sensing platforms can monitor large areas of ocean in
near real time, supported by innovative tracking and analysis tools.


41	 Statement by Dr. The Right Honourable Keith Mitchell at the Interactive Dialogue 4 “Protecting our Planet and Combating Climate Change” Trusteeship Council Chambers on
    September 27, 2015.




                                                                                                                               OVERVIEW                      19
Build the infrastructure for a blue economy. Improved coastal and port infrastructure is a critical asset for eco-
nomic growth and development in Caribbean small states. Once constructed, it must be protected, notably
from flooding and sea surges, given its frequent siting near sea level. Fortifying these assets can be expensive;
a more affordable approach often involves restoring natural barriers to reduce the hazards of flooding and
erosion.

Support research and development for a blue economy. R&D supports sustainable economic growth and job
creation, as well as informed governance and regulation of the marine sector. At present, the region suffers
from a general paucity of data relating to its waters. States would do well to buttress their own data collection
and also to access the hydrographic/bathymetric surveys, biological samplings, and environmental characteri-
zations conducted by the numerous international research vessels that cross the Caribbean Sea.

Support business development and sustainable finance. The region’s countries need policies to promote in-
vestment in existing blue economy enterprises and in new ones. In the island states, the greatest potential for
value addition and job creation may be in small- and medium-sized enterprises within the blue economy value
chains. Finance for start-up, capacity growth, and technology development will be crucial for these firms.

The diagram below demonstrates how these policies could fit together with ocean principles to facilitate
change.



                                                     Governance for a Blue Economy
        Ocean Principles for Investment in a Caribbean Blue Economy              Policy Instrument     Policy Instrument
                                                                                       Design               Delivery
       Principle 1: Sustainable Development/Sustainable Livelihoods
       Principle 2: Marine Ecosystem Health                                         Policies for          Education and
                                                                                    Integrated            Awareness
       Principle 3: Integrated Ocean Governance                                     Ocean                 Maritime
       Principle 4: Science-based, Precautionary, and Adaptive Decision Making      Governance            Surveillance,
       Principle 5: Duty of Care and Accountability                                 Policy                Monitoring and
                                                                                    objectives for a      Enforcement
       Principle 6: Inclusive and Transparent Decision Making                       healthy,              Infrastructure
       Principle 7: Ecosystem-based Management                                      resilient, and
                                                                                    productive            Research and
       Principle 8: Develop Ocean Solutions that will Reduce Climate Change         marine                Development
       Risks and Allow the Development of Climate Change-Related Opportunities      environment           Business
       Principle 9: Sharing of Beneﬁts Derived from the Blue Economy                                      Development
       Principle 10: The Right to Development                                                             and Sustainable
                                                                                                          Finance


                                               Direction of time from design to delivery




                    TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     20             SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
To get the policy process started, the region might consider the following approach:


  Proposed Approach to Begin the Transition toward a Caribbean Blue Economy

  Measure.
         ■■ Improve the statistical and methodological base for measuring the scale and performance of
             the ocean economy.
         ■■ Establish natural capital accounts for the Caribbean Sea at the national and regional levels.

  Manage.
         ■■ Create and expand integrated approaches to ocean governance.

         ■■ Apply marine spatial planning at the scale of exclusive economic zones.

         ■■ Invest in restoration and maintenance of the function and integrity of critical marine
             ecosystems.
         ■■ Build and strengthen the institutional and human capacity to act.

  Invest.
         ■■ Promote ocean principles to guide investment in the blue economy.

         ■■ Advance key infrastructure investments.

  Monitor.
         ■■ Continue to enhance knowledge of the Caribbean Sea.

         ■■ Expand maritime domain awareness of the Caribbean Sea.

         ■■ Track key indicators of the transition to a blue economy.

  Repeat.
         ■■ Keep close track of actions and progress and adjust as needed.




Creating a blue economy in the Caribbean will require major investments of capital and political will and take
decades to complete. But sticking with a business-as-usual approach risks the continued decline of a body of
water that boasts not only great beauty but mammoth economic potential. The World Bank stands ready to
work with governments and other actors to help bring the people of the Caribbean the full benefits of the blue
economy.




                                                                                     OVERVIEW           21
Glossary of terms
  OCEAN ECONOMY          The economic activities that take place in the ocean, receive outputs from the
  a.	 Ocean Service      ocean, and provide inputs to the ocean (Park and Kildow 2014)
  b.	 Economic             a.	 Economic activity of the ocean economy that provides benefit to people
      Sector/ Industry     b.	 Specific area or group of companies in the ocean economy

                         The total available biophysical stock of natural resources in the ocean, for
  OCEAN’S NATURAL        example, fish stocks, minerals and energy resources, mangrove forests, and so
   CAPITAL ASSETS        on (Narloch, Kozluk, and Lloyd 2016)
  a.	 Living Resources     a.	 Renewable stocks of natural resources that are harvested for use, such as
  b.	 Nonliving                fisheries
      Resources            b.	 Nonrenewable stocks of natural resources harvested for use, such as
  c.	 Ecosystems               minerals from the seabed
      and Ecosystem        c.	 The interaction between the living and nonliving environment as a func-
      Processes                tioning unit (for example, coral reef ecosystems, mangrove ecosystems,
                               and others) (MEA 2005)

  OCEAN POLICIES         The policies that affect the health and wealth of the ocean

                         A sustainable ocean economy, where economic activity is in balance with the
                         long-term capacity of ocean ecosystems to support this activity and remain
   BLUE ECONOMY          resilient and healthy (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015). This report illustrates
  a.	 Blue Economy       how the Caribbean basin can grow its “ocean economy” into a more sustainable
      Framework          “blue economy.”
  b.	 Blue Economy          a.	 blue economy conceptual framework
      Indicators            b.	 indicators of ocean sustainability are described in the report, and can be
  c.	 Blue Growth                used to measure blue growth.
                            c.	 Blue growth is the means by which an unsustainable ocean economy can
                                 transition towards a more balanced and sustainable one


                         An operational policy agenda to foster economic growth and development in
   BLUE ECONOMY          ocean spaces, while ensuring that the ocean’s natural assets continue to provide
 POLICY FRAMEWORK        the resources and environmental services on which human well-being relies
  a.	 Coastal and        (OECD 2011)
      Marine Spatial       a.	 A public process of analyzing and allocating ocean uses over space and
      Planning                  time to achieve economic, ecological, and social objectives (Ehler and
                                Douvere 2007)




              TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
  22          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
