Toward a Blue Economy: A Promise for
 Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean
Standard Disclaimer: This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement: The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all
of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-
750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/. All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-
2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.

Suggested Citation: Patil, P.G., Virdin, J., Diez, S.M., Roberts, J., Singh, A. (2016). Toward A Blue Economy: A Promise for
Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean; An Overview. The World Bank, Washington D.C.



Artist Statement

We refer to Mother Earth as our blue planet. Have you ever        The many images inside the globe suggest how full our
wondered why? We grow up looking at maps, and our                 oceans are. Our global ocean is full of life—coral reefs,
eyes fix on the familiar, six continents full of countries with   whales and sea turtles that drive tourism; and fish of all
people, mountains, forests, and rivers. When we spin our          shapes and sizes that feed billions. Yet, as we know, the
desktop globes fast, however, a transformation takes              ocean—and its underlying value—is under threat from
place and the world spins blue!                                   climate change and other human-induced threats.

Our world is indeed a blue planet with over 70 percent of         The colors associated with each of the seventeen United
its surface covered by oceans and seas, our global ocean.         Nations Sustainable Development Goals, including the
Much of it is unknown and unexplored, a new frontier for          one for oceans, SDG14, surround our ocean-centered
discovery. Yet many things take place on and within the           globe. Our global ocean will likely be vital in their
ocean space, ranging from commerce and trade to fishing           achievement.
and leisure.
                                                         Through the magnifying glass we invite you to take a
Our cover art depicts our planet from the perspective of closer look at our global ocean and in particular at the
our major oceans, viewing our world bottom up and Caribbean Sea and its transformation toward a blue
centering on the Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica. economy.
What emerges is the shape of the world from our ocean-
centered view, which shows just how much blue covers
Earth.



Cover Credit: Helena Eitel, Pawan Patil, and Ocean Art Hub (www.oceanarthub.org)
          REPORT NO: AUS16344
          SEPTEMBER 2016




                Toward a Blue Economy:
               A Promise for Sustainable
               Growth in the Caribbean
                                                  Pawan G. Patil
                                                   John Virdin
                                                Sylvia Michele Diez
                                                  Julian Roberts
                                                   Asha Singh




A CO L L A B O R AT I V E PA R T N E R SH I P


                                                                 Organisation of
                                                                 Eastern Caribbean States
Acronyms and abbreviations
CCI	
    Caribbean Challenge Initiative
CLME	
     Caribbean Large Marine Ecosystem
CMSP	
     Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning
CRFM	
     Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism
CRIFF	
      Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility
DOWA	
     Deep Ocean Water Applications
ECROP	
      Eastern Caribbean Regional Oceans Policy and Action Plan
EEZ	
    Exclusive Economic Zone
EIA	
    U.S. Energy Information Administration
FOSP	
     Future Ocean Spatial Planning
GDP	
    Gross Domestic Product
GEF	
    Global Environment Facility
GNI	
    Gross National Income
IEA	
    International Energy Agency
ICT	
    Information and Communication Technology
IUU	
    Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported
MPA	
    Marine Protected Area
MSP	
    Marine Spatial Planning
NPV	
    Net Present Value
OECD	
     Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECS	
     Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
SDG	
    Sustainable Development Goal
SIDS	
     Small Island Developing States
TEU	
    Twenty Foot Equivalent Units
UN	
   United Nations
UNDP	
     United Nations Development Programme
UNEP	
     United Nations Environment Programme
UNFCCC	
       UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
UWI	
    University of the West Indies
WATO	
     We are the Oceans
WTTC	
     World Travel and Tourism Council




              TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     4        SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Glossary of terms
 OCEAN ECONOMY          The economic activities that take place in the ocean, receive outputs from the
 a.	 Ocean Service      ocean, and provide inputs to the ocean (Park and Kildow 2014)
 b.	 Economic             a.	 Economic activity of the ocean economy that provides benefit to people
     Sector/ Industry     b.	 Specific area or group of companies in the ocean economy

                        The total available biophysical stock of natural resources in the ocean, for
OCEAN’S NATURAL         example, fish stocks, minerals and energy resources, mangrove forests, and so
 CAPITAL ASSETS         on (Narloch, Kozluk, and Lloyd 2016)
 a.	 Living Resources     a.	 Renewable stocks of natural resources that are harvested for use, such as
 b.	 Nonliving                fisheries
     Resources            b.	 Nonrenewable stocks of natural resources harvested for use, such as
 c.	 Ecosystems               minerals from the seabed
     and Ecosystem        c.	 The interaction between the living and nonliving environment as a func-
     Processes                tioning unit (for example, coral reef ecosystems, mangrove ecosystems,
                              and others) (MEA 2005)

 OCEAN POLICIES         The policies that affect the health and wealth of the ocean

                        A sustainable ocean economy, where economic activity is in balance with the
                        long-term capacity of ocean ecosystems to support this activity and remain
 BLUE ECONOMY           resilient and healthy (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015). This report illustrates
 a.	 Blue Economy       how the Caribbean basin can grow its “ocean economy” into a more sustain-
     Framework          able “blue economy.”
 b.	 Blue Economy          a.	 blue economy conceptual framework
     Indicators            b.	 indicators of ocean sustainability are described in the report, and can be
 c.	 Blue Growth                used to measure blue growth.
                           c.	 Blue growth is the means by which an unsustainable ocean economy
                                can transition towards a more balanced and sustainable one


                        An operational policy agenda to foster economic growth and development
  BLUE ECONOMY          in ocean spaces, while ensuring that the ocean’s natural assets continue to
POLICY FRAMEWORK        provide the resources and environmental services on which human well-being
 a.	 Coastal and        relies (OECD 2011)
     Marine Spatial        a.	 A public process of analyzing and allocating ocean uses over space and
     Planning                   time to achieve economic, ecological, and social objectives (Ehler and
                                Douvere 2007)




                                                                                                   5
Table of contents
Acronyms and abbreviations	                                                                           4
Glossary of terms	                                                                                    5
Foreword	10
Acknowledgments	12
Overview	13
Executive summary	                                                                                   14
CHAPTER 1. THE GROWING OCEAN ECONOMY	                                                                18
   1.1	 The Global Ocean Economy	                                                                    19

   1.2	 The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean	                                                          25


CHAPTER 2. THE OCEAN’S DECLINING NATURAL CAPITAL	                                                    32
   2.1	 Overview of the Status of the Global Ocean’s Natural Capital	                                33

   2.2	 Overview of the Status of the Natural Capital Assets of the Caribbean Sea	                   35


CHAPTER 3. ALIGNING THE TWO TRENDS - THE POTENTIAL FOR A BLUE
ECONOMY IN THE CARIBBEAN SEA	                                                                        40
   3.1	 Two trends	                                                                                  41

   3.2	 The Concept of a ‘Blue Economy’	                                                             42

   3.3	 A Blue Economy Conceptual Framework	                                                         44

   3.4	 A Caribbean Blue Economy: Aligning Economic Growth and Ocean Health	                         49

   3.5	 Case Study: Grenada: Translating Aspiration to Action in Its Transition to a Blue Economy	   53


CHAPTER 4. PATHWAY AND APPROACH FOR THE TRANSITION TO A CARIBBEAN
BLUE ECONOMY	                                                     60



              TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
    6         SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Annex 1. Summary of OECD Projections for Growth in the Ocean Economy	                            69
Annex 2. Detailed Description of Proposed Ocean Principles	                                      70
Annex 3. Contribution of the Blue Economy to Selected SDGs and Some of
Their Targets	                                                                                   72
Annex 4. Grenada’s Blue Growth Coastal Master Plan	                                              75
Reference List	                                                                                  86

Boxes
Box 2.1. Sustainable Development Goal 14 Summary:	                                               34
Box 3.1. Definition of the Concept of the Blue Economy	                                          43
Box 3.2. Position Paper on the Blue Economy for the 2014 SIDS Summit	                            47
Box 3.3. Tourism and the Ocean Ecosystems	                                                       50
Box 3.4. Blue Growth Sector: Marine Renewable Energy	                                            51
Box 3.5. Transforming Governance in Oceans - The OECS Experience	                                52
Box 4.1. Ocean Principles for Investment in a Caribbean Blue Economy 	                           62
Box 4.2. Proposed Approach to Begin the Transition toward a Caribbean Blue Economy	              67
Box A4.1. Three Stages of Development of Phase 1 Planning Process 	                              76



Figures
Figure 1.1. The Ocean Economy	                                                                   22
Figure 1.2. The Portion of the Ocean Economy Measured by Markets	                                23
Figure 1.3. Ocean Area under Jurisdiction of Low and Lower – Middle-Income Countries (in red)	   24
Figure 1.4. The Caribbean Sea	                                                                   25
Figure 1.5. The (Measurable) Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012 is Dominated by Shipping,
Tourism, and Oil and Gas Industries	                                                             29
Figure 2.1. Growth in the World Bank’s Portfolio of Investments in the Ocean	                    34
Figure 2.2. Stock Status of Commercially Exploited Fish Stocks in the Caribbean Sea	             35
Figure 2.3. Distribution of Fishing Effort in the Wider Caribbean	                               36




                                                                                             7
Figure 2.4. Mapping Ocean Wealth Calculations of Caribbean Mangrove Coverage	                      37
Figure 2.5. Mapping Ocean Wealth Example of Coastal Protection Benefits of Coral Reefs in Jamaica	 37
Figure 2.6. Annual Catch (Caribbean Sea)	                                                          38
Figure 2.7. Fishing Effort (Caribbean Sea)	                                                        38
Figure 3.1. Two Parallel Trends in the Global Ocean	                                               41
Figure 3.2. Global Fisheries: Decoupling growth in economic activity and overexploitation	         41
Figure 3.3. Decoupling Economic Growth and Degradation of the Caribbean Sea	                       42
Figure 3.4. Blue Economy Concept 	                                                                 43
Figure 3.5. A Blue Economy Framework	                                                              45
Figure 3.6. Proposed Blue Economy Policy Framework for Aligning Ocean Health and
Economic Growth	                                                                                   46
Figure 3.7. Example of the Blue Economy Conceptual Framework: Tourism, Waste Disposal, and
Ecosystems	50
Figure 3.8. Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean Policy 	                                              52
Figure 3.9. Map of Grenada	                                                                        53
Figure 3.10. Growing Tourism Sector	                                                               54
Figure 3.11. Grenada Exclusive Economic Zone	                                                      55
Figure 3.12. Grenada Underwater Sculpture Park	                                                    56
Figure 3.13. Tourism in Grenada	                                                                   57
Figure 4.1. Potential Policy Framework for a Caribbean Blue Economy 	                              62
Figure 4.2. Summary of Potential Policy Framework for a Caribbean Blue Economy 	                   66
Figure A4.1. Stakeholder Meetings	                                                                 76
Figure A4.2. Blue Growth Designated Areas	                                                         77
Figure A4.3. Potential Projects Within Each Sector	                                                77
Figure A4.4. Marine Tourism	                                                                       78
Figure A4.5. Blue Growth Economic Opportunties	                                                    78
Figure A4.6. Blue Growth Centers of Excellence	                                                    79
Figure A4.7. Blue Growth Incentive Zones	                                                          80
Figure A4.8. Blue Growth Strategic Projects.	                                                      81
Figure A4.9. Blue Growth vision for St. George’s Harbor	                                           81
Figure A4.10. Blue Growth Vision and Architectural Character	                                      82
Figure A4.11. Blue Growth Vision and Architectural Character	                                      82
Figure A4.12. Blue Growth Vision and World Trade Center	                                           83
Figure A4.13. Strategic Projects	                                                                  83




Tables
Table 1.1. The Ocean Economy: Component Parts and Future Trends	                                      20
Table 1.2. Estimates/Citations of the Contribution of the Global Ocean Economy	                       23
Table 1.3. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012: A Snapshot	                                    26
Table 1.4. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean: Future Trends	                                         30
Table 2.1. Country and/or Island Territory level Estimates of Plastic Marine Debris: 2010 and 2025	   39
Table A1.1. OECD Projections of Changes in the Ocean Economy to 2030 under Business as
Usual Scenario	                                                                                       69




                TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     8          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Foreword

S
          nce Rio+20 the blue economy has gained momentum across the globe, and the Caribbean region
          i
          seems poised to embark on a pathway toward sustainable blue growth. More and more coastal and
          island nations are looking at the ocean as the next frontier for economic development. By harness-
          ing the marine and coastal resources, Caribbean countries could not only boost growth, but also
          tackle some of the key challenges faced by these economies, including high unemployment, low
growth, food security, poverty, and resilience to climate change.

 ith the region’s growing population, demand for seafood and therefore aquaculture production will in-
W
crease, shipping traffic and tourism will continue to grow, and new ocean industries will emerge. At the same
time, the ecological processes of the sea are changing significantly due to human activities—overfishing,
poorly planned coastal development, land-based sources of pollution (plastic entering the sea and untreated
effluent), etc. The two overarching trends in the Caribbean Sea, growing ocean economy and declining ocean
health, led ministers to inquire about the blue economy concept at last year’s G20 Development Committee
dialogue with Caribbean finance ministers and central bank governors.

n response, Toward a Blue Economy: A Promise for Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean will serve as a guide to
I
help Caribbean policymakers plan a successful transition to a blue economy and to socially equitable ‘blue
growth.’ This report attempts to quantify the current value of the ocean economy in the region and to sum-
marize projections about where we may find new pockets of sustainable growth. It defines the blue economy
concepts and possible policy responses that might better align economic growth and environmental health
in the Caribbean. At a global level, the transition to a blue economy will significantly contribute to achieving
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14 for the ocean and to realizing goals such as poverty reduction, food
security, energy security, and climate change mitigation, among others.

 he World Bank is supporting this important agenda for the Caribbean. We hope that this report will help
T
policymakers identify smart approaches to harnessing the ocean and all its natural assets. It can enable the
sustainable use of ocean resources for the well-being of Caribbean countries and serve as a model to other
regions pursuing the same efforts.

                                                                                            Sophie Sirtaine
                                                               
                                                               World Bank Country Director for the Caribbean




                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     10          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
T
            e world counts 54 ocean-facing coastal and island nations with lower and lower-middle income
           h
           levels. For these countries, the ocean represents a significant jurisdictional area and a source of
           opportunity for future growth. Yet that potential is both under threat, and underutilized.

            he impacts of overfishing, coastal development, pollution and climate change are being felt by
           T
           coastal communities around the world. The oceans will soon contain a ton of plastic for every
four tons of finfish. At the same time, countries are looking to the ocean as a new frontier for food security,
poverty reduction, and economic growth. We have a double imperative: to restore ocean health, and adopt
innovative, sustainable and inclusive policies for blue growth.

 hat dual goal is captured in Sustainable Development Goal 14 on ocean conservation and sustainable use,
T
which guides our efforts at the World Bank. We see restoring the health of marine and coastal economies
as a priority to bolster people’s ability to earn a living, feed their families, protect themselves from extreme
weather, and thrive. We provide data and analysis to inform investment in the blue economy, including in the
sustainable fisheries, aquaculture, and nature-based tourism sectors. We work with public agencies and fisher
cooperatives to design and implement good policies. And we support stronger governance regimes, with a
particular emphasis on protecting the rights of small-scale fishers and their supply chains.

 he ocean economy is projected to grow rapidly as the global population reaches 9.6 billion, which it is pre-
T
dicted to do by mid-century, as countries increasingly draw on the sea for food, energy, medicines and other
products and services. Unless things change, they will also increasingly use it as the ultimate end-point for
waste materials. Putting the ocean economy on a more sustainable footing is particularly vital in Caribbean
countries and territories, where people’s culture, livelihoods and very lives are defined by the ocean.

 oward a Blue Economy: A Promise for Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean proposes a framework to better un-
T
derstand the magnitude of benefits derived from the Caribbean Sea and discusses policy options to move
the region toward a blue economy. By assessing the ocean space’s vast economic potential, this report is a call
to better manage the marine and coastal assets on which so many people and economies depend.

 he World Bank can help the Caribbean and other regions to unlock ocean wealth in a way that sustainably
T
contributes to growth and returns long-term benefits to communities and countries. Moving toward a blue
economy is a promise for inclusive and sustainable growth for our clients across the Caribbean, and beyond.

                                                                                              Julia Bucknall
                                                                                       cting Senior Director,
                                                                                      A
                                                           Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice




                                                                                                      11
Acknowledgments
T
           is report, Toward a Blue Economy: A Promise for Sustainable Growth in the Caribbean was prepared
          h
          by a multi-institutional team led by Pawan G. Patil, Senior Economist at the World Bank Group in
          collaboration with John Virdin, Director of Ocean Policy at Duke University’s Nicholas Institute for
          Environmental Policy Solutions; Julian Roberts, Advisor on Ocean Governance at Commonwealth
          Secretariat; Asha Singh, Head of Ocean Governance at Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS) during the preparation of this report and Sylvia Michele Diez, Environmental Specialist, Latin America
& Caribbean Region at the World Bank.

 he team is grateful to the participants of the G20 Working Group on the Caribbean Blue Economy who were
T
consulted during the preparation of the report. The team also acknowledges the vision of Ambassador Dr.
Angus Friday and the contributions of Ray Moldenhauer, Director of RM Strategies, who organized meetings
and brainstorming sessions with the Government of Grenada on visioning their Blue Economy. We also thank
participants of Grenada’s Blue Week, whom provided valuable feedback. The report benefited from the re-
search assistance from Tibor Vegh and contributions of Sunzhe Cao, Geoffrey Cooper, Julia Lewis and Prof.
Jay Golden at the Duke Center for Sustainability and Commerce, as well as Daniel Dunn and Jesse Cleary, all
from Duke University Nicholas School of the Environment; Robert Brumbaugh, Mark Spalding, Zach Ferdana
from The Nature Conservancy; and to Peter Kristensen, Lead Environmental Specialist, Africa Region, World
Bank and Emilia Battaglini, Lead Environmental Specialist, Europe and Central Asia Region, World Bank who
served as peer reviewers. The team appreciated valuable insights, inputs, and/or support from Carter Bran-
don, Alessandro Legrottaglie, Sabine Hader, Francisco Galrao Carneiro, Cecile Thioro Niang, Kseniya Lvovsky,
Raha Shahidsaless, Christelle Chapoy, Flore de Préneuf, Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep, Keiko Ashida, Juliana Isaza,
and Helena Eitel, our Dickey Center Summer intern from Dartmouth College, among others who are also
acknowledged with thanks.

 he work was carried out with the multi-institutional support of Sophie Sirtaine, Country Director for the
T
Caribbean Region, Paula Caballero and Julia Bucknall, former and Acting Senior Director of the Environment
and Natural Resources Global Practice, respectively and Raul Alfaro-Pelico, Practice Manager, Environment
and Natural Resources Global Practice, all of The World Bank; Tim Profeta, Director of the Nicholas Institute for
Environmental Policy Solutions at Duke University; Dr. Didacus Jules, Director General, Organization of Eastern
Caribbean State; and Deodat Maharaj, Deputy Secretary General, Commonwealth Secretariat.

 e would like to especially thank Jorge Familiar Calderon, World Bank Vice President, Latin America and Ca-
W
ribbean Region for launching the full report at the 2016 Annual Meeting during a flagship Seminar specifically
designed to share the report's findings with delegations seeking to understand what the blue economy is
and why it matters.

 he report was formally edited by John Virdin, Duke University and Pawan G. Patil, World Bank. Any errors in
T
the report, factual or otherwise are the sole responsibility of the core multi-institutional team members and
editors.




                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     12          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Overview
O
             ur global ocean covers more than seventy-two percent of the earth’s surface and is respon-
             sible for providing food, jobs, and recreation for a large portion of the world’s population; it
             has become a significant driver of global GDP.1 Our oceans drive economic activity, responsible
             for eighty percent of global trade and thirty-two percent of hydrocarbons extracted for energy
             needs. Oceans provide for both domestic and international tourism for almost 200 countries
and overseas territories. The contribution of the ocean economy to global value added has recently been
estimated conservatively in the order of US$1.5 trillion annually, or roughly 3 percent of global value added.2

As more and more countries look to this economic frontier and source of industrialization and growth, the
ecosystems upon which many ocean economic activities depend are changing at an unprecedented rate,
and not necessarily for the better. While our ocean is responsible for generating the oxygen we need for every
second breath we take and can sequester up to five times more carbon than tropical forests, this important
function is under threat due to climate change and other human-initiated factors. Maintaining and restoring the
integrity of these ecosystems (i.e. ‘ocean health’) are now synonymous with growing ocean wealth. Sustainable
development of ocean spaces for a nation’s economic advancement and growth is the cornerstone to deriving
benefit from its blue economy.

The 2012 Rio+20 conference first raised the notion of a “blue economy” and the need to stimulate “blue
growth,” particularly for island nations and developing countries with significant coastlines and maritime
areas. The idea progressed further at the 2014 SIDS conference. Just as the green economy and green growth
was once on the frontier of development planning and investment, its maritime-based equivalent has cap-
tured the imagination of policymakers, the United Nations, OECD, Commonwealth Secretariat, development
finance organizations (such as the World Bank), and NGOs alike. How to stimulate economic growth in ocean
areas may be understood to many, but it is not clear what a sustainable ocean economy or blue economy
should look like, and under what policies, conditions, and pathway is it most likely to develop.

Sustainably developing ocean spaces for economic growth while maintaining (or even improving) ocean
health could define a new era of economic opportunity for ocean-facing countries. With each promise of
ocean-based economic reward, however, comes a real risk to future generations. According to OECD (2016),
many ocean-based industries have the potential to outperform the growth of the global economy as a whole,
thereby boosting employment. The same report projects that over the next fifteen years through 2030, the
ocean economy could more than double its economic contribution to GDP equivalent. The question remains,
at what cost, and to whom? Notably, what role will the tens of millions of small-scale fishers throughout the
developing world play in this economy?

The oceans are in trouble due to a range of man-made factors including overfishing, pollution, and
climate-change induced ocean acidification, among other factors; yet their potential for economic ad-
vancement is significant—notably for coastal and island developing countries and particularly across the
Caribbean. In June 2015, the G7 Science Academies issued a statement of scientific consensus, informing the
world that human activities are provoking change in the oceans’ ecosystems with significant impact on soci-
eties and well-being. This change will undoubtedly have a direct impact on the current and future economic
growth of ocean-facing countries and small island developing states around the world. Better understanding
of ocean ecosystems, natural marine assets, ecological processes, and economic activity will help to assess a
nation’s ocean wealth and define a pathway to support the growth of a country’s blue economy.




1	 According to the World Bank, more than 350 million jobs are directly linked to marine resources such as fisheries, with ninety percent of those jobs coming from the developing world.
2	 OECD (2016); The Ocean Economy in 2030. OECD, Paris.




                                                                                                                                                                         13
Executive
summary
T
            his report attempts to demystify and define for Caribbean
            policymakers the blue economy, a new concept in discussion
            within development circles that has emerged as a new par-
            adigm for the sustainable development of our oceans and
            seas (Sustainable Development Goal 14) and particularly for
the economic growth of ocean-facing countries, including Small Island
Developing States (SIDS). This report focuses on a better understanding of
the challenges and opportunities for a blue economy in countries that share
the Caribbean Sea, in response to a series of questions first raised by finance
ministers and central bank governors during the inaugural Caribbean Region
Dialogue with the G20 Development Working Group in April 2015. The Di-
alogue was convened (a) to develop a blue economy across the Caribbean
and (b) to mobilize resources in support. Some basic questions were raised
during the dialogue, such as What is the blue economy and why is it important
for the Caribbean? and left largely unanswered. This report aims to provide
the answers, to guide Caribbean policymakers toward the transition to a blue
economy and socially equitable ‘blue growth.’

The hypothesis of this report is that the Caribbean Sea’s ecosystems
and natural resources form a unique asset for the region’s countries and
territories, and that understanding and measuring the economic activi-
ty tied to this asset, and dependent upon it, is essential for sustainably
growing these economies (blue growth). Better understanding of this new
frontier will contribute to more informed decision-making about existing
ocean assets and, as a result, greater economic resilience for the region. More
importantly, this natural resource, if well managed, has the potential to make
a much greater contribution to poverty reduction and shared prosperity for
the region’s growing population of 40 million, increasing their resilience to
climate change as well. Countries across the eastern Caribbean in particular
have been affected by a series of adverse events, including the erosion of
trade preferences, the decline in official foreign assistance, turbulence in the
business cycles of countries with high tourism revenues and foreign direct
investments, and recurrent natural disasters.3 With clarity on how to derive
growth from their blue economies, these countries also have an opportunity
to build resilience to exogenous shocks.

The report also serves as an important first step to reorient the conven-
tional wisdom (that largely focuses on costs and benefits of protecting
our ocean) to the true potential of the ocean as an economic space and
engine for growth, while developing associated policies to better manage
their sustainable use. This approach will help ensure that the basic needs of
people are met without further adverse effects on the health of the Caribbe-
an Sea. Essentially, this report speaks to the contribution of ocean ecosystem
services to sustainable and resilient development outcomes. It promotes the
blue economy as a new frontier for sustainable and shared economic growth
and development derived from well-managed ocean assets.

The geographic scope of analysis for this report is the ocean economy of
the 37 coastal and island states and territories bordering the Caribbean
Sea, plus The Bahamas. The full list is: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba,
The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Dominica, the Dominican Republic,
Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Mex-
ico, Montserrat, Nicaragua, Panama, Puerto Rico, St. Barthelemy, St. Eustatius,


3	 Taming Volatility: Fiscal Policy and Financial Development for Growth in the Eastern Caribbean; Report No: AUS15511,
   World Bank, 2016.




TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN                                             15
St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Maarten, St. Martin, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, U.S.
Virgin Islands, and República Bolivariana de Venezuela. (The United States is not included as being part of
the region, based on the definition of the Caribbean Sea large marine ecosystem.) The report is structured in
four chapters that together respond to the fundamental questions raised by decision-makers within finance
ministries and central banks across the Caribbean

Chapter 1 provides working definitions of the ocean economy and the blue economy. It explains why
these terms are growing in global importance, specifically throughout the Caribbean. The chapter cites recent
studies, notably from the OECD, that value the global ocean economy conservatively at over one and one-half
trillion US dollars in 2010. The same studies suggest that the contribution of the ocean economy to global
wealth is growing (notably as a share of national wealth for many coastal and island countries) and likely
to continue growing for coming decades (in what has been termed a new wave of ‘industrialization’ in the
ocean).

 Chapter 1 also estimates the value of the ocean economy in the Caribbean at US$407 billion (as of 2012).
This is a ball-park estimate of the total value of economic activity in the region, as well as the value of some
non-market ecosystem services such as coastal protection and blue carbon. The total value is dominated by
the share of global shipping that passes through the Caribbean Sea, together with the value of the region’s
tourism and oil and gas. (Note that the economic value generated by these sectors is shared by many coun-
tries around the world, and does not represent a share of the Caribbean regional economy.) The chapter
concludes with a synthesis of current projections for economic growth in the ocean of the Caribbean, high-
lighting potential opportunities in aquaculture, tourism, and coastal carbon sequestration (‘blue carbon’),
among others.

Chapter 2 deconstructs the ocean economy, showing that the value derived from the ocean’s natural re-
sources and ecological systems is significant. The chapter describes this natural ocean capital as consisting
of three components:

     a)	 
         renewable stocks or living resources that are harvested for use, such as fisheries;

     b)	 
         nonrenewable stocks or nonliving resources harvested for use, such as seabed minerals; and

     c)	 e
          cosystems and ecosystem processes that consist of interaction between the living and nonliving envi-
         ronment as a functional unit (e.g. coral reef ecosystems, mangrove ecosystems, etc.).

This chapter then synthesizes the current information available to present a snapshot of the status of
the Caribbean Sea’s natural capital, which is being depleted, largely due to the anthropogenic drivers
of overfishing, coastal development, pollution, introduction of invasive species and climate change. The
implication is that declining ocean health means declining ocean wealth.

Importantly, chapter 2 does not exclude the intrinsic values of ocean ecosystems or suggest that their
economic values are of greater priority than non-living resources, but rather emphasizes the interde-
pendence between ecological systems and economic activity. The chapter illustrates that the health of the
Caribbean Sea large marine ecosystem is intimately linked to the long term economic growth of the region,
whether directly supporting key sectors of the ocean economy in the Caribbean, or the interrelationship
between the economic sectors that could constitute a risk to their growth.

Chapter 3 attempts to reconcile two global and region-specific trends—a growing ocean economy and
declining natural capital asset base—and suggests that reformed and integrated policy packages are
necessary for sustainable development of countries’ ocean space and long-term growth. The report
points out that two overarching ocean use trends have become clear at both the global level and in the Ca-
ribbean Sea: Growing economic activity (see Chapter 1), together with human-driven changes in ecological
systems have reduced the ocean’s living natural capital (e.g. decreasing fish stocks, alteration of coastal ecosys-
tems, increased pollution, etc., see Chapter 2). The report raises and answers a key question: if all indications
suggest that the first trend (growth in the ocean economy) is at an early stage, what are the implications of the
second trend (an eroding ocean asset base and therefore declining ocean health)?



                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     16          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Chapter 3 also presents a conceptual framework to better guide policymakers. The chapter proposes
a blue economy con- ceptual framework to illustrate the inputs received by the ocean economy from the
underlying natural capital (as a factor of production, providing a nonmarket flow to the ocean economy4),
and the outputs from that economy that impact or affect the levels of this natural capital and the flows of
benefits that they can sustainably provide. On this basis, the chapter proposes a generic blue economy policy
framework to guide policymakers in the transition and offers some considerations for both monitoring and
financing a blue economy. The chapter then suggests some examples and benefits of applying this policy
framework in Caribbean, highlighting discussions around the ‘blue growth’ sectors of aquaculture, marine
renewable energy, nature-based tourism, and green infrastructure restoration, among others.

Chapter 3 does not purport to model the transition to a blue economy in the Caribbean, though the
conceptual framework proposed could be the basis of doing so. The chapter does provide examples of
policies to promote ‘blue growth’ as undertaken by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) in
2013 and more recently by the Government of Grenada. These examples illustrate both the benefits of a
blue economy approach and the potential risks in failing to account for the ocean’s natural capital. The OECS
region (in particular Grenada) has led the transformation to a blue economy in the Caribbean and can offer
best practice ‘blue’ solutions for sub-regional and national levels. In global terms, the chapter also describes
how a transition to a blue economy could make wide-ranging contributions toward a number of the targets
set for at least ten of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in addition to SDG 14 for the oceans.

Chapter 4 offers an approach for consideration by decision-makers to serve as a guide in the transition
toward a Caribbean blue economy. The approach calls for consideration three core recommendations: (a)
Allow a set of Ocean Principles to help guide direction and needed investment; (b) Review, discuss & adopt
a Blue Economy Policy Framework governed by a set of proposed policy priorities, and (c) Consider five key
action-oriented Ocean Strategies to sustain the transition. While the proposed Ocean Principles and Policy
Framework under which to consider them are discussed in detail in Chapter 4, we conclude this executive
chapter summary with a review of these five proposed Ocean Strategies, which may provide policymakers
with a more action-oriented lens through which to read this report.

The five key strategies (with accompanying actions) which could enable and sustain a transition to a Ca-
ribbean Blue Economy include:       Strategy 1: Measure both the region’s ocean economy and natural capital; Action
1.1: Improve the statistical and methodological base for measuring the scale and performance of the ocean
economy; Action 1.2: Establish natural capital accounts for the Caribbean Sea at the national and regional level;
Strategy 2: Manage the Caribbean ocean space in a more integrated manner; Action 2.1: Create/expand integrated
approaches to ocean governance; Action 2.2: Apply marine spatial planning at the scale of EEZs; Action 2.3:
Invest in restoration and maintenance of marine ecosystem function and integrity, with a focus on protecting
critical ecosystems and ecosystem processes; Action 2.4: Build and strengthen the institutional and human
capacity to act; Strategy 3: Invest in sustainable growth and key public goods; Action 3.1: Promote Ocean Princi-
ples to guide investment in the blue economy; Action 3.2: Advance key infrastructure investments; Strategy 4:
Monitor the transition over time; Action 4.1: Continue to enhance knowledge of the Caribbean Sea; Action 4.2:
Expand maritime domain awareness of the Caribbean Sea; Action 4.3: Track key indicators for the transition to
a blue economy; and finally, Strategy 5: Repeat steps 1–4, adapting based on experience.

This report serves as an important first step to assessing the true potential of the ocean as an economic
space and engine for growth, while developing associated policies to manage its sustainable use. At
the same time, this report attempts to demystify the blue economy, explaining what it is and why it matters,
particularly to Caribbean nations. It is our hope that the report will serve as an important input to an evolving
discussion, in which policymakers find ways to harness the ocean and all its natural assets for the betterment
of citizens, nations, the region, and the planet as a whole.




4	 OECD (2016) The Ocean Economy in 2030. OECD, Paris.




                                                                          Executive summary               17
The Growing
Ocean Economy
                     1.1	 The Global Ocean Economy
                     Covering over two-thirds of the planet, the global ocean is fundamental
                     to human well-being, regulating the earth’s climate, absorbing some 30
                     percent of anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide, and providing
                     seafood and nutrition essential for more than a billion people (IPCC 2013;
                     FAO 2014a). The ocean also connects cities and countries around the world,
                     driving economic activity and trade for the 38 percent (and growing) of the
                     global population that lives within 100 kilometers of the sea. Submarine ca-
                     bles cross the ocean’s floor to carry 90 percent of the electronic traffic on
                     which communications rely. Coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs help
                     protect communities and cities from storm surge and wave damage, while
                     mangroves, sea grasses, and salt marshes are significant natural carbon sinks
                     (United Nations 2016). The estimated 1 to 1.4 million different species that live
                     in the ocean also supply a growing number of medicines and drugs known
                     to benefit human health (Costello et al., 2010; Montaser and Luetsch, 2011).

                     The ocean may also be a new economic frontier, driven by a growing pop-
                     ulation in search of new sources of growth and rapid technological advanc-
                     es that make new resources accessible (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015;
                     OECD 2016). For example, global offshore wind capacity has developed from
                     practically nothing twenty years ago to a capacity of more than 7 gigawatts
                     (GW) today, and projections suggest further growth of an order of magnitude
                     by 2050 (OECD 2016). Seaborne trade is expected to continue to grow at an-
                     nual rates of at least 3 percent to 2030, and global tourism at a rate of almost
                     4 percent annually to 2025­ —with the most growth likely in coastal and ocean
                     tourism (OECD, 2016).

                     The physical context of the ocean shapes this new economic frontier: a
                     fluid, buoyant, three-dimensional environment, where resources can shift
                     or migrate over long distances. Economic activity in this space, traditionally
                     focused on shipping, tourism, fishing, and offshore oil and gas (all of which
                     are undergoing their own changes), is set to shift dramatically in the coming
                     decades, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De-
                     velopment (OECD). Emerging industries will include offshore wind, tidal, and
                     wave energy; oil and gas exploration and production from previously inacces-
                     sible waters; offshore aquaculture; seabed mining; cruise tourism; and marine
                     biotechnology, among others. The potential benefits from the development
                     of these activities are considerable. They could help address many of the key
                     challenges facing the population in coming decades, from food insecurity to
                     the search for new sources of energy and jobs (OECD 2016).

                     Despite the wide range of economic activity dependent upon and shaped
                     by the ocean as a discrete and unique segment of the global economy,
                     measures of this ‘ocean economy’ have historically not been available. The
                     term has not even been consistently defined, with 14 different countries using
                     14 different definitions (Park and Kildow 2015). For the purposes of this report,
                     the ocean economy is defined as “the economic activities that take place in the
                     ocean, receive outputs from the ocean, and provide inputs to the ocean.”

                     These economic activities come together in the ocean as a system. Indus-
                     tries in the ocean economy are not developing in isolation, but interact in a
                     number of different ways—similar to other closely interconnected clusters of


Photo Credit: OECD   TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                      SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN                   19
                     economic activities that function as an economic system or ‘economy’ rather than a fragmented collection
                     of individual sectors. Recent history has shown that once such systems or clusters develop, they benefit
                     from more coherent strategic approaches to their development. For example, the notion of the ‘information
                     economy’ arose with the growth of information and communication technology (ICT) and more integrated
                     infrastructure planning. Similarly, more recently developed segments of the space sector (such as launchers,
                     satellite construction and operations, global communications, and so on) have come to see themselves as
                     the ‘space economy,’ just as the different strands of the relatively young biotechnology sector have come to
                     be perceived as a ‘bioeconomy’ (OECD 2016).

                     Drawing from work by the Economist (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015) and OECD (OECD 2016), respec-
                     tively, one description (among others) of the components of this system - the ‘ocean economy’ - could be
                     proposed as follows:



Table 1.1. The Ocean Economy: Component Parts and Future Trends
                                                  ECONOMIC
  TYPE OF                 OCEAN
                                                   SECTOR/                                                          FUTURE TRENDS
  ACTIVITY                SERVICE
                                                  INDUSTRY
                                               Fisheries                Demand for fish and hence seafood continue to grow, requiring aquaculture
                                                                        production to double by 2050 without improved capture fisheries yields. Howev-
                     Seafood
                                               Aquaculture              er, ending overfishing in the ocean and rebuilding depleted stocks could increase
                                                                        the ocean’s yield by as much as 20 percent (MEA 2005; Waite et al. 2014).
Harvesting                                                     The first drugs derived from marine organisms were commercialized over
of living                                                      the past decade, together with considerable growth in nutraceutical and
resources                                                      other nonmedical uses of marine natural products, and new technologies
                     Marine                    Pharmaceuti-
                                                               are fostering renewed interest in marine biotechnology (MEA 2005). As such,
                     biotechnology             cals, chemicals
                                                               the global market for marine biotechnology products and processes is a
                                                               significant and growing opportunity, projected to grow from US$2.8 billion in
                                                               2010 to US$4.6 billion by 2017 (OECD 2016).
                                                             Interest in seabed minerals is expected to be sustained over the long-term
                                                             future, given limitations on some land-based mineral resources, though it
                                                             remains unclear whether deep-sea mining will develop any time soon on a
                     Minerals, sand,
                                               Seabed mining commercial scale (notably given uncertainty over environmental impacts)
                     and gravel
                                                             (OECD 2016). According to one projection, by 2030, 10 percent of the world’s
                                                             minerals, including cobalt, copper, and zinc could come from the ocean floors
                                                             (UNEP 2014a).
                                                                        In 1980, offshore oil and gas production provided 20% of consumption needs.
                                                                        By 2014 it rose to 30% and is expected to continue to grow as most of the new
                                                                        discoveries globally are primarily offshore in waters as much as 3 kilometers
Extraction
                                                                        deep, as compared to 1 kilometer just 20 years ago (Brakenhoff 2015). The
of nonliving
                                                                        coming 15 years could see a significant increase in deep water offshore
resources,           Energy                    Oil and gas
                                                                        production, while production from shallow-water fields may decrease (OECD
generation
                                                                        2016). At the same time, gas extraction is expected to grow in both shallow
of new
                                                                        and deep waters, from slightly above 17 million barrels of oil equivalent/day in
resources
                                                                        2014 to 27 mboe/d in 2040 (OECD 2016). Total hydrocarbons (gas and oil) from
                                                                        offshore are expected to grow at about 3.5% per year up to 2030 (IAEA 2014).
                                                                        An assessment of the world’s exploitable offshore wind resources has placed the
                                                                        estimates around 22 TWa(a) (Arent et al. 2012) which is approximately nine times
                                                                        greater than the International Energy Agency’s (IEA) 2010 estimate of average
                                                                        global electricity generation capacity (MEA 2005). Global installed offshore wind
                     Energy                    Renewables
                                                                        capacity has developed from practically nothing twenty years ago to greater
                                                                        than 7 gigawatts (GW) today, while projections suggest there is potential for
                                                                        40–60 GW by 2020 and growth of a further order of magnitude by 2050 (OECD
                                                                        2016).
Source: Adapted from Economist Intelligence Unit (2015), OECD (2016).
Note: (a) TWa = average number of terawatt-hours over a specified time.
(b) World Travel and Tourism Council. http://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/economic%20impact%202015%20summary_web.pdf.
(c) http://www.worldwatch.org/global-plastic-production-rises-recycling-lags-0.




                                              TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                             20               SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Table 1.1. The Ocean Economy: Component Parts and Future Trends
                                                  ECONOMIC
  TYPE OF                 OCEAN
                                                   SECTOR/                                                          FUTURE TRENDS
  ACTIVITY                SERVICE
                                                  INDUSTRY
Extraction
of nonliving
                                                                        Global desalination capacity has been increasing exponentially (Lattemann et
resources,
                     Freshwater                Desalination             al. 2010). The size of the global desalination market in 2025 is estimated to be
generation
                                                                        seven times larger than it was in 2000 (Bremere et al. 2001).
of new
resources
                                                                        Currently some 90% of global trade is carried on the ocean, and by 2050
                                                                        maritime freight transport is projected to quadruple from 2010 (OECD and ITF
                                               Shipping                 2015). More specifically, seaborne trade is expected to grow by 4.3% in 2016,
                     Transport and                                      4.1% per year over the period 2017–19, 4.0% per year on average over 2020–29,
                     trade                                              and 3.3% between 2030 and 2040 (OECD 2016).
                                               Port infra-              Port infrastructure is projected to increase by 4.7% from 2015 to 2020 (Lucintel
                                               structure and            2015), with healthy increase over longer term given the expected rise in freight
                                               services                 transport.
                                                                        Global tourism and travel’s contribution to global gross domestic product
                                                                        [GDP] (already over 10%) is expected to grow at a rate of 3.8% per year from
                                                                        2015 to 2025(b)—much of the growth occuring in coastal and marine tourism.
                                                                        As populations age and incomes rise in many countries, while transport costs
Commerce,                                      Tourism
                                                                        remain relatively low, coastal and ocean locations will become even more
tourism and
                                                                        attractive tourist destinations, and recent developments suggest that marine
trade
                                                                        tourism is likely to grow at a faster rate than international tourism as a whole
                                                                        (OECD 2016).
                     Tourism and
                                                                        Migration and development of the coastal zone (defined as land <100 km
                     recreation
                                                                        from the coast) around the world has increased faster than inland areas since
                                                                        1970, leading to much higher population densities in most of the world’s
                                                                        ‘mega-cities’ such as Tokyo, New York, Seoul, Mumbai, Shanghai, Jakarta, and
                                               Coastal
                                                                        so on. Development is projected to affect 91% of all inhabited coasts by 2050
                                               development
                                                                        and will contribute to more than 80% of all marine pollution as we enter a
                                                                        world with 9.6 billion people. For example in China the growth of coastal
                                                                        urban areas is currently more than three times the national rate (Neumann et
                                                                        al. 2015; World Bank 2012a).

Indirect
                                                                        The full social cost of the carbon released into the atmosphere as a result of
contribution                                   Blue carbon
                                                                        clearing mangroves has been estimated at between US$3.6 and 18.8 billion
to economic Carbon                             (that is, coastal
                                                                        per year, at a price (that is, the true ‘social’ cost) of US$41 per ton of carbon
activities   sequestration                     vegetated
                                                                        dioxide (Pendleton et al. 2012). Blue carbon conservation is expected to
and environ-                                   habitats)
                                                                        become a significant portion of reductions in tropical forest emissions.
ments


                                                                 Though it varies by habitat and site measured, analysis has shown that coastal
                                                                 habitats (coral reefs, mangroves, salt marshes, seagrass/kelp beds) reduce
                                                                 wave height significantly (between 35% and 71% on average across 69 sites
Indirect
                                                                 studied) and thereby help reduce flooding (Narayan et al. 2016). The need for
contribution
                                                                 restoration of such habitats will only grow. For example, coastal protection
to economic Coastal                            Habitat protec-
                                                                 from flooding and erosion is the largest economic service provided by man-
activities   protection                        tion, restoration
                                                                 grove systems in Thailand, and is a significant function of mangroves in many
and environ-
                                                                 tropical countries (Barbier 2012). Yet at the current rates of change, most
ments
                                                                 mangrove forests will be lost in the next two decades (Nellemann et al. 2009).
                                                                 As the sea level rises, at least 900 million people could be living in vulnerable
                                                                 low-lying coastal zones (that is, <10 m), mostly in Asia (Neumann et al. 2015).

Source: Adapted from Economist Intelligence Unit (2015), OECD (2016).
Note: (a) TWa = average number of terawatt-hours over a specified time.
(b) World Travel and Tourism Council. http://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/economic%20impact%202015%20summary_web.pdf.
(c) http://www.worldwatch.org/global-plastic-production-rises-recycling-lags-0.




                                                                                                                          chapter 1                    21
Table 1.1. The Ocean Economy: Component Parts and Future Trends
                                                  ECONOMIC
  TYPE OF                 OCEAN
                                                   SECTOR/                                                          FUTURE TRENDS
  ACTIVITY                SERVICE
                                                  INDUSTRY

                                                                The demand for use of ocean ecosystems for waste disposal continues to grow.
                                                                For example, nutrient loads from land to sea are estimated to have increased
                     Waste disposal            Assimilation of
                                                                roughly threefold from pre-industrial levels (UNEP 2012a). Similarly, an estimated
                     for land-based            nutrients, solid
                                                                275 million metric tons of plastic were produced in 2010, of which 4.8 to 12.7
                     industry                  waste
Indirect                                                        million tons entered the ocean (Jambeck et al. 2015). Subsequently, global plastic
contribution                                                    production rose to roughly 299 million tons in 2013.(c)
to economic
activities
and environ-                                                            Assuming the recent 4.5 percent annual growth rate of the area of the global
ments                                                                   ocean designated for some form of protection could be maintained beyond
                                               Protection
                     Existence of                                       2020, the current target of 10% of the global ocean under protection would
                                               of species,
                     biodiversity                                       be reached by 2035 (Boonzaier and Pauly 2016). This does not necessarily
                                               habitats
                                                                        imply that all protection designations prevent extraction, or are effectively
                                                                        enforced to protect species and habitats within these zones.

Source: Adapted from Economist Intelligence Unit (2015), OECD (2016).
Note: (a) TWa = average number of terawatt-hours over a specified time.
(b) World Travel and Tourism Council. http://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/economic%20impact%202015%20summary_web.pdf.
(c) http://www.worldwatch.org/global-plastic-production-rises-recycling-lags-0.




                     Importantly the description in Table 1.1, and the definition of the ocean economy suggested in this report,
                     does not include a number of recognized marine ecosystem services(Liquete et al. 2013), such as regulat-
                     ing services for climate and weather or cultural services for cognitive effects, where valuation tools are less
                     developed.


                     Figure 1.1. The Ocean Economy

                                                    Minerals, Sand, Gravel                                                   Transport and trade


                                                    Seafood                                                                         Tourism and recreation


                                                    Energy                                Ocean Economy                                   Coastal protection


                                                    Biodiversity                                                                       Waste disposal


                                                    Marine biotechnology                                                     Carbon sequestration



                     The contribution of the ocean economy to global GDP has rarely been measured, though a number
                     of recent estimates have been made, generally on the order of some US$1.5 to 3 trillion annually, or
                     roughly 3 to 5 percent (see Table 1.2) (Global Ocean Commission 2014a; Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2015).
                     Subsequent to these estimates, the most extensive effort to date has been the development of an Ocean
                     Economy Database by the OECD, suggesting conservatively a contribution in 2010 on the order of US$1.5
                     trillion in value added (or 2.5 percent of world gross value added) (OECD 2016). The relative contribution of
                     the ocean economy is much higher in a number of coastal and island states with large ocean areas, provid-
                     ing for example in 2014 an estimated 10 percent of China’s GDP and 20 percent of Indonesia’s (Economist
                     Intelligence Unit 2015).


                                              TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                             22               SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Table 1.2. Estimates/Citations of the Contribution of the Global Ocean Economy
   ESTIMATES/CITATIONS OF
                                                                             METHODOLOGY                                                            SOURCE
 ANNUAL CONTRIBUTION (US$)
 3–5 trillion ‘global ocean
                                                        Estimate only - no details provided                                       FAO 2014c
 economic activity’
 6–21 trillion ‘economic value of
                                                        Estimate only - no details provided                                       World Ocean Council(a)
 ocean goods and services’
 3 trillion ‘market value of marine                                                                                               Global Ocean Commission
                                                        Estimate only - no details provided
 and coastal resources’                                                                                                           2014a
                                     Averaged a ‘top-down’ analysis extrap-
                                     olating the percentage of known ocean
                                     economy contributions to GDP, and a
 2.5 trillion ‘gross marine product’                                              Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2015
                                     ‘bottom-up’ analysis estimating the value of
                                     marketed goods and services produced by
                                     industries as well as other benefits
 1.5 trillion value added of ocean-
 based industries in 2010                               Developed a database of country
 33% offshore oil and gas                               information on value added per industry,
                                                                                                                                  OECD 2016
 26% ocean and coastal tourism                          supplemented by literature (note: does not
 13% ports                                              include small-scale fisheries) (b)
 11% maritime equipment
Note: (a) World Ocean Council. http://www.oceancouncil.org/site/faq.php.
(b) OECD’s Ocean Economy Database consists of 169 coastal countries and draws heavily on United Nations (UN) and OECD sources to collect industry-specific data on physical capital
stock, employment, and value added for those ocean-based industries defined in ISIC Rev.3 (International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities).


However, many of these estimates do not include a number of services provided by the ocean’s ecosys-
tems as described in Table 1.1 and for which markets do not exist, but yet contribute significantly to eco-
nomic and other human activity —for example, carbon sequestration, coastal protection, waste disposal,
and the existence of biodiversity (see Figure 1.2 below). For example, a recent study estimated that in 46
countries containing over 53 percent of estimated mangroves worldwide, these ecosystems reduced the area
of the coastal zone subject to storm surge by some 30 percent or 36,061 square kilometers (Blankespoor,
Dasgupta, and Lange 2016). As the OECD emphasizes, measures of the ocean economy without such natural
stocks and their flows of services will always be incomplete (OECD 2016). Additionally, using GDP to measure
the ocean economy only captures the annual economic output, but does not account for changes to the un-
derlying natural stocks or capital assets5 in this economy, and the future benefit streams that they can provide
(World Bank 2012b). Simply stated, the ocean economy consists of more than just industries, but a number of
key services provided by the ecosystems, some of which may not have markets.


Figure 1.2. The Portion of the Ocean Economy Measured by Markets

                                                    Market Goods and Services                                         Non-Markets Goods
                                                                                                                         and Services
                                         Private sectors                        Public Sectors


                                           Industry

                                                                                 Economy


Source: Park and Kildow (2015).




5	 Natural capital assets are defined broadly here as the total available biophysical stock of natural resources in terms of land and soil, forest and timber, water, minerals and
   energy resources, fish stocks, and air and climate (Narloch, Kozluk, and Lloyd, 2016).




                                                                                                                                       chapter 1                       23
Regardless of the measures of the ocean economy, it is critically important for many of the world’s low-in-
come coastal and island states. For 54 lower- and lower-middle-income coastal and island states, almost
two-thirds of the national territory is ocean (see Figure 1.3). For small island developing states (SIDS) in partic-
ular, the ocean economy and national economy are often indistinguishable.


Figure 1.3. Ocean Area under Jurisdiction of Low and Lower – Middle-Income Countries (in red)




    Exclusive Economic Zones                                             Countries
    Income Level                                                         Income Level
        Low income                                                           Low income
        Lower-Middle Income                                                  Lower-Middle Income
        Upper-Middle Income                                                  Upper-Middle Income
        High Income                                                          High Income
         Not Available

Source: Blue Ribbon Panel to the Global Partnership for Oceans (2013).



As indicated in Table 1.1, many components of the ocean economy are projected to grow rapidly this
century as the global population reaches 9.6 billion by 2050, and countries continue to look to the sea
for the next economic frontier. Demand for seafood will continue to grow, as will aquaculture production.
Shipping traffic will multiply several times, and tourism will continue to increase, to name a few. Renewable
energy, from wind, waves, and currents, among others, offers the potential to help meet increasing global en-
ergy demand while reducing long-term carbon emissions. The Economist (2015) suggests that in this century,
the ocean is likely to become an economic force as activity accelerates at a pace reminiscent of the previous
industrialization on land (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015).




                           TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
        24                 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
1.2	 The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean
Perhaps nowhere is the ocean economy more relevant than in the Caribbean Sea, where many states
and territories are defined by the ocean. The Caribbean Sea covers less than 1 percent of the world’s ocean
area (2.75 million square kilometers); nonetheless, it directly supports the economies of 37 coastal and small
island countries and territories.6 This natural resource, if well managed, has the potential to make a much
greater contribution to poverty reduction and shared prosperity for the region’s growing island population
of 40 million, meanwhile increasing people's resilience under climate change. The ocean may indeed be the
frontier for growth for these economies in the coming decades, as countries look to the Caribbean Sea for
new sources of food, energy, and jobs while diversifying their economies to reduce reliance on a limited
number of key exports.


Figure 1.4. The Caribbean Sea




   Gulf of Mexico




                                                                                    Caribbean Sea




Source: Transboundary Water Assessment Programme 2015.



Surprisingly, the region’s ocean economy is not well measured or understood, even as the next frontier for
growth. This report includes a review of existing literature and secondary data to generate a first-order esti-
mate of the size and composition of the ocean economy in the Caribbean basin. These estimates are meant
to be indicative of the magnitude of the ocean economy, and do not represent value-added to accrues to the
countries in and around the Caribbean Sea. (For example, much of the value-added from shipping, tourism,
and mineral extraction conducted by multinational companies owned outside the Caribbean benefit other
countries.) The estimates of market activities are of gross revenues (not value-added) for the most recent year
available (2012), and the estimates of non-market ecosystem services are derived from recent literature.


6	 As a unit of analysis, this chapter focuses on the potential blue economy of the Caribbean Sea, that is, the ocean economy of the 37 coastal and island states and territories
   bordering the Caribbean Sea, plus The Bahamas. The full list is as follows: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands,
   Cayman Islands, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Mexico,
   Montserrat, Nicaragua, Panama, Puerto Rico, St. Barthelemy, St. Eustatius, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Maarten, St. Martin, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and
   Tobago, U.S. Virgin Islands, and República Bolivariana de Venezuela.




                                                                                                                                      chapter 1                      25
Table 1.3. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012: A Snapshot

                                                                                      INDICATIVE ANNUAL GROSS
                                                                                    REVENUES (US$, BILLIONS IN 2012
                                                         ECONOMIC                           U.S. DOLLARS)
    TYPE OF                     OCEAN
                                                          SECTOR/                                                                          NOTES/METHODS
    ACTIVITY                    SERVICE                                             ISLAND
                                                         INDUSTRY                                             MAINLAND
                                                                                  STATES AND                              TOTAL
                                                                                                              COUNTRIES
                                                                                  TERRITORIES
                                                                                                                                  Estimated based on catch data from
                                                                                                                                  Food and Agriculture Organization
                                                      Fisheries                   0.37                       4.62         5.0     (FAO) FishStatJ (FAO 2016a), and value
                           Seafood                                                                                                per metric ton from Sumaila et al.
                                                                                                                                  (2007) and Swartz et al. (2012).
Harvesting                                                                                                                        Value produced retrieved from FAO
                                                      Aquaculture                 0.04                       1.86         1.9
of living                                                                                                                         FishStatJ (FAO 2016a)
resources                                                                                                                         Data not available to estimate the size
                                                                                                                                  of the Caribbean marine biotechnol-
                                         Pharma-
                                                                                                                                  ogy sector, though a
                           Marine        ceuticals,                                                                       n.a.
                                                        n.a.                                                 n.a.                 number of drugs (for example, Ara-A,
                           biotechnology chemicals, and
                                                                                                                                  AZT, Ara-C) have been developed in
                                         so on
                                                                                                                                  the past from Caribbean coral reefs
                                                                                                                                  (Bruckner 2002).
                                                                                                                                  Data not available to indicate seabed
                           Minerals, sand, Seabed
                                                                                  n.a.                       n.a.w        n.a.    mining occurring currently in the
                           and gravel      mining
                                                                                                                                  Caribbean Sea.
                                                                                                                                  Only offshore oil and gas included.
                                                                                                                                  Trinidad and Tobago is the leading
                                                                                                                                  producer among Island States and
                                                                                                                                  Territories, generating roughly 66%
                                                                                                                                  of offshore oil production in island
                                                                                                                                  waters (Cuba produces another 29%)
                           Energy                     Oil and gas                 5.64                       34.25        39.9    (EIA 2015) and 98% of natural gas (EIA
                                                                                                                                  2016). Both natural gas and oil explo-
                                                                                                                                  ration activities have continued at a
                                                                                                                                  fast pace in Trinidad and Tobago over
                                                                                                                                  the early 2000s (GENI 2003), and in
                                                                                                                                  Colombia (PwC 2014) and Venezuela,
                                                                                                                                  RB (ENI 2015) more recently.
Extraction
of nonliving                                                                                                                      Data not available to disaggregate
resources,                                                                                                                        marine renewables from total renew-
generation of                                                                                                                     ables, which generated some US$1.3
new resources                                                                                                                     billion in revenues in 2012 according
                                                                                                                                  to the U.S. Energy Information Ad-
                                                                                                                                  ministration (EIA) (EIA 2016). For total
                                                                                                                                  renewables (terrestrial and marine),
                                                                                                                                  EIA estimates the Islands States and
                                                                                                                                  Territories produced an estimated
                                                      Renewables                                                                  3.66 billion kWh renewable electricity
                                                                                  n.a                        n.a.         n.a
                                                      (marine)                                                                    in 2012 (EIA 2015). For example, Bo-
                                                                                                                                  naire currently generates some 90%
                                                                                                                                  of total energy from wind (12 turbines
                                                                                                                                  with a total 11 MW capacity) (RMI
                                                                                                                                  2015). To supplement wind-based
                                                                                                                                  generation in times of low wind,
                                                                                                                                  the island also has 14 MW of diesel
                                                                                                                                  generation, designed to be able to
                                                                                                                                  run on locally grown algae-based
                                                                                                                                  biodiesel (Pei 2010; RMI 2015).

Note: * Average of estimated value over the time period from 2000 to 2050 has not been adjusted to 2012 U.S. dollar.




                                                     TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                                 26                  SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Table 1.3. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012: A Snapshot

                                                                                      INDICATIVE ANNUAL GROSS
                                                                                    REVENUES (US$, BILLIONS IN 2012
                                                         ECONOMIC                           U.S. DOLLARS)
    TYPE OF                     OCEAN
                                                          SECTOR/                                                                            NOTES/METHODS
    ACTIVITY                    SERVICE                                             ISLAND
                                                         INDUSTRY                                             MAINLAND
                                                                                  STATES AND                              TOTAL
                                                                                                              COUNTRIES
                                                                                  TERRITORIES



                                                                                                                                    The regional Caribbean Desalination
                                                                                                                                    Association has been active in pro-
Extraction
                                                                                                                                    moting the growth of the industry
of nonliving
                                                                                                                                    (CaribDA 2016), and the 2012 value of
resources,    Freshwater                              Desalination                n.a                        n.a          0.2
                                                                                                                                    production reported at US$0.53 per
generation of
                                                                                                                                    m3 (US$2 per 1,000 gallons) for a total
new resources
                                                                                                                                    of approximately US$230 million (EPA
                                                                                                                                    2016).




                                                                                                                                    In the container shipping industry,
                                                                                                                                    US$311.3 represents the share of
                                                                                                                                    the total global shipping revenues
                                                                                                                                    that flow through the Caribbean,
                                                      Shipping                    n.a                        n.a          311.3     including through the Panama Canal.
                                                                                                                                    Specifically, 8.2% of global container
                                                                                                                                    shipping volume in 2012 was
                                                                                                                                    estimated to flow through the region
                                                                                                                                    (Rodrigue and Ashar 2015).

                           Transport and
                           trade



Commerce,                                                                                                                           The estimate above includes the full
tourism, and                                                                                                                        cost of shipping in the region, and the
                                                      Port infra-
trade                                                                                                                               value of port services are included as
                                                      structure and               n.a                        n.a          n.a
                                                                                                                                    part of shipping costs. Therefore, to
                                                      services
                                                                                                                                    avoid double-counting, this row is left
                                                                                                                                    blank.




                                                                                                                                    Total marine and coastal tourism
                                                                                                                                    revenues for Island States and Terri-
                                                                                                                                    tories (WTTC 2015), though revenues
                           Tourism and                                                                                              are not available for coastal tourism
                                                      Tourism                     47.1                       n.a          47.0
                           recreation                                                                                               in mainland countries. Tourism in the
                                                                                                                                    Island States and Territories projected
                                                                                                                                    to increase to over US$70 billion per
                                                                                                                                    year by 2024 (WTTC 2014).


Note: * Average of estimated value over the time period from 2000 to 2050 has not been adjusted to 2012 U.S. dollar.




                                                                                                                                chapter 1         27
Table 1.3. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012: A Snapshot

                                                                                      INDICATIVE ANNUAL GROSS
                                                                                    REVENUES (US$, BILLIONS IN 2012
                                                         ECONOMIC                           U.S. DOLLARS)
    TYPE OF                     OCEAN
                                                          SECTOR/                                                                          NOTES/METHODS
    ACTIVITY                    SERVICE                                             ISLAND
                                                         INDUSTRY                                             MAINLAND
                                                                                  STATES AND                              TOTAL
                                                                                                              COUNTRIES
                                                                                  TERRITORIES




                                                                                                                                  The estimated value of this
                                                                                                                                  ecosystem service is a non-market
                                                                                                                                  economic benefit. Assumed that the
                                                                                                                                  mangrove loss rates remain constant
                                                                                                                                  at 0.08% per year; r = 6%; carbon
                                                                                                                                  price US$5 per tCO2e. Total man-
                                                      Blue carbon                                                                 grove coverage used as baseline, for
                           Carbon                     (that is, coastal                                                           Island States and Territories was 2,417
                                                                        0.02                                 0.07         0.09
                           sequestration              vegetated                                                                   km2, (10,305 for mainland countries)
                                                      habitats)                                                                   for a regional total of 12,722 km2
                                                                                                                                  (Hamilton and Casey 2016). Assumed
                                                                                                                                  carbon storage of 200 (biomass) and
                                                                                                                                  400 Mg C per ha (top meter of soil)
                                                                                                                                  (Bhomia et al. 2016), where carbon
                                                                                                                                  is emitted with a half-life of 10 years
                                                                                                                                  (Pendleton et al. 2012).
Indirect
contribution
to economic
activities and
environments
                                                                                                                                  The estimated value of this
                                                                                                                                  ecosystem service is a non-market
                                                      Habitat
                           Coastal                                                                                                economic benefit. Protection value
                                                      protection,                 n.a                        n.a          1.5*
                           protection                                                                                             of Caribbean coral reefs, estimated
                                                      restoration
                                                                                                                                  by World Resources Institute in 2004
                                                                                                                                  (Burke and Maidens 2004).


                           Waste disposal Assimilation of
                           for land-based nutrients, solid n.a                                               n.a          n.a     Data not available
                           industry       waste



                                                      Protection                                                                  Data not available for any payments
                           Existence of
                                                      of species,                 n.a                        n.a          n.a     to protect Caribbean Sea biodiversity,
                           biodiversity
                                                      habitats                                                                    nor global willingness-to-pay




                                                                                                                                  These totals are likely conservative
                                                                                                                                  given that many ocean sectors have
TOTAL                                                                             53.17                                   407.0
                                                                                                                                  not been measured, or disaggregat-
                                                                                                                                  ed at the level of the islands.



Note: * Average of estimated value over the time period from 2000 to 2050 has not been adjusted to 2012 U.S. dollar.




                                                     TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                                 28                  SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure 1.5. The (Measurable) Ocean Economy of the Caribbean in 2012 is Dominated by Shipping,
Tourism, and Oil and Gas Industries


                                                                 2nd Tourism                 11.5%
                                                                 3rd Oil and gas             10.0%
                                                                 4th Fisheries                1.2%
                                                                 5th Aquaculture              0.5%
                                                                 6th Carbon sequestration,
                                                                 desalination, and coastal
                                  1st Shipping                   protection                  0.4%
                                     76.4%



Source: Park and Kildow (2014).


The annual economic value of the ocean economy in the Caribbean in 2012 was on the order of US$407
billion. This consists almost entirely of market-based activities, since the non-market values of many ecosys-
tem services are not easily valued monetarily. The value of the ocean country is dominated by the estimated
value of the volume of cargo shipped through the Caribbean Sea, together with tourism and oil and gas in
the Island States and Territories. (Note: this number should not be compared with the GDP of the Caribbean
Basin countries, since not all of this economic value accrues to those economies. Rather, much of the value
of shipping, fishing, tourism, and off-shore energy production accrues to the countries that are home to the
companies involved, or the source of Caribbean imports used in those sectors.)

Focusing just on the Caribbean Island States and Territories, where disaggregated estimates of shipping
activity and values are not available, the gross revenues generated in 2012 are estimated on the order of
some US$53 billion. This estimate is likely conservative and even low, given that reports have not measured or
disaggregated at the level of the islands a number of sectors, such as ports and shipping, the protection value
of coastal ecosystems (‘green infrastructure’), or nonmarket values that the global community places on the
existence of biodiversity in the Caribbean Sea. In one sense, the ocean economy currently measured in the
Caribbean Island States and Territories is dominated by tourism (88 percent), as tourism is indeed as large as
many other segments of the region’s non-ocean economy (such as wholesale/retail trade).

Globally, current trends point to a future of what has been termed a new wave of ‘industrialization’ in the
ocean, driven by population growth to 9.6 billion by 2050, advances in technology, and increasing con-
sumption (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015). The OECD modeled the development of the ocean economy
to 2030, projecting many ocean-based industries to outperform the growth of the global economy—indeed
doubling its contribution to global value added from 2010. In the Caribbean, these global trends are expected
to drive growth in a number of sectors of the ocean economy, as shown in Table 1.5.

The ‘horizon scan’ below shows expectations in a number of individual sectors in the region’s ocean econ-
omy —for example, aquaculture production growth of 30 percent, blue carbon revenues from zero to some
US$700 million annually (at a carbon price reflecting the estimated social cost), exponential growth in global
shipping combined with expanded traffic through the Panama Canal, and more than 3 percent annual real
growth in tourism to name a few. These trends in the aggregate would likely effect significant change in the
Caribbean Sea and its ecosystems over the coming years and decades.

In conclusion, even with conservative methods, the size of the Caribbean ocean economy is large and
growing. In fact, following a global trend projected by OECD (2016), all indications are that the ocean econo-
my is likely to grow faster than overall rates of economic growth in coming decades. Therefore, the challenge
will be to manage and direct this growth in such a way as to foster more sustainable “blue growth” in the
ocean economy. This is the topic of the remainder of this report.




                                                                                      chapter 1      29
Table 1.4. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean: Future Trends

   OCEAN
 ECONOMIC
                                                                                               TREND
  SECTOR/
 INDUSTRY

                                    Globally, by 2030 aquaculture will supply two-thirds of fish production, including seafood
                                    (World Bank 2013). Assuming current capture fisheries production can be maintained,
                                    projected population growth will require aquaculture production to double in or to sup-
                                    port current per capita consumption levels (Waite et al. 2014). In the Caribbean, capture
Seafood
                                    fisheries production slightly decreased over the 2010–2014 period (FAO 2016b). Similarly,
                                    over this same period aquaculture production did not grow as fast as it has in other
                                    regions around the world, but with good governance FAO suggests that production has
                                    the potential to grow by 30% by 2025, equivalent to a rate of 3% annually (FAO 2014d).


                                    Globally, technological progress for production of offshore oil and gas has been signif-
                                    icant over the last two decades, such that fields at depths of up to 3 km are accessible,
                                    whereas 20 years ago it was not possible past 1 km. Experts believe that this trend will
                                    continue, and globally offshore production growth is likely to exceed onshore growth
                                    (Brakenhoff 2015). However, in the Caribbean Sea, while Colombia and Venezuela will
                                    continue offshore exploration and production, overall growth may slow relatively to
                                    terrestrial sources (Rystad Energy 2016b).
                                                                  2

Oil and gas
                                                                  1


                                                                  0
                                                                         2015      2020       2025      2030      2035       2040

                                                                                 O shore NG                     O shore Oil
                                                                                 Onshore NG                     Onshore Oil


                                    Globally, investment in renewable energy production has grown significantly over
                                    recent decades, certainly for marine renewables (for example, offshore wind). Through-
                                    out the Caribbean, a number of renewable energy options have been identified from
Renewables
                                    the ocean, and the costs associated with the technologies have fallen dramatically over
                                    the past decade. In the coming decade, marine renewable energy may increasingly be
                                    a viable option for many islands in the region.


                                    Currently some 90% of global trade is carried on the ocean, and by 2050 maritime freight
                                    transport is projected to quadruple from 2010 (OECD and ITF 2015). The trade significance
                                    of the existing Panama Canal is clear as a key conduit for international maritime trade for
Shipping
                                    decades, and it is currently undergoing expansion. This project, as well as other efforts
                                    such as the planning of the Nicaragua Canal, suggest a significant future role for the
                                    Caribbean region in international maritime shipping.


                                    Developing economies currently hold some 72% share of world container port
Port Infra-                         throughput, and with ship sizes and traffic volumes expected to grow, existing ports
structure                           in the Caribbean will likely expand capacity, while new ports are constructed. Such
and Services                        transport infrastructure investment needs have been estimated at 6.2% of GDP in the
                                    region annually between 2012–2020 (UNCTAD 2016).

Note: (a) World Travel and Tourism Council. http://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/economic%20impact%202015%20summary_web.pdf.




                        TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
      30                SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Table 1.4. The Ocean Economy of the Caribbean: Future Trends

   OCEAN
 ECONOMIC
                                                                                               TREND
  SECTOR/
 INDUSTRY

                                    Globally, tourism (already over 10% world GDP) is expected to grow at a rate of 3.8% per
                                    year from 2015 to 2025(a)—much of it coastal and marine tourism. By 2025, the annual real
Tourism
                                    growth in tourism’s total contribution to GDP is projected at 3.3% for the Caribbean region
                                    (excluding mainland countries), and 4.5% when including mainland countries.


                                    The blue carbon sector is expected to grow as carbon prices at the voluntary or
                                    compliance markets grow, and as financial mechanisms are created to incentivize the
                                    protection of mangroves and coastal grasses. Current market prices are about one-
Blue Carbon
                                    eighth of the estimated social cost of carbon value, which can be used as an indicator
                                    of the long-term carbon prices in an efficient market that prices carbon according to its
                                    climate-related damages (when emitted due to conversion).

Note: (a) World Travel and Tourism Council. http://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/economic%20impact%202015%20summary_web.pdf.




                                                                                                                           chapter 1                    31
The Ocean’s
Declining Natural
Capital
2.1	 Overview of the Status of the
     Global Ocean’s Natural Capital
Underpinning the global ocean economy are the natural resources and
ecological systems that function as the ocean economy’s natural capital
asset base. Natural capital includes: (a) living resources (renewable stocks)
harvested for use, such as fisheries; (b) nonliving resources (nonrenewable
stocks) harvested for use, such as seabed minerals; and (c) ecosystems and
ecosystem processes that consist of interaction between the living and
nonliving environment as a functional unit (coral reef ecosystems, mangrove
ecosystems, and so on).

With the expected growth of the ocean economy in the coming decades,
the potential change to its natural capital asset base may be significant.
The baseline is already low. For example in 2015 the G7 Science Academies is-
sued a statement warning that human activities were causing changes to the
ocean’s ecosystems that will profoundly affect human well-being. In 2016 the
UN Secretary General wrote that the findings of the first world ocean assess-
ment “indicate that the oceans’ carrying capacity is near or at its limit,” and
“urgent action on a global scale is needed to protect the world’s oceans from
the many pressures they face” (United Nations, 2016). Among others, four
anthropogenic drivers of change in the ocean’s natural capital are notable:

     a)	 overfishing, 
                      as some 29 percent of the world’s ocean fisheries that
         have been assessed are considered overfished, up from 10 percent
         in 1970 (FAO 2014b), while an estimated 11 to 25 million tons of fish
         are captured via illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing
         each year (Agnew et al., 2008);

     b)	 coastal development,    such as filling wetlands or hardening coast-
         lines for construction, whichhas significantly altered ecosystems and
         ecosystem processes, as the world has lost some 20 percent of its
         sea grass and mangrove habitats since 1970 and 1980, respectively,
         while coral reefs have declined by 38 percent since 1980 (Spalding,
         Kainuma, and Collins 2010; UNEP 2012b);

     c)	 pollution, largely in the form of excess nutrients from sources such
         as agriculture and untreated sewage, which have increased roughly
         threefold from pre-industrial levels (UNEP 2012b) to create ‘dead
         zones’ covering 245,000 square kilometers of ocean by 2010 (Doney,
         2010), together with an estimated 4.8 to 12.7 million tons of plastic
         entering the ocean each year (Jambeck et al. 2015), with the volume
         of plastic in the ocean projected to exceed the volume of fish by
         2050 (WEF, 2016); and

     d)	 climate change and ocean acidification,including higher surface
         water temperatures and rising sea levels, together with more acidic
         waters owing to the uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
         – with the mean surface ocean pH already decreasing from 8.2 to 8.1
         and projected to continue to 7.7 or 7.8 by 2100 (UNEP, 2012b).

In response to these recent changes to the ocean’s ecosystems, one of the
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by the UN General
Assembly in September 2015 focuses on ocean conservation and sustain-
able use (see Box 2.1). Governments and stakeholders in countries around
the world have increased efforts and investments in policy reforms and rule


TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN                  33
  Box 2.1. Sustainable Development Goal 14 Summary:

   “to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development”
          ■■ Preventand significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds by 2025;

                                and protect marine and coastal ecosystems by 2020, including resto-
          ■■ Sustainably manage 
              ration, to achieve healthy and productive oceans;
                                                            and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and
          ■■ Effectively regulate harvesting of fish stocks 
              unregulated fishing by 2020 (including prohibiting subsidies that contribute to overfishing),
              to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible to levels that can produce the maximum
              sustainable yield;
          ■■ Conserve at least 10 percent of coastal and marine areasby 2020; &

          ■■ Increase the economic benefits to SIDS 
                                                    from sustainable use of ocean resources by 2030.


changes to better safeguard and/or restore functionality in ocean ecosystems. For example, the World Bank
has increased its active investment portfolio in projects directly or indirectly aiming to increase the ocean’s
natural capital to some US$6.4 billion by 2015, with support for sustainable fisheries and aquaculture increas-
ing from practically zero in 2004 to almost US$1 billion by 2015 (see Figure 2.1 below).



Figure 2.1. Growth in the World Bank’s Portfolio of Investments in the Ocean
  Sustainable Fisheries, Aquaculture and                         Active Sustainable Fisheries & Aquaculture Portfolio, incl. ICZM (IBRD/IDA/GEF)
          Habitat Conservation                             800
               US$1 billion                                700
                                                           600
                                                           500
                                           (Million USD)




                                                           400
                                                           300
                                                           200
                                                           100
                                                            0
              US$5.4 billion                                     FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14
   Pollution Reduction E.g. watershed                                GEF Fisheries  Governance & mgt, marine Fisheries     Other
   management, coastal infrastructure
                                                                     Aquaculture    Integrated coastal zone mgt & planning




                     TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     34              SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
2.2	 Overview of the Status of the Natural
     Capital Assets of the Caribbean Sea
The Caribbean Sea and its living and nonliving resources together with the ecosystems that they form,
can be considered a tremendous natural capital asset, often undervalued and even poorly defined, yet
determinant of a number of the benefits generated by the ocean economy. Throughout the literature (for
example, a ‘Transboundary Diagnostic Assessment’ of the marine ecosystems and a ‘Transboundary Water
Assessment’ both funded by the Global Environment Facility [GEF]) there is strong evidence that the Carib-
bean Sea’s natural capital is being depleted, largely due to the anthropogenic drivers of overfishing, coastal
development, pollution, introduction of invasive species, and the impacts of climate change (CLME Project
2011). Such depletion represents a significant risk, both to the economic benefits of the ocean economy and
likely to future growth prospects.

The Caribbean Sea’s Natural Capital Assets. Current information available on the status of the region’s natu-
ral capital includes:

            ■■ Living resources (for example, fisheries): 
                                                          The  Caribbean includes a wide array of living resources that
               support fisheries, including the spiny lobster, the queen conch, panaeid shrimps, reef fish, bot-
               tom-dwelling fish on the continental shelf, deep slope and bank fish, coastal large pelagic species
               (such as king mackerel, Spanish mackerel, amberjack, and dolphinfish), and offshore large pelagic
               species (such as yellowfin tuna, skipjack tuna, Atlantic blue marlin, and swordfish). Uncertainty about
               the biological status of many of the region’s fish stocks has remained high, but available data sug-
               gests that nearly 60 percent of commercially exploited fish stocks in the Caribbean Sea are either
               overexploited or have collapsed—contributing some 50 percent of the fish landed (TWAP 2015).
               This status is consistent with FAO’s data for the wider fishing area that includes the Gulf of Mexico
               together with the Caribbean Sea, where some 55 percent of the assessed fish stocks commercially
               harvested are considered overexploited, and another 40 percent are considered fully exploited (FAO
               2014e). In particular, large pelagic stocks throughout the region have been heavily exploited, in many
               cases by distant water fishing nations (CLME Project 2011).



Figure 2.2. Stock Status of Commercially Exploited Fish Stocks in the Caribbean Sea
                       Stock Status                                  Catch by Stock Status
   80                                               400k

       60                                                                        300k

       40                                                                        200k

       20                                                                        100k

        0                                                                          0k
                      1960                 1980                     2000                   1960   1980        2000
                                           Years
                                                                     Exploited   Overexploited

Source: TWAP, 2015.

            ■■ Nonliving resources (for example, minerals, oil and gas in the seabed): 
                                                                                       To date there has been little
               indication of significant deposits of commercially valuable minerals in the Caribbean seabed that
               could be mined.7 With regard to oil and gas resources, significant reserves are known to be found
               in the waters under the jurisdiction of Colombia and República Bolivariana de Venezuela, though


7	   See for example: https://www.isa.org.jm/contractors/exploration-area.




                                                                                                  Chapter 2      35
Figure 2.3. Distribution of Fishing Effort in the Wider Caribbean




Source: TWAP, 2015.


              production from these sources is projected to decline over the coming years in comparison to ter-
              restrial sources (WTTC 2015). Additionally, a number of countries are actively pursuing oil exploration
              activities (The Bahamas and Barbados, for example).

          ■■ Ecosystems     and ecosystem processes (for example, coral reefs, mangroves, sea grass beds, beaches,
              and so on): The Caribbean Sea has the highest level of species diversity in the tropical Atlantic and is
              considered a global hotspot of marine biodiversity, supported in particular by the region’s coral reef
              ecosystems (notably the 220-kilometer long MesoAmerican Reef system) (Roberts et al. 2002; Milo-
              slavich et al. 2010). According to the U.S. Geological Survey, some 0.35 percent of the entire Caribbe-
              an Sea large marine ecosystem is covered by mangroves; and according to the Global Distribution
              of Coral Reefs in 2010 ,some 0.64 percent is covered by coral reefs (TWAP 2015). There is evidence for
              overall ecosystem degradation in the Caribbean Sea, notably in coral reef and mangrove systems
              (Burke et al. 2011; Burke and Maidens 2004; CLME Project 2011). Caribbean mangrove coverage has
              declined steadily over the past decades at the rate of approximately 0.08 percent per year (Hamilton
              and Casey 2016). Coral coverage in the region has dropped significantly in recent decades, with
              some 75 percent of all Caribbean reefs considered to be at risk from anthropogenic impacts (Burke
              and Maidens 2004).

Anthropogenic Drivers of Change in the Status of the Caribbean Sea’s Natural Capital Assets. In the con-
text of climate change and ocean acidification, there are at least three significant and mutually reinforcing
anthropogenic drivers of the declining status of the Caribbean’s natural capital that are shared widely: (a)
overfishing, (b) coastal development, and (c) pollution (CLME Project 2011), all occurring in the context of the
effects of increasing greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, such as ocean acidification and increas-
ing sea surface temperatures.

          ■■ Overfishing: 
                          According to FAO, growth in the capture fishing industry in the region has stagnated since
              1990, in conjunction with trends in declining stocks and increasing overexploitation (Burke and Maidens


                      TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
        36            SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure 2.4. Mapping Ocean Wealth Calculations of Caribbean Mangrove Coverage




Source: Mapping Ocean Wealth http://oceanwealth.org/




Figure 2.5. Mapping Ocean Wealth Example of Coastal Protection Benefits of Coral Reefs in Jamaica




Source: Mapping Ocean Wealth http://oceanwealth.org/



             2004). The overall volume of fish landed in the Caribbean declined from a peak of 430,000 metric tons
             in 1998, to below 300,000 tons by 2010 (TWAP 2015). This trend is reflected in FAO’s data on the broad-
             er fishing area that includes both the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico, where between the late
             1990s (1.75 million tons) and 2009 (1.3 million tons) (FAO 2011). At the same, total aggregate fishing effort
             increased steadily in the Caribbean Sea, following the global trend in the expansion of fishing activity
             in the 1950s, to a peak in the mid-2000s (TWAP 2015). This growth in fishing effort has led to biological
             overfishing in some fisheries, where the level of fishing exceeds what would be required to catch the
             maximum sustainable yield. Such overfishing has also had a notable impact on the region’s coral reef
             ecosystems, with annual landings of reef resources from the capture fisheries generally declining since
             the mid-1970s and most considered either over or fully exploited (World Bank 2016). Commercial fishing
             on deep-water reefs has caused extensive damage to corals, and more broadly fishing has depleted
             certain herbivore species—leading to overgrowth of algae on coral reefs throughout the Caribbean
             (World Bank 2016).


                                                                                           Chapter 2            37
Figure 2.6. Annual Catch (Caribbean Sea)                                                  Figure 2.7. Fishing Effort (Caribbean Sea)
                                       Fishing e ort (Caribbean Sea)                                              Annual Catch (Caribbean Sea)
                      250M                                                                       500k

                      200M                                                                       400k

E ective e ort (Kilowatt)
                      150M                                                                       300k




                                                                                     Tons/Year
                      100M                                                                       200k

                            50M                                                                  100k

                            0M                                                                     0k
                             1950      1960     1970      1980         1990   2000                  1950   1960       1970     1980     1990     2000   2010
                                                         Years                                                                 Years

Source: TWAP, 2015.

                              ■■ Coastal   development: Coastal population density has grown throughout the region in recent de-
                                  cades, with over 41 million people living within 10 kilometers of the coast, and some 166 million
                                  within 100 kilometers (Burke and Maidens 2004). This growth has placed tremendous pressure on
                                  the coastal ecosystems as natural habitats are cleared for construction, waterways are dredged for
                                  increased sea transport, and the number of visitors and users of the reefs increases (to name a few
                                  threats among others). For example, about 25 percent of the region’s coral reefs are considered at
                                  threat from growing coastal development, and just over a third are located within 2 kilometers of
                                  inhabited land areas (Burke and Maidens 2004; Burke et al. 2011). These threats can directly impact
                                  the tourism sector of the region’s ocean economy, given the role that coral reef ecosystems play in
                                  visitation throughout the Caribbean.

                              ■■ Pollution: 
                                            The ecosystems and the water quality of the Caribbean Sea have been significantly impacted
                                  by growing levels of pollution from untreated sewage, agricultural runoff, and marine trash (plastics, for
                                  example) (GPO 2014; CLME Project 2011). In particular, increasing volumes of untreated sewage generat-
                                  ed by growth in coastal development has impacted water quality and public health, as an estimated 85
                                  percent of wastewater entering the Caribbean Sea is untreated (with a higher percentage in many urban
                                  areas) (UNEP-CEP 2010; Corbin, Daniel, and Vogeley 2014). Again, this damage can constitute a significant
                                  risk to the tourism sector of the region’s ocean economy, among others. With regard to marine debris, the
                                  Caribbean Sea is estimated to have relatively high levels of plastic concentrations compared with many
                                  other large marine ecosystems (TWAP 2015). More specifically, an estimated 0.16 to 0.42 million tons of
                                  plastic entered the Caribbean Sea in 2010 from the region’s coastal population, with projections gradually
                                  increasing to 0.29–0.79 million metric tons (MMT) per year by 2025 as the population grows (see Table 2.1)
                                  (Jambeck et al. 2015).

Lastly, other drivers of change in the status of the Caribbean Sea’s natural capital assets include the intro-
duction of invasive species such as the Indo-Pacific lionfish, which is competing with native species and
changing coral reef ecosystems (FAO 2011). As mentioned previously, many of these drivers are expected to
continue to be exacerbated by the effects of climate change, resulting largely from greenhouse gas emissions
in the terrestrial economy.

In conclusion, these drivers of change in the status of the Caribbean Sea’s natural capital assets constitute
an important constraint and significant risk to the potential growth of the region’s ocean economy, sim-
ilar to the risks to the global ocean economy (OECD 2016). In some cases the decline of these assets may
prevent sectors and industries from reaching their potential in the region; for others it may create regulatory
uncertainty that also presents a significant risk. For example, impacts of coastal development and pollution
on coral reef ecosystems can directly impact the tourism sector of the region’s ocean economy, and reduce
the net benefits that it can generate for poverty reduction and economic growth.




                                           TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                             38            SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Table 2.1. Country and/or Island Territory level Estimates of Plastic Marine Debris: 2010 and 2025
                                                          PLASTIC        PLASTIC       PLASTIC        PLASTIC
                                                          MARINE         MARINE        MARINE         MARINE
            COUNTRY/ ISLAND               COASTAL        DEBRIS IN      DEBRIS IN     DEBRIS IN      DEBRIS IN
              TERRITORIES                POPULATION      2010 - LOW    2010 - HIGH    2025 - LOW    2025 - HIGH
                                                         ESTIMATE       ESTIMATE      ESTIMATE       ESTIMATE
                                                           (MMT)          (MMT)         (MMT)          (MMT)
Anguilla                                       14,561             8             21             11            29
Antigua and Barbuda                            66,843           188            501           208            554
Aruba                                          137,910           56            149            71            190
Bahamas                                        341,145          200            533           258            687
Barbados                                      276,784           522           1,393          558          1,488
Belize                                        202,429           584           1,557          906           2,417
British Virgin Islands                         29,674             8             22            12             31
Cayman Islands                                 51,864            14             38            20             54
Colombia                                     7,498,563        13,826        36,869         26,996         71,989
Costa Rica                                   2,479,298         6,314        16,836         11,384        30,358
Curacao                                       143,784            40            107            57            151
Dominica                                        70,138           117           313           214            571
Dominican Republic                          8,232,586         17,734         47,290        34,301        91,468
Guatemala                                   2,392,442         13,734        36,625         23,655        63,079
Haiti                                        9,155,693        22,108        58,956         48,627        129,671
Honduras                                     3,324,144        14,346        38,255         28,375        75,668
Jamaica                                     2,820,558          1,503         4,008          8,936         3,830
Martinique                                    402,257            112           300           143            382
Mexico                                      22,647,771        15,201        40,537         35,009        93,357
Montserrat                                       5,173            6             15             11            29
Netherlands Antilles                           227,165           62            166            55            147
Nicaragua                                   3,482,653         12,662        33,766         25,416         67,775
Panama                                       3,249,531         5,158         13,755        10,614        28,303
Puerto Rico                                 4,249,848          2,478         6,607          3,072          8,193
Saint Kitts and Nevis                          36,102           107            286            111           297
Saint Lucia                                   163,227          1,006         2,684          1,292         3,444
Saint Maarten, DWI                              37,429           10             28            15             39
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines              120,149           337            898           449           1,198
Trinidad and Tobago                          1,358,433        14,110         37,626        11,027        29,405
Turks and Caicos Islands                       22,570             7             20            10             28
USVI                                          134,219            37            100            44            118
Venezuela, RB                              16,094,897         15,350        40,933         23,136         61,697
Total                                      89,469,840        157,948        421,195       294,994       786,650
Source: Data from Jambeck et al. 2015.




                                                                                      Chapter 2        39
Aligning the Two
Trends - The Potential
for a Blue Economy
in the Caribbean Sea
3.1	 Two trends


S
          ince the ‘great acceleration’ in global economic output and pop-
          ulation growth beginning in the 1950s, at least two overarching
          trends in the use of the ocean have become clear at both the
          global level and in the Caribbean Sea. These trends are growing
          economic activity (see Chapter 1) together with human-driven
changes in ecological systems that have reduced the ocean’s natural capital
(for example, decreasing fish stocks, alteration of coastal ecosystems, in-
creased pollution, and so on—see Chapter 2). The question arises: If all indica-
tions suggest that the first trend (growth in the ocean economy) is at an early
stage, what are its implications for the second trend? Conversely, will changes
in the ocean’s natural capital affect, and potentially slow, growth in the ocean
economy in the Caribbean? What is the risk to the future ocean economy and
therefore to ocean-facing developing countries in particular?


Figure 3.1. Two Parallel Trends in the Global Ocean

                                                       Growth in Ocean
                                                       Economy




                                                       Declining Health of
                                                       Ocean Environment


Figure 3.2. Global Fisheries: Decoupling growth in economic activity
and overexploitation
                                  3.5                                                                     140
                                              Decked vessels (number)
                                  3.0         Fleet capacity index (ﬁshing power)
                                                                                                          120


                                                                                                                Catch per vessel/ Catch per unit capacity
                                              Catch per vessel (tons)
Fleet capacity index ( shing power)




                                  2.5         Catch per unit capacity (tons)
    Number of decked vessels/




                                                                                                          100
                                  2.0
              (million)




                                                                                                                                 (tons)

                                                                                                          80
                                  1.5
                                                                                                          60
                                  1.0

                                  0.5                                                                     40


                                  0.0                                                                      20
                                    1970   1980       1985          1990            1995        2000   2005

         orld Bank and FAO (2009)
Source: W




 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
  SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN                                                      41
Figure 3.3. Decoupling Economic Growth and Degradation of the Caribbean Sea
   8
                                                            Plastic marine debris
   7                                                        GDP Wider Caribbean Region
   6                                                        Island tourism
    5
    4
    3
                                                                                                                              Shoreline protection lost due to coral reef degradation
    2
                                                                                                                              Cumulative mangrove loss
    1
    0
        2010             2011               2012               2013               2014              2015               2016

Source for GDP growth: (World Bank 2016); projected growth based on 2005–2014 period; Plastic marine debris projections based on Jambeck et al. (2015); past and projected Island
Tourism (WTTC 2015); trend in shoreline loss due to reef degradation (Burke et al. 2004) and cumulative mangrove loss (Hamilton and Casey 2016). Units for the data were adjusted so that
all of the line graphs would be between 0 and 10 in the period.
Note: Plastic marine debris is measured in units of 100,000 tons; GDP is measured in trillions of current U.S. dollar; Island tourism is measured in 10s of billions of U.S. dollars; Shoreline
protection is shown as an index; Cumulative mangrove loss is measured in 100 square kilometers;




The above graph illustrates that as with the global trends, the Caribbean economy (represented by
GDP for the region and tourism for the islands) has exhibited a growth trend over recent years, just as
a number of indicators of the loss of natural capital have shown similar increases over that time frame.
Essentially, economic growth and environmental degradation have occurred concurrently in the Caribbean
Sea during this time period, illustrating the challenge of introducing policies that promote the ‘decoupling’
of the trends, so that economic growth continues and even accelerates, while environmental degradation
reverses.


3.2	 The Concept of a ‘Blue Economy’
With the simultaneous growth of the ocean economy and disruption to the ocean’s ecological systems,
the perspective emerging worldwide over the last decade on a ‘green economy’ and ‘green growth’
has become a more widely used lens for viewing the risks and opportunities in the ocean. The term
was featured prominently for example in the outcome statement by countries at the Rio+20 Earth Summit
in 2012, as a tool for policymaking that provides a lens for looking at economic and environmental policy
together—focusing on economic growth without a reduction in aggregate natural capital, and the link be-
tween poverty reduction and conservation of ecological commons (UNEP 2011; Bowen and Hepburn 2014;
Smulders et al. 2014). Common policy recommendations for green growth, such as those included in the
OECD’s global green growth strategy, often focus on:

           ■■ Enhancing     efficiency 
                                       in the use of resources and natural capital, and reducing waste (embracing
               ‘circular economy’ strategies for example);

           ■■ Spurring innovation of new technologies 
                                                      to  simultaneously increase economic growth as measured
               by GDP and enhance natural capital, with a focus on the energy system;

           ■■ Creating new markets by stimulating demand for green technologies, goods, and services;


           ■■ Measuring natural capital part of the economy, thereby incorporating considerations of the envi-
                                        as
               ronment into broader economic decision-making; and

           ■■ Boosting   investor confidence through greater predictability and continuity in addressing environ-
               mental issues, while better understanding the scale of risks (for example, through application of
               environmental, social, and governance principles such as the Equator Principles) (UNEP 2011; OECD
               2011; Jouvet and de Perthuis 2013).


                             TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
         42                  SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Metrics of green growth have included increased GDP for growth, along with measures of natural cap-
ital (OECD 2011), or GDP and wealth measures adjusted for natural capital, as well as process-oriented
measures (Jakob and Edenhofer 2014; Narloch, Kozluk, and Lloyd 2016; UNEP 2014b; UNEP 2015a; UNEP
2015b). In 2014, the OECD proposed tracking a set of green growth indicators (maintained on the Green
Growth Knowledge Platform), grouped according to (a) environmental and resource productivity (for ex-
ample, more efficient, low-carbon economy); (b) the natural asset base; (c) environmental quality of life (for
example, health and risks such as air pollution); and (d) economic opportunities and policy responses (for
example, new technology and innovation) (OECD 2014). Reviewed policies that support transitions toward
green growth have generated increases in wealth and a higher rate of GDP growth, and over time the jobs
created in the transition exceed losses in the ‘brown economy.’ These policies focus, for example, on renew-
able energy, energy efficiency, public transportation, sustainable agriculture, ecosystem and biodiversity
conservation, and land and water conservation, among others (OECD 2011). The United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) (Sukhdev, Stone, and Nuttal 2010) has featured a number of diverse ‘green economy
success stories’ worldwide, including urban planning in Brazil, organic agriculture in Uganda, green infra-
structure in rural India, and ecosystem service payments in Ecuador, among others, though few examples to
date have been given for SIDS.

As the green economy concept gained prominence
before Rio+20, UNEP together with a group of part-         Box 3.1. Definition of the Concept of the
ners proposed to apply this concept to the ocean           Blue Economy
economy—envisaging a ‘blue economy.' The focus
was on policies to ‘green’ the ocean economy, sector by     “A sustainable ocean economy emerges
sector. At the Rio+20 Summit, the blue economy con-        when   economic activity is in balance
                                                           with  the long-term capacity of ocean
cept emerged in a number of different and competing
                                                           ecosystems to support this activity and
discourses on human-ocean relations, including: (a) the    remain resilient and healthy.” Essentially, the
oceans as natural capital, (b) the oceans as ‘good busi-   blue economy concept is a lens by which
ness,' (c) the oceans as integral to Pacific SIDS, and (d) to view and develop policy agendas that
the oceans as a source of small-scale fishing livelihoods  simultaneously enhance ocean health and
(Silver et al. 2015). Subsequently, a number of national   economic growth, in a manner consistent
strategies and international summits were held on the      with principles of social equity and inclusion.
subject of the blue economy broadly, as featured in
FAO’s 2014 State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture
report (FAO 2014b). Drawing from these efforts, the Economist Intelligence Unit defined the concept of the
blue economy as shown in Box 3.1 below (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015).

The blue economy concept considers the ecological
systems that provide so many of the services linked Figure 3.4. Blue Economy Concept
to the ocean economy as underlying and sometimes
invisible natural capital assets. These assets include,                                 Ocean
for example, fish stocks, coral reef systems, beach and
water quality, mangroves, and so on), which help sup-
port the more visible produced capital (machinery
and structures) and intangible capital (skills, expertise,
and so on, with which labor is applied) (World Bank                 Enviromental Health        Economic Bene ts
2012b, 2006). This analysis is not intended to exclude
intrinsic values that these ecological systems may
have or to suggest that their economic values are of
greater priority, but rather to emphasize the connec-
tion between the ocean’s ecological systems and the
economic activity defined in the ocean economy. The                                Blue Economy
blue economy concept recognizes that while only
some activities in the ocean economy depend on the
status of the underlying ecological systems (such as fishing), all have the potential to degrade them (such
as shipping, off-shore oil production and seabed mining). Therefore, the impact of all ocean economy ac-
tivities on the underlying ecosystems need to be minimized or else jobs and economic growth depending
on the living resources will be put at risk. Increasingly, policy frameworks and industries are emerging that
can simultaneously enhance or expand a more sustainable ocean economy, that is, grow the blue economy


                                                                                  Chapter 3          43
3.3	 A Blue Economy Conceptual Framework
A conceptual framework explains graphically the main key factors, constructs, or variables to be
studied and the presumed relationships among them. The approach essentially creates intellectual
‘bins’ containing a lot of discrete events and behavior (Miles and Huberman 1994). Alternatively, such
frameworks have been defined as a network or a ‘plane’ of interlinked concepts that together provide a
comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon or phenomena (Jabareen 2009). To better illustrate the
complex relationship between economic activity and ecological systems in the Caribbean Sea, a concep-
tual framework for the blue economy is proposed here (see Figure 3.5).

This Blue Economy Conceptual Framework aims to illustrate the inputs received by the ocean economy
from the underlying natural capital (as a factor of production, providing a nonmarket flow to the ocean
economy (OECD 2016), and at the same time the outputs from that economy that affect the levels of this
natural capital and the flows of benefits that they can sustainably provide. If properly managed, many of
these natural capital assets are renewable and capable of yielding a sustained flow of benefits. For example,
fish stocks are a living resource that provides a flow of inputs into the production of seafood in the ocean
economy. Alternatively, ocean economic activities may provide outputs or impacts on the ecosystems and
ecosystem processes. For example, coastal development leads to the construction or expansion of ports,
marinas, harbors, or channels for shipping that change or convert ecosystems such as sea grass beds and
mangroves. This framework aims to capture the value of changes in the natural capital assets together with
changes in economic activity, to measure the net benefit to society from this integrated blue economy, con-
sistent with OECD’s recent work characterizing the ocean economy as well as widely established concepts
of a ‘circular economy’ where material flows to and from industry are circular (OECD 2016). Such interactions
happen horizontally between different sectors of the ocean economy, and between different ecosystems of
the ocean, as well as vertically between the economic sectors and ecosystems, which in aggregate affect the
outcomes of the blue economy.

While no two cases or contexts are the same, there are a number of examples of a transition toward a blue
economy within various sectors of the ocean economy that may be instructive, for example:

                                        an in some instances be rewarded with an eco-label that brings a price
      ■■ Sustainable fishing practices c

         premium;

                 aquaculture 
      ■■ Shellfish           can both enhance coastal water quality and produce valuable seafood that
         supports employment and contributes to GDP;

                                                                       an
      ■■ Offshore wind and other marine renewable energy technologies c        generate new jobs and signifi-
         cant additional energy according to some estimates; and

      ■■ Green infrastructure along the coast can both create jobs and protect coastal development.


Governments that introduce policies to enhance or encourage the transition to the blue economy could
help their countries capture the potential benefits, measured as the net present value (NPV) of the in-
crease in the entire blue economy, with costs being charged to the inputs from or outputs to the natural
capital. This framework allows one to consider whether the economic returns from the transition to a blue
economy justify the initial investment costs in a given context, in contrast with business-as-usual to grow the
ocean economy.

Figure 3.5 represents a graphic illustration of the entry points for policy reforms to change the flow
of inputs from natural capital assets to the ocean economy over time, or conversely to reduce its
outputs (such as pollution) to the ocean’s natural capital. The conceptual framework allows for con-
sideration of the ocean economy and ecological systems together in policy design. For example, the
costs of a policy reform to reduce the output from one industry in the ocean economy to the underlying
natural capital assets (for example, to reduce impacts of shipping or port services on coastal ecosystems)
might be far less than the inputs over time that this natural capital can provide to other industries (for
example, tourism). Figure 3.5 provides a conceptual framework for governments to:


                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     44          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure 3.5. A Blue Economy Framework



                                                         The Ocean Economy




        Seafood         Marine       Energy      Transport       Tourism and    Carbon        Coastal        Waste      Biodiversity’s
                     biotechnology               and trade        recreation sequestration   protection     disposal   existence value


                  Inputs                                                                                         Outputs         Policy
           Flow of Material                                                                                   Flow of Materials Reforms
           & Services over                               Natural capital assets                                & Impacts over
                time                                                                                                time


                                                                                                                        = Change
                                                                                     Ecosystems
                                                                                     &Ecosystem
                                      Living Resources       Non living Resources     Processes




     a)	 think about economic activity 
                                       in the ocean as a discrete and unique segment of the larger econ-
         omy, with shared risks and opportunities (including cluster opportunities within the ocean space);
         and

                                                        nto accounting and supporting policies for this
     b)	 measure and incorporate natural capital assets i
         ocean economy.

The blue economy conceptual framework translates OECD’s global green growth strategy to the sea,
supporting an operational policy agenda to “foster economic growth and development in ocean spaces.
It also ensures that the ocean’s natural assets continue to provide the resources and environmental services
on which our well-being relies” (OECD 2011). The OECD breaks this policy agenda down into two broad sets
of policies: (a) broad ‘framework’ policies that mutually reinforce economic growth and conservation of nat-
ural capital, such as tax, competition, and innovation policy to increase efficiency and reduce waste, and
(b) incentives that put a price on overexploitation of natural resources and on pollution, including a mix of
market-based instruments such as environmentally related taxes, together with well-designed regulations
and technology support policies, depending on the context (OECD 2011). Similarly, the World Bank’s 2012
environment strategy also focused on ‘green growth’ objectives applicable to the ocean, to support policies
that are: (a) ‘clean’—that is, reducing pollution; (b) ‘green’—that is, supporting natural resource stocks and
ecosystems to maintain the goods and services that depend on them; and (c) ‘resilient ’—that is, strengthening
the ability of economies to bounce back from natural disasters and more volatile weather patterns (World
Bank 2012a).

Many coastal nations have already introduced a mix of sector and industry-specific policies for economic
activities in the ocean. Increasingly countries have undertaken efforts to develop more integrated policies
reflecting the underlying ecosystems, including coordinating the actions of various government agencies
(OECD 2016). Building from these experiences, a blue economy policy framework, to increase the value of the
entire system in a given ocean space, would include the following components:




                                                                                                          Chapter 3               45
Figure 3.6. Proposed Blue Economy Policy Framework for Aligning Ocean Health and Economic Growth

            Policy Instrument Design                                    Instrument Delivery                                        Ocean Economy Sectors
                 (Objectives, strategies)                                (Rules + Organizations)

     Green: sustainable management of                          Fisheries management regulations                                 Fisheries
     renewable resource stocks, e.g.                           and enforcement
                                                                                                                                Aquaculture
          Ecosystem-based ﬁsheries management                  Protection for marine/coastal species
                                                                                                                                Marine biotechnology


     Clean: reducing (a) environmental impacts              Minerals & Energy                                                   Seabed mining
     of nonrenewable resource use and (b)                      Permitting and licensing
                                                                                                                                Oil and gas
     pollution from land-based sources (such as                Monitoring and enforcement
     untreated sewage, plastics, etc.), e.g.                                                                                    Renewables
                                                               Risk mitigation
          Coastal and marine spatial planning                                                          Business environment
                                                                                                       for ocean activities
          Extractive industries transparency                Shipping and port regulations                                       Shipping
                                                                                                           Ease of doing
                                                            Tourism and Recreation                         business             Port infrastructure & services
                                                               Government commitment                       Corruption
                                                               to sustainability in coastal                perception           Waste disposal for land-based industries
                                                               tourism development                                              (e.g. sewage, plastics)
                                                                                                           Eﬀectiveness of
                                                               Reg. of env. impact of                      dispute resolution
                                                               coastal development                         mechanisms
                                                                                                                                Tourism
                                                            Waste disposal                                 Quality of coastal
                                                                                                           infrastructure       Coastal development
                                                              Agency capacity
                                                              Regulatory standards for
                                                              water pollution                                                   Blue carbon sequestration
                                                              Monitoring and enforcement                                        Coastal protection via habitat protection
                                                                                                                                and restoration

     Resilient: enhancing the ability of coastal               Prevalence of coastal protected
     economies to bounce back from natural                     areas
     disasters and volatile weather and plan for
     adaptation to the eﬀects of climate change,               Natural disaster risk mitigation
     e.g.,                                                     Green infrastructure along the
                                                               coast
          National strategy to adapt to climate
          change


Source: Adapted from World Bank (2012), Economist (2015).




                        The policy framework in Figure 3.6 highlights the role of coastal and marine spatial planning (CMSP) in
                        the transition toward a blue economy, whereby considerations of natural capital are integrated into the
                        regulation of various economic activities, while oceans are envisaged as ‘development spaces.’ CMSP
                        is defined here as a public process of analyzing and allocating ocean uses over space and time to achieve
                        economic, ecological, and social objectives (Ehler and Douvere 2007). Following long traditions of regu-
                        lation of conflicts between different land uses through zoning, CMSP has in many cases resulted in ocean
                        plans and zoning, whereby maps categorize the ocean space for a particular use or array of uses, taking into
                        account ecosystem processes (Agardy 2009). A recent review of CMSP noted 59 ocean plans in preparation
                        or completed as of mid-2014, and outlined case studies for 5 of these plans, which in aggregate created an
                        estimated US$310 million in new economic value, largely through offshore wind developments in the north-
                        ern United States and in Belgium. The study of these plans not only helped to reduce conflicts between
                        different ocean users, such as wind developers and fishers, but also expanded ocean area under protection
                        (with fishers gaining protection of key fishing grounds from wind farms or other uses in some cases) (Blau
                        and Green 2015).


                                                    TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                                46                  SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Putting the blue economy conceptual framework into action would measure both the ocean economy
and the natural capital that underpins it, combined as the blue economy. Tracking metrics or indicators of
growth in this economy together with the sustainability of its natural capital (for example, in a blue econo-
my index), together with clear principles for investment, could help leverage greater investment in the blue
economy with increased benefits for the global economy over the long term. Such a set of indicators could
be used in the blue economy conceptual framework shown in Figure 3.5, to track the transition to a blue
economy over time. For example, while it may be time-consuming and difficult to construct a full model
predicting changes to these indicators over time in various scenarios, more narrative or qualitative scenarios
might suggest the future direction or magnitude of change in the indicators for a blue economy, or specific
components. Additionally, the measures of sector output at a given point in time from each of the sectors of
the ocean economy could be aggregated into an ‘Ocean Economy Index’

Similarly, clear ‘investment principles’ that essentially screen all investments in the ocean economy, could
help ensure that economic and environmental objectives are simultaneously met, consistent with interna-
tionally agreed principles on equity and social justice, and with a priority on poverty reduction. For example,
over 70 percent of international project finance debt in emerging markets is provided by 83 banks and organiza-
tions that have committed to follow the Equator Principles for incorporating environmental and social consid-
erations into finance8. This process has helped spur the development of more specific practices in the financial
sector and banking industry, such as the Carbon Principles,9 and could be the basis for a set of ‘Ocean Principles’
for the blue economy. For example, the Seychelles recently highlighted the role that capital can play in helping to
drive the transition to a blue economy, with agreement on a debt swap to allow the country to redirect a portion
of current debt payments from Paris Club creditors to fund ocean conservation (including creation and manage-
ment of over 400,000 square kilometers of new marine protected areas [MPAs]), together with the NatureVest arm
of The Nature Conservancy.10

Coastal and island states have championed the blue economy in a number of international fora, for exam-
ple putting forward a position paper for the Summit in Apia in 2014.11 Seychelles has focused on the blue
economy and created a Ministry of Finance, Trade, and the Blue Economy; neighboring Mauritius developed
a ‘roadmap’ for the ocean economy in 2013, orienting the country’s growth strategy around the development
and use of its 2.3 million square kilometers of ocean space (Mauritius Prime Minister’s Office 2013). The Mauri-
tius roadmap focuses on development of seven components of the ocean economy: (a) seabed exploration
for hydrocarbon and minerals; (b) deep ocean water applications (DOWA) to draw deep water for cooling
systems and other applications; (c) seafood from both fisheries and aquaculture; (d) port services and related
activities; (e) ocean renewable energies; (f) other ocean-related activities linked to tourism and ICT for exam-
ple; and (g) ocean research and innovation (Lattemann et al. 2010). In late 2014 Indonesia’s President proposed
a policy for the country as a ‘global maritime axis,’ focusing on growth in the ocean economy based on four
main objectives: (a) strengthening sovereignty over the country’s waters and resolving maritime border dis-
putes; (b) sustainably managing the natural resources and protecting the marine environment (notably by
stepping up efforts to combat illegal fishing, developing aquaculture, and growing public revenues from
the sector exponentially by 2019); (c) increasing tourism (doubling visitors by 2019) by building marinas along


   Box 3.2. Position Paper on the Blue Economy for the 2014 SIDS Summit

   The Blue Economy conceptualizes oceans as “Development Spaces” where spatial planning inte-
   grates conservation, sustainable use, oil and mineral wealth extraction, bio-prospecting, sustain-
   able energy production and marine transport. The Blue Economy breaks the mold of the business as
   usual “brown” development model where the oceans have been perceived as a means of free resource
   extraction and waste dumping; with costs externalized from economic calculations. The Blue Economy
   will incorporate ocean values and services into economic modelling and decision-making processes.
   The Blue Economy paradigm constitutes a sustainable development framework for developing coun-
   tries addressing equity in access to, development of and the sharing of benefits from marine resources;
   offering scope for re-investment in human development and the alleviation of crippling national debt
   burdens (OECD 2016).


8	http://www.equator-principles.com/.
9	http://www.theclimategroup.org/who-we-are/our-members/our-member-principles/.
10	http://www.nature.org/newsfeatures/pressreleases/debt-swap-to-finance-marine-conservation-in-the-seychelles.xml.
11	 Small Island Developing States, Blue Economy Concept Paper, www.sids2014.org/content/documents/275BEconcept.pdf.




                                                                                                                       Chapter 3   47
yacht routes for example; and (d) building science and research capacity for a blue economy, for example
through construction of three marine science technology parks by 2019.12 Similarly, the Commonwealth is
supporting developing countries to pursue four interrelated objectives: (a) diversifying the existing economic
base and increasing the proportion of GDP derived from ocean sectors; (b) focusing on strategies to create
higher value jobs; (c) addressing the achievement of food security through marine sources of protein; and (d)
supporting developing countries in sustainably managing ocean development (Roberts 2015).

The Blue Economy and the SDGs. As mentioned in Chapter 2, the international community has agreed on an
SDG aimed at the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans (SDG 14), toward which the transition of the
ocean economy to a blue economy would make a significant contribution. However, the ocean provides food,
jobs, economic growth, carbon storage, and protection from natural disasters among others, and hence can
make a significant contribution toward achieving many more of the 17 SDGs than just SDG 14. For example,
a quick scan of all 17 goals shows at least 10 other SDGs where the transition to a blue economy would be
expected to contribute toward meeting some or all of the targets (see Annex 3).




12	http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/12/30/maritime-axis-development-boost-ri-s-gdp.html#sthash.ifwdCRi8.dpuf.




                        TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       48               SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
3.4	 A Caribbean Blue Economy: Aligning
     Economic Growth and Ocean Health
A growing number of Caribbean states have expressed their desire to explore policies for a blue econo-
my in the region, notably during the inaugural Caribbean Region Dialogue with the G20 Development
Working Group held in Washington, D.C. on April 13, 2015 at the International Monetary Fund headquar-
ters. The dialogue was attended by the region’s finance ministers and central bank governors and covered
the opportunities and challenges around two interrelated themes: (a) ‘Developing the Blue Economy in the
Caribbean’ and (b) ‘Mobilizing Resources’ in support. As the background document to the meeting stated:
“by applying a blue economy approach many new opportunities arise for the region, which can create new
jobs, achieve a higher rate of growth, reduce poverty, and secure international biodiversity and sustainability
obligations” (Roberts 2015). The participants considered that the transition to a blue economy would contrib-
ute toward a number of broader policy objectives captured in the SDGs, including poverty reduction, food
security, energy security, disaster risk reduction, climate change mitigation, and ocean conservation. As the
Outcome Statement from the Caribbean Regional Dialogue notes, “developing the Caribbean Blue Economy
offers strong potential for the Caribbean region and its member countries to help broaden output, exports,
employment and revenue and to benefit from the array of assets and opportunities offered by the Caribbean
Sea.”

The fundamental hypothesis upon which this effort rests, is that the future growth and opportunity of
the ocean economy in the Caribbean Sea for the region’s states and territories would be increased by
transitioning to a blue economy in the region—with investments simultaneously in both natural and
produced capital, and integrated policies that target the interrelationships between economic sectors


                                                                                  Chapter 3          49
                  in the water. The Blue Economy Conceptual Framework proposed in Figure 3.5 aims to help illustrate this
                  hypothesis. For example, the waste disposal sector of the region’s ocean economy, where the Caribbean
                  Sea provides implicit or explicit services of disposal of wastes and particularly excess nutrients, provides a
                  flow of outputs in the form of pollution to the ecosystems and ecosystem processes that in turn reduces
                  their ability to provide critical inputs or factors of production for the tourism and recreation sector of the
                  ocean economy.

                                                                              One specific example of the circular interaction between different
Figure 3.7. Example of the Blue Economy                                       sectors of the ocean economy and the natural capital of the Carib-
Conceptual Framework: Tourism, Waste                                          bean Sea is the above depiction of the waste disposal function of
Disposal, and Ecosystems                                                      the ocean and its impact on ecosystems and ecosystem processes
                                                                              such as coral reefs, beaches, and water quality, all of which are
                                                                              inputs or factors of production for the tourism sector. While the
                    The Ocean Economy                                         value of the waste disposal segment has not been quantified, the
                  Tourism and          Waste                                  tourism sector in the waters of the islands alone generates some
                   recreation         disposal                                US$47 billion in annual revenues (see Table 1.3), and depends heavily
                                                                              on the ocean ecosystems and ecosystem processes as an input (for
    Inputs                                             Outputs                example, Box 3.3).
      Ha of                                             Flow of
   ecosystems                                          Pollutants
                                                       Using the proposed Blue Economy Conceptual Framework
    (e.g. coral        Natural capital                 over time
                           assets                      to consider the ocean’s natural capital and economic sectors
  reefs), water
     quality                                           together requires opportunities to test the hypothesis and de-
                        Ecosystems &
                         Ecosystem                     termine its effects on the overall economic value for the region.
                          Processes                    The hypothesis posits that benefits would be greater with the
                                                       development of those sectors of the ocean economy that main-
                                                       tained or enhanced the natural capital—that is, ‘blue growth.’ For
                                                       example, emerging blue growth opportunities in the Caribbean
                                                       have been proposed in aquaculture, marine renewable energy,
                  tourism, and marine biotechnology, among others (Roberts 2015).


                     Box 3.3. Tourism and the Ocean Ecosystems




                                                               or the region’s tourism industry after large blooms of sargas-
                     In 2015, there were significant concerns f
                     sum seaweed washed up on beaches from Mexico to Barbados, fueled in part by untreated sewage
                     discharged into the Caribbean Sea.
                     https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/08/14/paradise-lost-caribbean-beaches-face-a-massive-seaweed-invasion-ahead-of-winter-tourism-season/




                  Marine renewable energy is one example of a sector often regarded as a model for the transition to a
                  blue economy, where the ocean provides increased jobs and energy without drawing down the natu-
                  ral capital. The aim of blue growth is to find new sectors of the ocean economy (or promote changes to ex-
                  isting ones) that simultaneously enhance both economic benefits and natural capital. Green infrastructure
                  along the coast is an example that can both create jobs and protect coastal development—enhancing the
                  ecosystem processes. A recent meta-analysis of various studies of coastal habitat restoration/engineering
                  projects to increase defenses against storm surge and flooding showed significantly improved protection
                  at lower costs than constructed alternatives such as breakwaters (Narayan et al. 2016). Depending on the
                  water depth, mangrove projects in Vietnam can be three to five times cheaper than a breakwater, and
                  salt-marsh projects across Europe and the United States vary from being just as expensive, to around three
                  times cheaper (Narayan et al. 2016). These are examples of ocean economy sectors that fill the venn dia-
                  gram of a blue economy, where economic growth and environmental health overlap. Another sector that
                  has this potential in the region is aquaculture, depending on the policy and regulatory framework in place.


                                          TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                        50                SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
   Box 3.4. Blue Growth Sector: Marine Renewable Energy

   Currently, imported oil provides 90 percent of the energy consumed in the Caribbean, with
   electricity costs of up to US$0.20 and US$0.50 per kWh (World Bank 2015). For this reason CARICOM
   adopted a regional energy policy in 2013 calling on states to increase the use of commercially viable
   and sustainable renewable energy sources (CARICOM 2013). Efforts to date have focused on terrestrial
   renewable energy, for example in Bonaire where 12 wind turbines with a total of 11 MW of wind power
   capacity (backed by batteries and an additional 14 MW of diesel generation for peak loads and low
   wind) were constructed after a fire destroyed the diesel power plant in 2004 (Bunker 2015). In this case,
   the price of electricity in Bonaire dropped from US$0.50 per kWh to US$0.22 per kWh (Bunker 2015).
   While the ocean could be a source of additional renewable energy—for example, from wave, tidal,
   and ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC)—many of the technologies currently remain in the early
   development stages, combining with the relatively low energy demand of the islands to deter devel-
   opment in the near term. However, as states in the Caribbean explore expanding renewable energy
   generation from the ocean, the region could be a candidate for locating marine renewable testing and
   demonstration projects.
   Sources: World Bank 2015; CARICOM 2013; Bunker 2015.



The Policy Framework for a Caribbean Blue Economy. A Blue Economy Conceptual Framework has been
proposed in Figure 3.5 to help conceptualize an ocean economy that:

       a)	 
           measures natural capital,

            anages competing uses of the ocean space to conserve natural capital, enhance social benefits,
       b)	 m
           and reduce conflicts, and

            purs innovation and investment in blue growth sectors and technologies that simultaneously in-
       c)	 s
           crease economic benefits and natural capital.

Transitioning to such a blue economy in the Caribbean requires a policy framework that accounts for
the ocean as a unique ‘development space,’ shaped by its ecology. Such a policy framework may be
driven by CMSP, generating maps to categorize the ocean space for a particular use or array of uses while
taking into account ecosystem processes, and in some cases translating these categories into regulations
via ocean zoning. Currently ocean governance in the Caribbean is relatively fragmented to support such
integrated policies for the blue economy. Over 30 different regional and subregional organizations par-
ticipate to some degree; and a collection of multilateral environmental agreements, political agreements,
nonbinding agreements, programs, projects, and national laws apply, all of which work at different levels
and spatial scales. Across the region and at the national level, this framework is often focused on a sec-
tor-specific approach to the ocean economy, unable to respond to the cumulative and synergistic impacts
and pressures from human activities in this shared space (Roberts 2015).

Governments and development partners have launched a number of regional initiatives to measure and
conserve the Caribbean Sea’s natural capital, as a foundation for the transition to a blue economy. For
example, since 2009 the GEF has funded a Caribbean Large Marine Ecosystem (CLME) Project implemented
by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to better assess the status of the ecological systems
and the region’s natural capital, and support policy recommendations for conservation.13 Similarly, in 2013
nine Caribbean states and territories signed the Caribbean Challenge Initiative (CCI) Leaders Declaration com-
mitting to conserve and manage at least 20 percent of the marine and coastal environment by 2020, together
with sustainable financing mechanisms for operating costs over the long term (Roberts 2015). These commit-
ments follow a trend in the region to increase protection of ocean areas (MPAs) with coverage growing from
6,463 square kilometers in 1983 to 143,096 square kilometers by 2014, or some 4 percent of the Caribbean Sea
(TWAP 2015).




13	http://www.clmeproject.org/index.html.




                                                                                   Chapter 3          51
Figure 3.8. Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean           At the subregional level, in 2013 the members of the Organization
Policy                                                 of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) adopted a policy framework
                                                       that could provide the foundation for a blue economy in this area
                                                       of the Caribbean Sea. The framework is documented in the Eastern
                                                       Caribbean Regional Oceans Policy and Action Plan (ECROP) (see Box
                                                       3.6). At the national level, a number of states have introduced policies
                                                       to support the transition to a blue economy, such as in The Bahamas
                                                       (where an integrated policy framework aims to manage the ocean
                                                       space and its resources jointly across some 34 different government
                                                       bodies) as well as St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
                                                       and Antigua and Barbuda. In the latter, the Barbuda Blue Halo Initia-
                                                       tive is being supported by the Waitt Institute to develop a compre-
                                                       hensive, community-driven, and science-based plan for the island’s
                                                       coastal waters, including new fishing regulations and a zoning plan
                                                       for coastal waters (Roberts 2015). Similar work is also being undertak-
                                                       en in countries like British Virgin Islands and Montserrat.

                                                       As the following section describes, Grenada in particular has intro-
                                                       duced since 2014 a set of policies aimed at the development of a
                                                       blue economy as the pillar of the country’s future growth.




               Box 3.5. Transforming Governance in Oceans - The OECS Experience

               Promoting Sustainable Oceans Governance in OECS
               SITUATION ANALYSIS: T    he OECS is an economic subregion in the Caribbean with 10 member states, all of
               whom are SIDS which have challenges similar to those faced in the marine environment for example, pol-
               lution among others. The Revised Treaty of Bassetterre establishing the Economic Union which stipulates
               in Article 4(0), among other things, that the Union shall pursue a common policy for oceans. In addition,
               all member states ratified the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). In 2013, the
               highest decision-making body of the Union (the Authority) approved and adopted a regional ocean policy
               (ECROP) to promote a common approach to ocean governance in all member states and further mandat-
               ed that each member develop the national ocean policy to support the regional policy. The competency
               for the implementation of the Oceans program including ECROP was given to the Commission for the
               OECS. The ECROP has a number of priorities and a number of goals, of which many find synergy with the
               SDGs.
               PROGRESS MADE:In 2014, the implementation commenced and to date, a structure for research has
               been developed to support a stronger science policy interface (a marine research strategy, code of
               conduct for responsible marine research, a data platform to support greater access to information, a
               guideline of marine standards)and an oceans governance team, comprising one nominated represen-
               tative of each member state who supports the connectivity and articulated the needs on behalf of the
               state, has been established. To date, five National Ocean Policies have been developed.
               IMPACT: P rior to the implementation of ECROP, ocean spaces were managed in an ad hoc manner, with a
               large number of policies dealing mostly with conservation without significant implementation resources, all
               done solely within national jurisdictions with little bilateral or multilateral cooperation. Now, member states
               are including the ocean economy in their development models and many countries are also pursuing
               greater conservation efforts, such as the CCI of having 20 percent of their coastal area under conservation.
               MAJOR PREREQUISITE FOR SUCCESS: P       olitical will was the major driver; sound governance structure
               in both multilateral environmental agreements and political diplomatic agreement; polices; effective
               institutional structure and cooperation.




                             TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                 52          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
3.5	 Case Study: Grenada: Translating Aspiration to
     Action in Its Transition to a Blue Economy
The state of Grenada consists of the three islands of Grenada, Car-
riacou, and Petit Martinique with a total land area of 345 square Figure 3.9. Map of Grenada
kilometers (133 square miles). As one of the nine members of the
                                                                                          CARRIACOU
OECS, the island nation is nested between the Caribbean Sea and the
Atlantic Ocean. Similar to many small island states, Grenada’s economy
                                                                            Caribbean Sea
is shaped by its remoteness, small land mass, limited natural resource
base, and fragile ecosystems. Grenada supports a population of 106,300
(2014), with a gross national income (GNI) per capita of US$7,910 (World
Bank 2014). Grenada is recognized for its natural beauty and cultural di-
versity. Over the last quarter century it has developed a tourism-based
service economy, and it now brands itself as ‘Pure Grenada: The Spice
of the Caribbean.'

Grenada has a small, open economy, vulnerable to a wide range of                                                                                                     Caribbean Sea
exogenous shocks, and faces several development challenges. With
a current GDP of US$911 million (World Bank 2014), Grenada has ex-
perienced low growth in recent years, and the weak dynamism of the
private sector has contributed to high debt levels. The official poverty                                                         GRENADA
rate in Grenada is 37.7 percent, and the 2008 financial crisis increased
the already high unemployment level to 10.2 percent, with youth un-
employment over 30 percent.

Agriculture represents about 11 percent of the labor force, with
nutmeg and mace being the country’s main exports. In the last two
decades, however, the importance of traditional export crops has fallen, and natural disasters have severely
impacted the agriculture industry. At this time all agriculture, including fisheries, represents 7.1 percent (World
Bank 2014) of GDP in Grenada, down from 13.4 percent in 1990. The country is now the world’s second largest
producer of nutmeg, accounting for 20 percent of global supply. While nutmeg remains a principal export
crop, it is currently second to fisheries as a source of export earnings.

The tourism sector is the main pillar driving economy growth in Grenada. Over the years, the economy has
shifted from one dominated by agriculture to one focused on the tourism industry—now considered the
largest export sector in the country. The economic ramifications of the tourism industry have been profound
with the increase in tourism development projects, employment, and investment on the island. The World
Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC) estimates that the total contribution of tourism to GDP has increased from
15 percent in 2005 to 25.5 percent in 2015. The share of tourism to total employment increased from 13.9
percent to 23.3 percent from 2005 to 201514 (equivalent to 11,500 jobs). The reliance on tourism has resulted
in numerous benefits. Tourism-related activities in the economy has made communities more economically
stable, and has improved the health care and education system in the country. Moreover, tourism has brought
the protection of the natural environment through funding from entrance fees and the maintenance and
enhancement from government funding (Bhola-Paul 2015). While economic growth was moderate in 2015
because of structural challenges, the tourism industry is expected to remain strong and continue to grow.

Grenada is highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and climate variability. Most of the
island’s infrastructure is located in the coastal zone, making the economy vulnerable to impacts of sea-level
rise, inundation, erosion, and storm surges, while the steep slopes are vulnerable to landslides. Based on data
from DesInventar,15 Grenada’s damages and losses from hydro-meteorological disasters and earthquakes can
be estimated at US$1.098 billion between 1994 and 2013. Hurricane Ivan, in particular, caused direct and indi-
rect losses of US$889 million, destroying 90 percent of all property, affecting 85 percent of the nutmeg export



14	 Source: World Travel and Tourism Council Data, 2016. https://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/countries%202015/grenada2015.pdf.
15	 EM-DAT, DesInventar, Caribbean Development Bank.




                                                                                                                          Chapter 3                   53
            crop, and causing a drop of 24 percent in the 2004 GDP.16 Hurricane Ivan rendered inoperable 70 percent of
            Grenada’s hotel infrastructure in 2004, and the debt-to-GDP ratio increased to 94 percent (World Bank 2015).17
            The damage was equivalent to 200 percent of the country’s GDP at the time. The following year, the effects
            of Hurricane Emily further retarded recovery, especially with inadequate insurance coverage. Therefore, the
            vulnerability of Grenada to these natural disasters has caused and will continue to cause costly damage to the
            infrastructure, socioeconomic sectors, environment, and local livelihoods.

                                                            Grenada has come a long way in its recovery process,
Figure 3.10. Growing Tourism Sector                         while placing a major focus on greening its econo-
                                                            my. Grenada’s progress is observed in the approach to
                                                            stimulate key transformation sectors such as tourism
                                                            and hospitality services; health, well-being and edu-
                                                            cation services; agribusiness; ICT; and energy develop-
                                                            ment (renewable and nonrenewable). In transitioning
                                                            to a low-carbon economy, the national Energy Policy
                                                            of Grenada aims to deliver a sustainable low-carbon
                                                            approach through eight core principles: (a) ensuring
                                                            energy security, (b) achieving energy independence,
                                                            (c) maximizing energy efficiency, (d) promoting energy
                                                            conservation, (e) pursuing environmental sustainability
                                                            through ‘green energy,' (f) guaranteeing sustainable
                                                            resource exploitation, (g) minimizing energy costs, and
                                                            (h) energy solidarity.18 Grenada has worked to create a
                                                            new Electricity Supply Act with a view of achieving 100
            percent renewable energy.19 Such an economy would utilize base load geothermal and waste-to-energy,
            complemented by intermittent wind and solar in the energy mix by 2030. Several policies and programs
            have been implemented to meet the clean energy goals of renewable energy and energy efficiency.20
            A price on carbon through a fuel levy has also been introduced, improving the fiscal space of the coun-
            try.21 Although Grenada’s total emissions are not significant in the global context, Grenada declared its
            contribution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions at the conclusion of the UN Framework Convention
            on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conference of the Parties (COP21) in Paris in December 2015. As per the
            (Intended) Nationally Determined Contributions submitted by Grenada, the government committed to
            reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent of 2010 by 2025, with an indicative reduction of 40
            percent of 2010 by 2030.22

            For Grenada mainstreaming climate change adaptation activities into national development planning
            is a priority. The nation has adopted Climate Smart Agriculture, integrating agriculture development with
            climate responsiveness. The largest agricultural production systems, nutmeg and other spice production, are
            ‘climate smart.’23 These arboreal crops sequester carbon, make a vital contribution to soil and watersheds, and
            resist drought. The sustainable use of water resources is crucial for the future development of the country, and
            major actions such as a vulnerability assessment of the water sector and a national adaptation plan have been
            developed. Rainwater collection activities are underway to improve water availability and storage. To reduce
            the risk of hurricane damage, Grenada has also been a member of the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance
            Facility (CRIFF) since 2007. CRIFF was designed as a regional catastrophe fund for Caribbean governments to
            limit the financial impact of devastating hurricanes and earthquakes by providing quick financial liquidity
            when a policy is triggered.

            Broadening its scope past the limited reliance on the green economy, Grenada is now a leader in the transfor-
            mation to a Blue Economy Ocean State in the Caribbean. In May 2014, the Government of Grenada announced


            16	 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. http://www.cepal.org/en/headquarters-and-offices/eclac-caribbean.
            17	 World Bank. Summary Diagnostic Report. Grenada Disaster Risk Financing Technical Assistance Project.
            18	 National Energy Policy of Grenada 2011. http://www.gov.gd/egov/docs/other/GNEP_Final_Nov_23_2011.pdf.
            19	 Statement by Dr. The Right Honourable Keith Mitchell at plenary meeting of the UN Summit for the Adoption of the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
            20	 Some of them include demand-side energy efficiency programs; Government Energy Efficiency Program, which targets a 10 percent reduction in government electricity use;
                Government programs to replace incandescent lights with fluorescent lights, and so on.
            21	 Statement by Dr. The Right Honourable Keith Mitchell at plenary meeting of the UN Summit for the Adoption of the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
            22	 Grenada’s (Intended) Nationally Determined Contributions (I)NDC.
            23	 Most of Grenada’s export crops are from trees that require no tillage. Farmers have also diversified into alternative export crops, including cocoa and tropical fruits to reduce
                the risk of hurricane damage on shallow-rooted nutmeg trees. Cocoa is a deep-rooted species that is resilient to tropical storms. These initiatives will sustainably increase
                productivity, enhance resilience, and reduce greenhouse gases




                                       TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                    54                 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
its intention to undertake a number of activities to protect its ‘blue space’ and grow the island’s blue economy.24
As part of the transition to a blue economy, Grenada has established the National Ocean Governance Committee,
which includes officials from the ministries of Agriculture, Foreign Affairs, Legal Affairs, Finance, Tourism, the Royal
Grenadian Police Force, the Grenada Ports Authority, the Grenada Solid Waste Management Authority, and the
National Disaster Management Agency. This committee oversees the development of blue economy initiatives
across the government.

Grenada is the first OECS member country to develop a vision for its blue growth economy. Grenada’s blue
growth vision is to optimize the coastal, marine, and ocean resources to become a world leader and interna-
tional prototype for blue growth and sustainability. Because of the country’s outward-looking geography, its
ocean and coastal areas provide important resources for developing new ideas and innovation. The situation
has opened up an opportunity for blue growth, harnessing the untapped potential of Grenada’s oceans and
coasts for jobs and economic growth. This potential is significant, provided the appropriate investments are
made.

Grenada’s ocean space is 75 times larger than its land area. Beyond the 345 square kilometers of green terri-
torial land, Grenada has 26,000 square kilometers of blue ocean space—exclusive economic zone (EEZ). Such a
large EEZ provides more space to diversify the country’s economy, and by applying a blue economy approach,
many new opportunities will arise to achieve a higher rate of growth, create new jobs, and reduce poverty.
Some of the emerging opportunities in the blue economy with a strong potential in Grenada are aquaculture,
marine renewable energy, marine biotechnology, and ocean-related tourism.


Figure 3.11. Grenada Exclusive Economic Zone




While the marine environment has great potential with regard to economic sustainable development,
the country is facing increasing environmental pressures. Its large marine ecosystem is characterized by
coral reefs, mangroves, sea grasses, sandy beaches, and rocky shores; and the high biodiversity associated
with fauna and flora has resulted in high rates of national and regional endemism. These marine resources
provide the basis for a range of economic and social activities, including the tourism and fishing industries.
The natural systems underpinning the health of Grenada waters are changing at an alarming rate and scale,
due largely to human action in the context of weak institutions. Despite the value of the goods and services
provided by the oceans, enormous challenges are confronting this natural capital asset, most notably (a)


24	 NOW Grenada. Grenada’s blue economy poised for rapid growth. http://nowgrenada.com/2014/05/pm-grenadas-blue-economy-poised-rapid-growth/.




                                                                                                                     Chapter 3                  55
habitat change and loss, (b) pollution, (c) overfishing, and (d) climate change. Coastal development and ma-
rine-based pollution, for example, threaten 85 percent and 25 percent, of the reefs in Grenada, respectively.

Recognizing the rich marine ecosystem and increasing environmental pressures, Grenada has created
MPAs and commits to create more. Grenada committed to effectively conserve at least 25 percent of its
near-shore marine area and at least 25 percent of its terrestrial area by 2020 as a means to contribute to the
sustainable livelihoods for its people and to contribute to protection of the world’s biodiversity (Convention
on Biological Diversity - COP8). The MPAs will help restore the productivity of the oceans, avoid further deg-
radation, and offer sites for scientific study which can generate income through tourism, biotechnology, and
sustainable fishing.

Grenada’s strategic location in the world offers a number of significant factors that play into the develop-
ment of a successful blue economy strategy. As examples of its advantages, Grenada possesses (a) a location
in close proximity to both North and South America with convenient access to/from major cities throughout
the world, (b) an EEZ of 26,000 square kilometers of blue ocean space, (c) the gateway to the Grenadine Islands
and the best sailing in the Caribbean, (d) one of the most politically stable governments in the region, (e) a
widely recognized sound infrastructure and supportive investors, and (f) excellent port facilities and an inter-
national airport. All of these factors put Grenada in a unique position to thrive on the path to a blue economy,
and to serve as a leader in its implementation.



Figure 3.12. Grenada Underwater Sculpture Park




underwatersculpture.com


Globally, Grenada has already achieved acclaim for several blue economy activities. The world’s first under-
water sculpture park is recognized as one of the top 25 wonders of the world by the National Geographic. The
park contains a collection of ecological underwater contemporary art located off the west coast. The island
has also been recognized for the best advanced diving and wreck diving in the Caribbean by Scuba Diving
Magazine. Moreover, Kick’em Jenny is the most active volcano in the region and considered one of the first
shallow vent biological communities ever found, providing unique opportunities for research related to the
growth of a submarine volcano.


                          TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       56                 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
The blue economy in Grenada is closely linked to the in-
come generated by ocean-related tourism. As the largest Figure 3.13. Tourism in Grenada
industry in Grenada, tourism is heavily reliant on the coast-
al and marine environment with regard to cruise ships,
beach side hotels and beaches, scuba diving, recreational
and sport fishing, and recreational yachting. The country
has been recognized as a sustainable tourism destination
with its 'Pure Grenada' brand, referring to the spices, pris-
tine tropical rain forests, and coral reefs. The charming
villages, towns, and harbors reflect the maritime heritage.
In addition to providing berths for large cruise ships, Gre-
nada serves as a major destination point for private yachts
and mega yachts. The diving segment alone contributes
around EC$57 million. The economic impact of yachting
on Grenada is over EC$230 million. The quality and status
of the marine environment could therefore have a signifi-
cant impact on the value of this sector, depending on how
tourists perceive the quality of the marine environment and the experience it offers.

The growth of Grenada’s fisheries exports has contributed in major ways to the blue economy. The con-
tribution of fisheries to the national economy has been increasing, representing (along with other agriculture)
7.1 percent (2014) (World Bank 2014) of GDP in Grenada. The characterization of Grenada’s ocean waters has
determined the nature of its fisheries; Grenada has a large ocean space in relation to its terrestrial size, but the
majority of this is deep oceanic water with a relatively small area of shallow shelf. The fisheries are therefore
dominated by large oceanic pelagic species like tuna, which constitute 75 percent of landings.25 Yellow fin
tuna, which is mainly targeted for export, comprises 28 percent of total annual fish catch.26 Other prime species
include demersals (reef fish like snapper, grouper, and parrotfish) and small pelagics (mostly scads) which are
caught in coastal areas. Overall, it is important to highlight that the oceanic pelagic fishery has been a major
area of growth in the country’s economy. Unlike other Eastern Caribbean countries, Grenada has a successful
high-value seafood export business, which has significant and positive economic implications for the country.
Two important factors led to this success: (a) Fresh tuna exports are sent by air to the United States, and (b) the
country achieved the quality standard required to gain an European Union ‘number’ to export fresh demersal
fish (grouper, snapper, and so on) to Martinique (which is a Department of France).27 Fisheries have thereby
played a major role in reviving the economy, and the expanding export of high-value fish (fresh tuna) has
generated a significant level of foreign exchange in recent years.

Grenada is actively pursuing opportunities for ocean aquaculture. This subsector was discontinued in Gre-
nada after its introduction in the 1990s (tilapia and fresh water prawns), mainly due to lack of an economy
of scale and an inability to compete with the traditional capture fisheries. Grenada is part of the Global Blue
Growth Network, which recognizes the need to better protect the marine environment and at the same time
produce an additional 60 million tons of fish through sustainable aquaculture by the year 2030.28

Grenada has been an advocate for addressing climate change and building coastal resilience. Ocean
issues are a critical part of any attempts to address climate change, and major efforts have begun to build
coastal resilience in the country. In the coastal zone, effectively addressing climate and disaster risks requires
an integrated approach that looks at exposure to impacts from climate change and natural hazards. Gre-
nada has now completed its integrated coastal zone policy in 2015 with a view to preserve, enhance, and
strengthen resilience of coastal ecosystems while enabling social and economic development.29 Moreover,
assessments of the national and local vulnerability have been undertaken30 to provide a holistic picture of
risk, thus helping design and implement locally relevant solutions. One initiative to be implemented is the


25	 Fisheries Policy for Grenada 2012. http://acpfish2-eu.org/uploads/projects/id140/I1544%20-%20ACPFISH%20II%20-%20CAR%20-%201.2%20-%20B2b%20-%20Policy%20
    Grenada%20%20-01.pdf.
26	 FAO Country Profile. ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/en/FI_CP_GD.pdf.
27	 Fisheries Policy for Grenada 2012. http://acpfish2-eu.org/uploads/projects/id140/I1544%20-%20ACPFISH%20II%20-%20CAR%20-%201.2%20-%20B2b%20-%20Policy%20
    Grenada%20%20-01.pdf.
28	 Statement by Dr. The Right Honourable Keith Mitchell at the Interactive Dialogue 4 “Protecting our Planet and Combating Climate Change” Trusteeship Council Chambers on
    September 27, 2015.
29	 Grenada’s (Intended) Nationally Determined Contributions (I)NDC.
30	 The Nature Conservancy. At the Water’s Edge (AWE): Coastal Resilience in Grenada and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. An Integrated Approach to Adaptation and Disaster
    Risk Reduction.




                                                                                                                               Chapter 3                    57
establishment of a fisheries insurance to promote the resilience of the small-scale fisheries sector against the
increasing climate-change-related disaster risks. Other efforts already under implementation include several
community ecosystem-based adaptation activities, in particular coral restoration, mangrove rehabilitation,
alternative livelihood solutions, and so on, all of which will reduce the community’s vulnerability to threats
and help inform actions and policies to further build resilience.

Grenada is the first country to initiate a proactive and comprehensive national coastal master planning
approach to blue growth. The government recently completed a high-level Blue Growth Coastal Master
Plan for the islands of Grenada, Carriacou, and Petite Martinique. The plan not only summarizes key goals
and objectives but also identifies specific blue growth development incentive zones along the coast. It doc-
uments preliminary site and facility concepts for desirable blue growth strategic projects to initiate a dialog
with investors. The master plan, in concert with Grenada's Integrated Coastal Zone Management Policy, is
a roadmap for the nation to become a world leader in the development of a sustainable blue economy
that will generate new jobs, alternative livelihoods, and an expanded economy, while preserving the natural
environment. A detailed description of the planning process and findings are highlighted in Annex 4.

On the pathway toward blue growth, Grenada further aims to establish a Blue Growth and Oceans Gov-
ernance Institute. The institute will make Grenada a global example for Blue Growth as an Ocean State. It
will house many of the leading global ocean research centers, and promote its vision to optimize the coastal,
marine, and ocean resources around the Caribbean. Grenada has put major efforts into education, which rep-
resents 20 percent of the GDP. The island is home to St. George’s University, the leading academic center in the
Caribbean. Moreover, Grenada has joined Dominica and Marshall Islands to promote a new initiative called
‘We are the Oceans’ (WATO), inspired by the United Nations Global Goals. WATO is dedicated to educating
youth across the world about ocean sustainability and making it part of every school’s curriculum by 2030.

Marine spatial planning (MSP) is a fundamental tool for developing Grenada’s blue economy. Threats
to Grenada’s ocean space (and the entire Caribbean Sea) have not occurred in isolation, but often overlap
and intensify their impacts in the same physical space, which is often governed by different sector-based
legal frameworks. Utilizing tools such as MSP will help Grenada better understand and then reform gov-
ernance of the diversity of ocean uses and economic activities, resulting in a more secure framework for
sustained investment in the blue economy. To achieve blue growth aspirations, Grenada and other OECS
countries are aiming to fill the capacity gap, which has become a priority in the Eastern Caribbean Regional
Oceans Policy and the Three Year Strategic Plan (ECROP) approved in 2013. Drawing upon MSP, it will bring
several benefits tied to the health of the marine ecosystems, which would include increased sustainable
livelihoods from ocean-based tourism and from fisheries, enhanced food security from fisheries, and in-
creased defenses and resilience to extreme weather events.

The successful development of a blue economy will require governance and policies that integrate
environmental and economic considerations. Good governance at local and regional levels is imperative
to fully realize the transition to a blue economy. Grenada is well on its way through its several ongoing
blue economy initiatives, at the regional level also, through the endorsement of the new Eastern Caribbean
Regional Ocean Policy. The planning and management for multiple coastal and ocean uses requires consid-
eration of the full range of uses, users, and values, through an integrated, interdisciplinary and inter-sectoral
approach. Trade-offs must be made where space imposes limits on the combination of all activities. The
mix of marine resource development will be determined by existing governance structures and will likely
require new legislation, defined rules, strengthened institutions, and potentially entirely new ones (Roberts
2015).

By applying a blue economy approach, Grenada will continue to encounter many new opportunities, also
to the benefit of the Caribbean region. The blue economy approach allows countries to coordinate man-
agement across sectors and resources and integrates environmental management directly with economic
development, fiscal policy, and social goals. The emerging opportunities will require investment in research
and development, strengthening technical capacity, and creating the right enabling environment to attract
and retain outside investments.

Some enablers are vital to the conditions for blue growth. These include (a) policies for a healthy, resil-
ient, and productive marine environment; (b) infrastructure; (c) technology, research, and development; (d)


                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     58          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
business development with sustainable finance; (e) maritime surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement;
(f) education and awareness; and (g) institutions for integrated ocean governance. With these conditions,
the blue economy will create new jobs, achieve a higher rate of growth, reduce poverty, and also secure
international biodiversity and sustainability obligations.

To create the financing environment to advance the transformation to a blue economy, Grenada orga-
nized Blue Week 2016 to promote blue growth and investment to SIDS and least developed countries. This
international conference was in response to the adoption of the Agenda 2030 by the UN in 2015, including the
SDG on oceans and seas (SDG 14), and the Paris Agreement at the UNFCCC in December 2015. Blue Week 2016
focused on integrating ocean health and wealth, and bringing together ocean-related investment into a co-
herent package of bankable projects to increase the benefits of SIDS. In particular, the conference established
a Blue Growth Network to (a) harness ocean-based investment initiatives; (b) recognize that integrated ap-
proaches are vital for long-term investment, reduced pressure on marine habitats, and sustainable livelihoods;
and (c) recognize that capacity development is essential to achieving blue growth.

In conclusion, this chapter suggests that the economic benefit derived from oceans is poised to increase
at even higher rates as ocean industrialization continues. Countries like Grenada have recognized this
fact and are preparing to better understand and ultimately harness the ocean’s potential for future growth.
However, the very ocean assets underpinning economic growth are facing threats due to their unsustainable
utilization. If ocean wealth rises and falls with that of ocean health, as indicated by reports, recognition of that
relationship holds great importance. Governments will need to maintain the integrity of ocean assets and
indeed help them to appreciate in value by better care of ocean ecosystems. Based on early estimates of the
ocean economy’s contribution to GDP, quite a lot is at stake. This chapter provides a framework or entry point
for needed policy reforms. The next chapter provides a suggested pathway to a blue economy.




                                                                                      Chapter 3           59
Pathway and
Approach for
the transition to
a Caribbean Blue
Economy
A
             n infinite number of pathways are possible. The development
             of the ocean economy in the Caribbean from the current baseline
             described in Chapter 1 will require thoughful consideration. In
             modeling the trajectory of the global ocean economy, the OECD
             described three future scenarios to 2030:

     a)	 
         Unsustainable growth in the region’s ocean economy;

     b)	 
         Business-as-usual growth (and decline in the natural capital); and

     c)	 
         Transition to a blue economy (OECD 2016).

Achieving the third scenario will take coordinated action. While it is beyond
the scope of this paper to model future pathways for the ocean economy in
the Caribbean and quantify projections over time, some initial policy recom-
mendations and actions can be proposed for initiating a transition to a blue
economy, based on the general blue economy policy framework suggested
in Chapter 3 from international experiences and recent work undertaken in
the Caribbean by the Commonwealth. These policy recommendations pro-
vide a broad menu from which countries may choose what applies to their
local context, given that ocean governance arrangements are at different
stages of readiness throughout the region. Some recommendations and
cases may be applicable at a regional scale for shared natural capital assets
and ocean industries, whereas others may be best pursued by subregional
coalitions or at the national level.

As a first step, a set of ‘Ocean Principles’ for the region’s blue economy may
be useful to guide both policy and investment. These are based on a review
of selected international law, the Equator Principles, the Carbon Principles,
and several initial attempts to articulate key principles for the use of the ocean.
This report proposes some Ocean Principles for discussion and consideration
in the region in order to help the transition to a Caribbean blue economy. In
particular, relevant policy statements of principles included in international
law can be found in, among others:

               N Convention on the Law of the Sea Treaty;
      ■■ 1982 U


               io Declaration on Environment and Development;
      ■■ 1992 R


               ode of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries;
      ■■ 1995 C


      ■■ 2002Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development;


      ■■ 2012The Future We Want Outcome Document; and


      ■■ 2015 
              Voluntary  Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fish-
         eries in the Context of Food Security and Poverty Reduction.

Of note in particular, the Future We Want Outcome Document from the
Rio+20 Summit renewed international commitment to the principles of
sustainable development articulated in 1992 at the first Earth Summit.
It emphasized the need for sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth in order to achieve sustainable development, introducing the con-
cept of policies to promote a green economy that better aligns production
and consumption patterns with conservation of ecological systems and pro-
cesses (United Nations, 2012).



TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN                    61
                                                                           n addition to international law, several recent international efforts
                                                                           I
Box 4.1. Ocean Principles for Investment                                   have synthesized principles to guide investment in the ocean space
in a Caribbean Blue Economy                                                with various objectives that may be helpful, including:
■■ Principle 1: Sustainable Development/                                   ■■    International Union For Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Princi-
  Sustainable Livelihoods                                                  ples for High Seas Governance;31
■■ Principle 2: Marine Ecosystem Health

■■ Principle 3: Integrated Ocean Governance
                                                                           ■■    Blue Ribbon Panel to the Global Partnership for Oceans Princi-
                                                                           ples (Blue Ribbon Panel 2013); and
■■ Principle 4: Science-based, Precautionary,
  and Adaptive Decision-making                                             ■■       World Wildlife Fund Blue Economy Principles.32
■■ Principle 5: Duty of Care and Accountability

■■ Principle 6: Inclusive and Transparent                                   ased on these efforts, the following Ocean Principles are proposed
                                                                           B
  Decision-making                                                          for discussion and consideration in the region, with the objective of
■■ Principle 7: Ecosystem-based Management
                                                                           guiding public and private investment in transition toward a blue
                                                                           economy in the Caribbean (see Annex 2 for more detail).
■■ Principle 8: Develop Ocean Solutions that
  will Reduce Climate Change Risks and Allow        A policy framework is needed to enable the transition to a Ca-
  the Development of Climate Change-Relat-          ribbean blue economy. A generic blue economy framework was
  ed Opportunities                                  proposed in Chapter 3 from a set of international experiences in
■■ Principle 9: Sharing of Benefits Derived from    promoting governance that would integrate the environmental,
   the Blue Economy                                 social, and economic dimensions of the ocean economy with
■■ Principle 10: The Right to Development           broad participation and innovation. Research was also undertak-
                                                    en with a number of Caribbean countries by the Commonwealth
                                                    Secretariat.33 This report suggests seven interrelated priorities for a
             policy framework to enable the transition to a blue economy in the region:



            Figure 4.1. Potential Policy Framework for a Caribbean Blue Economy

                                  Policy Instrument Design                                                               Policy Instrument Delivery
                   Policies for Integrated Ocean Governance                                               Education and Awareness
                   Policy objectives for a healthy, resilient, and productive                             Maritime Surveillance, Monitoring and Enforcement
                   marine environment                                                                     Infrastructure
                                                                                                          Research and Development
                                                                                                          Business Development and Sustainable Finance


            Policy instrument design 1: Developing and strengthening regional and national policies to better inte-
            grate the governance framework for the Caribbean Sea. This framework sets a key priority on reviewing
            and enhancing the broad policies for integrated ocean governance. At different scales, these policies must
            support the design and enactment of more ocean-specific (rather than sector-specific) policy instruments.
            They should also review the capacity for delivery (that is, the regulations and institutions to give effect to the
            policies). Robust and integrated governance (i.e. both policy instrument design and delivery) is the unique key
            to achieving adequate management of the ocean and is therefore an overarching theme for the transition to
            a blue economy. As the OECD notes, given the expected rapid future expansion of ocean industrial activity
            worldwide and the increasingly crowded ocean space, establishing effective integrated ocean governance in
            coastal countries is imperative (OECD 2016).

            The existing policy framework for ocean governance in most, if not all, developing Caribbean states em-
            phasizes a traditional sector-specific approach. Their management and planning thus show symptoms of


            31	See: https://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/10_principles_for_high_seas_governance___final.pdf
            32	www.panda.org/wwf_news/?247477/Principles-for-a-Sustainable-Blue-Economy.
            33	 See for example the situation analysis completed in support of the development of a national maritime policy framework for The Bahamas (Commonwealth Secretariat 2013).




                                      TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                   62                 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
the problem facing a large number of countries seeking to implement a blue economy approach: Ocean
governance remains highly ‘balkanized’ (McGinnis 2016). As Caribbean governments encourage economic
development of marine areas in the future, value-based conflict between competing interests is likely to
increase. Clear, coordinated institutional mechanisms for integrated coastal and ocean management estab-
lished and implemented across relevant sectors such as fisheries, tourism, transport, energy and environment,
will be essential to accommodate and resolve these conflicts. This goal will be difficult to achieve without a
more comprehensive and integrated approach to marine planning and decision-making. At the same time, it
should be recognized that trade-offs will need to be made where ocean space is limited and the combination
of all activities is not feasible. New policies for ocean governance should produce change in management
practices that enable a shift toward the sustainable use of ocean resources.

A more effective governance system can be summarized in three components. The first component is a
broad policy framework that creates the administrative mechanisms required for integrated management of
the ocean. This mechanism may be either formal (for example, the establishment of a Ministry or Department
with functions and powers and duties for coordination) or informal (for example, an across government co-
ordination committee with broad representation from different sectors). The mechanism incorporates local
knowledge and leadership. The second component is the more frequent policies and regulations that these
administrations develop to govern the use and allocation of ocean resources and space. It includes capacity
to enforce compliance with access and use rules. (A number of countries in the region have embarked on the
development and implementation of national ocean policy frameworks.) The third component consists of
tools to achieve the implementation and coordination of integrated ocean policy frameworks (for example,
CMSP, administrative capacity for monitoring and enforcement, and so on).

With regard to the tools, the application of CMSP is particularly important for guiding decision-making
in a blue economy, and for resolving conflicts over ocean space. CMSP brings a spatial dimension to the
regulation of marine activities by helping to establish geographical patterns of sea uses within a given area
(OECD 2016). One key practical issue for the use of CMSP in the Caribbean will be the appropriate spatial scale


                                                                                  CHAPTER 4          63
for planning to match uses to ecosystems and ecosystem processes, including the strong representation of
protected areas (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2015). Another issue is ensuring greater leadership for the develop-
ment of spatial plans (for example, at the national scale perhaps ensuring a single lead agency for marine
spatial planning, harmonizing associated legislation and policies). Additionally, ‘Future Ocean Spatial Planning’
(FOSP) has been suggested as a further framework to guide sustainable development of the ocean and coasts
inspired by the MSP approach (EU-U.S. Conference Series 2011).

Fortunately, recent years have seen a significant increase in the number of countries and regions putting
in place strategic policy frameworks and decision tools for better ocean management (OECD 2016). The
ECROP in the eastern Caribbean is an example of a step toward more integrated ocean governance within the
region, and a number of states have begun the development and implementation of integrated ocean policy
framework at the national scale (for example, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, St. Lucia, St. Kitts and Nevis,
and St. Vincent and the Grenadines).

Policy instrument design 2: Ensuring the implementation of policy objectives for a healthy, resilient, and
productive marine environment in the Caribbean, as the basis for a blue economy. In addition to develop-
ing more integrated frameworks for ocean governance, policies should explicitly reflect the principle that the
health of the oceans is inextricably linked to the sustainability of economic livelihoods for coastal commu-
nities and the economy generally. As noted in section 2.1, they also provide a range of essential goods and
services that would be extremely costly to restore or replace once lost. For Caribbean countries in particular,
the health of coral reefs and associated biodiversity are of critical importance from both their environmental
and economic perspective due to the strong reliance of their economies on the tourism and fisheries sectors.
Effective management of the Caribbean marine environment and the maintenance and restoration of ecosys-
tem health and integrity is thus fundamental to ecologically sustainable development in the region.

Policy instrument delivery 1: Carrying out education and awareness for the blue economy. The lack of
education and training in many small Caribbean states leads to chronic gaps in the technical capacity for
policy instrument delivery. The gaps occur notably in marine research, planning, and decision-making across
all sectors of the ocean economy. Identifying future skill needs, labor market supply, and demand trends and
adapting and developing existing education, vocational, and professional training programs to meet them
will be essential if the blue economy is to become a reality in the Caribbean. Interested governments may find
a key ‘short cut’ in many cases through cooperation to share capacity on issues or sectors of the ocean econ-
omy of critical concern, in a creative, effective, and politically appropriate manner—for example, for maritime
surveillance and monitoring. Such cooperation, coupled with greater coordination across governments, can
help reduce costs and accelerate the transition to the integrated governance approaches needed for a blue
economy. A more coordinated focus between the existing research and educational facilities in the region
may well prove beneficial in addressing key gaps in research skills and capacity building. Ultimately a more
comprehensive research strategy is likely required for Caribbean small states to realize fully the opportunities
presented by a blue economy. This strategy would likely include regional cooperation or partnerships to more
systematically identify and quantify the skills needed for the blue economy; it would then engage local and
regional universities to explore whether current curricula can meet these needs.

Policy instrument delivery 2: Ensuring maritime surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement, to enhance
compliance with policy instruments. The Commonwealth’s experience of undertaking stakeholder en-
gagement in several SIDS highlights the difficulties associated with the enforcement of existing rules and
regulations, particularly with regard to fisheries. In many countries, the issue of illegal, unregulated, and unre-
ported (IUU) fishing by neighboring states34 and poor enforcement of existing fisheries laws are key concerns
for governments and marine users alike. In the context of a Caribbean blue economy, IUU fishing prevents
governments from achieving their nationally and regionally agreed-upon fisheries management goals and
objectives (FAO 2015). A key element of monitoring and enforcement is surveillance of a nation’s ocean space
and an awareness of the activities undertaken in the maritime domain. Improving procedures for monitor-
ing and enforcement and clearly defining the responsibilities for the management of marine activities and
resources between various ministries and departments is a crucial issue that must be addressed. Caribbean
small states need to enhance their ability to identify threats to maritime space in a timely manner. They may


34	 Concerns were voiced to Commonwealth advisers during stakeholder consultation programs in The Bahamas and Antigua and Barbuda alike. The key concerns relate to
    foreign fishing vessels fishing illegally in those states’ national waters with little or no possibility for enforcement action being taken by the respective coastal state.




                          TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       64                 SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
share and integrate intelligence, surveillance, and navigation systems into a common operating picture. They
must position decision-makers to prepare for, prevent, respond to, and recover from a broad spectrum of
potential maritime-related threats. Regional cooperation in maritime domain awareness will also allow limited
resources to be shared and more effectively deployed, for example around satellite-based remote sensing
platforms to monitor large areas of ocean space in near real time, combined with innovative tracking and
analysis tools,35 drawing for example upon facilities that already exist within the Commonwealth.

Policy instrument delivery 3: Providing the infrastructure for a
blue economy. Coastal and port infrastructure are critical assets
that serve as catalysts of economic growth and development in
Caribbean small states. These countries rely heavily on coastal
tourism and are almost entirely dependent on maritime transport
to facilitate global trade (UNECA 2014). A number of Caribbean
small states are also positioning themselves as maritime hubs in
the region, anticipating future growth in that sector as a key pillar
in their economic development strategies.36 In many Caribbean
small states, tourism resorts, coastal towns, and infrastructure are
at risk, given their location at or near present sea level and their
proximity to the coast. Relocation or fortifying coastal infrastruc-
ture for coastal protection will become financially burdensome
for governments. A more integrated approach to planning could
make the tools to help minimize hazards of flooding and erosion
and investments in coastal infrastructure affordable and optimize
performance.

Policy instrument delivery 4: Supporting research and devel-
opment for a blue economy. Research and development leads
to new products and services; the generation of new knowledge
about the marine environment; facilitation of better manage-
ment and protection of marine ecosystems; and informed policy,
governance, and regulation of the marine sector.  Knowledge
of the marine environment is a critical need for effective deci-
sion-making toward a blue economy. Translating new opportu-
nities into productive sectors will require investment in research
and development, building technical capacity, and creating
the right environment to attract and retain outside investment.
Identifying and defining ongoing strategic marine research and
information needs, in an inclusive and adaptive manner, togeth-
er with the appropriate funding resources and mechanisms, is
essential for achieving economic development through a blue
economy framework. This research will ensure that the maximum
value can be achieved from any resource through sound planning
and management, ensuring that the best decisions can be made
regarding the balance between economic development and sustainable resource use (Greenhill et al. 2015).

There is generally a paucity of marine data relating to the offshore waters in Caribbean small states. Fur-
thermore, indigenous marine research is not well developed in most small states due to a lack of funding and
research institutions. Numerous international research cruises are undertaken in the Caribbean Sea, related
to the collection of hydrographic/bathymetric data, biological sampling, or environmental characterization.
Establishing a program for identifying marine data, in particular bathymetry, via a number of academic and
other sources, and reviewing the process by which diplomatic clearance for marine scientific research is given.
Requiring that copies of all data collected are provided to the government upon research completion would
greatly enhance countries’ ability to use what is acquired (at considerable expense) for use in developing
their marine management plans (Evans 2015). To this end, the OECS has recently published a series of strategy


35	 For example, see: http://globalfishingwatch.org/.
36	 Notable examples include Jamaica, Antigua & Barbuda, and The Bahamas.




                                                                                  CHAPTER 4          65
Figure 4.2. Summary of Potential Policy Framework for a Caribbean Blue Economy

                                                              Governance for a Blue Economy
            Ocean Principles for Investment in a Caribbean Blue Economy                            Policy Instrument                     Policy Instrument
                                                                                                         Design                               Delivery
          Principle 1: Sustainable Development/Sustainable Livelihoods
          Principle 2: Marine Ecosystem Health                                                         Policies for                          Education and
                                                                                                       Integrated                            Awareness
          Principle 3: Integrated Ocean Governance                                                     Ocean                                 Maritime
          Principle 4: Science-based, Precautionary, and Adaptive Decision Making                      Governance                            Surveillance,
          Principle 5: Duty of Care and Accountability                                                 Policy                                Monitoring and
                                                                                                       objectives for a                      Enforcement
          Principle 6: Inclusive and Transparent Decision Making                                       healthy,                              Infrastructure
          Principle 7: Ecosystem-based Management                                                      resilient, and
                                                                                                       productive                            Research and
          Principle 8: Develop Ocean Solutions that will Reduce Climate Change                         marine                                Development
          Risks and Allow the Development of Climate Change-Related Opportunities                      environment                           Business
          Principle 9: Sharing of Beneﬁts Derived from the Blue Economy                                                                      Development
          Principle 10: The Right to Development                                                                                             and Sustainable
                                                                                                                                             Finance


                                                       Direction of time from design to delivery


documents aimed at facilitating and improving coordination on marine-related research among its member
countries.37 These documents may serve as a useful model for countries to develop their own approaches.

Policy instrument delivery 5: Supporting business development and sustainable finance. Many countries
are developing and implementing strategic plans to stimulate growth in their ocean space (see, for example,
the Grenada Case Study in section 3.5). Such plans generally include fisheries, aquaculture, ecosystem services,
marine and coastal tourism with the potential for the future integration of other important sectors as appro-
priate (Ababouch 2015). These plans have the potential to significantly increase investment in the transition
to a blue economy. Such strategic development plans focus on both existing sectors and new and emerging
opportunities such as aquaculture and marine renewable energy. While it is clearly recognized that the ocean
offers further potential for economic benefits to be derived from the sea—both from living and nonliving
resources—it has not always been clear what a sustainable ocean economy should look like, and under what
conditions it is most likely to develop (Economist Intelligence Unit 2015). The realization of these opportunities
will require strategies that (a) further support investment in and development of existing sectors; (b) promote
investment and innovation to support the development of new sectors; and (c) further develop the backward
and forward links in the value chains of existing sectors. In Caribbean island states in particular, perhaps the
greatest potential for value addition and job creation lies with the development of small and medium-sized
enterprises within the blue economy value chains. There is, therefore, a need to examine the mechanisms
necessary to encourage and finance start-up micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and to assist with
capacity and technology development.

Approach for the transition to a Caribbean blue economy. While the above policy framework for consider-
ation in the region to enable the transition to a Caribbean blue economy is easy to articulate at the level of
political ambition, execution is highly complex, and the pathway from intent to action is uncharted (Greenhill
et al. 2015). Many of the elements required to transition to a Caribbean blue economy do, however, already
exist, and the evolution of current approaches is both possible and realistic. Identifying and addressing some
immediate actions for the above priorities could significantly drive and enable progress in this direction.
Particularly for the island states and territories such actions would also be consistent with, and support imple-
mentation of, the program agreed at the Third International Conference on Small Island Developing States in
2014 and its SAMOA Pathway Outcome document.



37	 These include OECS Commission 2016; OECS 2016a; OECS 2016b; OECS 2016c. All documents are available at http://www.oecs.org/our-work/units/ogu.




                         TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
       66                SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
  Box 4.2. Proposed Approach to Begin the Transition toward a Caribbean Blue Economy

  Measure.
         ■■ Improve the statistical and methodological base for measuring the scale and performance of
             the ocean economy.
         ■■ Establish natural capital accounts for the Caribbean Sea at the national and regional levels.

  Manage.
         ■■ Create and expand integrated approaches to ocean governance.

         ■■ Apply marine spatial planning at the scale of exclusive economic zones.

         ■■ Invest in restoration and maintenance of the function and integrity of critical marine
             ecosystems.
         ■■ Build and strengthen the institutional and human capacity to act.

  Invest.
         ■■ Promote ocean principles to guide investment in the blue economy.

         ■■ Advance key infrastructure investments.

  Monitor.
         ■■ Continue to enhance knowledge of the Caribbean Sea.

         ■■ Expand maritime domain awareness of the Caribbean Sea.

         ■■ Track key indicators of the transition to a blue economy.

  Repeat.
         ■■ Keep close track of actions and progress and adjust as needed.




This report recognizes that progress on integrated ocean governance arrangements are at different stag-
es of readiness across the Caribbean. It proposes some potential immediate next steps for action that could
serve as the basis for a practical approach (that is, medium-term strategies and actions) (Laffoley 2013) to help
achieve a Caribbean blue economy. These actions are grouped under five strategies which, if pursued by na-
tional and regional authorities with the support of development partners, could help transform the promising
concept of a Caribbean blue economy into a sustainable process of implementation.

In conclusion, this report and the above approach has aimed to provide a first-order estimate as a baseline
for measuring the size of the current ocean economy in the Caribbean, together with a synthesis on the
available information on the status of the natural capital underpinning that economy, and a conceptual
framework and basis for countries to advance their stated aims to pursue a transition toward a Caribbean
blue economy. Based on terrestrial experiences in the green economy as well as OECD’s recent measure and
models of the global ocean economy, the report has proposed some likely policy priorities and approach for
advancing this transition. An important next step will be to develop the blue economy conceptual framework
proposed here into a blue economy model for the region that could project potential net economic benefits
from various policy decisions and scenarios of transition—for example, modeling the net benefits of pursu-
ing the approach suggested here, in line with internationally agreed principles for social equity and poverty
reduction.




                                                                                    CHAPTER 4          67
Annex 1. Summary of OECD
Projections for Growth in
the Ocean Economy

G
              lobally in the coming decades, every sector of the ocean economy is likely to be affected
              by technological advances such as innovations in advanced materials, subsea engineering
              and technology, sensors and imaging, satellite technologies, computerization and big data
              analytics, autonomous systems, biotechnology, and nanotechnology. The OECD modeled
              the development of the ocean economy to 2030, projecting many ocean-based industries to
outperform the growth of the global economy—indeed doubling its contribution to global value added
from 2010. In particular, the OECD projects strong growth rates in shipping and transport, port services, ma-
rine aquaculture, offshore wind, and ocean-based tourism, among others. Marine renewable energy, marine
biotechnology, and carbon capture and storage are also considered to have significant potential, though
unlikely to be realized by 2030 (OECD 2016).


Table A1.1. OECD Projections of Changes in the Ocean Economy to 2030 under Business as Usual
Scenario

                                              CHANGE IN OCEAN          GROSS VALUE           GROSS VALUE
                         SHARE OF OCEAN
         INDUSTRY                             ECONOMY SHARE            ADDED (US$,         ADDED INCREASE
                          ECONOMY (%)
                                                   (%)                  BILLIONS)           (US$, BILLIONS)

                          2010       2030         2010 –2030            2010       2030        2010 –2030
Tourism                    25         26               1                 375        780           405
Ports                      13         16               3                 195        480           285
Fisheries                   6         11               5                 90         330           240
Marine renewables           1          8               7                 15         240           225
Shipping                   20         17               -3                300        510            210
Offshore oil and gas       34         21               -13               510        630           120
Aquaculture                 1          1               0                  15        30             15
Total                      100        100                               1,500      3,000          1,500
Source: OECD (2016).


The OECD projected growth in the ocean economy under three different scenarios: (a) unsustainable growth,
(b) business-as-usual, and (c) sustainable growth (a blue economy). The difference in the contribution to gross
value added from these three scenarios by 2030 is relatively small (from US$2.8 trillion, to US$3.0 trillion, to
US$3.2 trillion, respectively), though expected to widen significantly by 2050 (OECD 2016). The OECD’s projec-
tion for the global ocean economy is instructive for the Caribbean, which constitutes a significant portion of
this economy.




                                                                                    Annexes              69
Annex 2. Detailed Description
of Proposed Ocean Principles
S.NO.               PRINCIPLE                                                DESCRIPTION

                                           This principle recognizes the importance of marine ecosystems in delivering
                                           essential goods and services that underpin the livelihoods of millions by
        Sustainable Development/Sustain-   contributing to food security, poverty eradication, livelihoods, income, em-
  1
        able Livelihoods                   ployment, health, safety, equity, and political stability. Central to this principle
                                           is the need to align the use of resources to optimize the well-being of people
                                           today and in perpetuity.
                                           The diversity, health, and productivity of marine ecosystems is fundamental to
                                           the management of both the oceans and the land. The diversity, productivity,
 2      Marine Ecosystem Health            and core functions of marine ecosystems must be maintained, restored, and
                                           protected with a desired end of maintaining or recovering natural levels of the
                                           natural capital upon which its prosperity depends.
                                           Integrated governance is a commitment to planning and managing human
                                           activities in a comprehensive manner while considering all factors necessary
                                           for the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources and the shared
                                           use of ocean spaces.
  3     Integrated Ocean Governance        Inherent to this principle are initiatives that produce change in management
                                           practices to enable a rapid shift toward the sustainable use of marine and
                                           coastal resources. The goal is to support (or design) effective innovative gover-
                                           nance systems that provide incentives to private and public sector leaders at all
                                           levels to engage and support a healthy ocean and community well-being.
                                           Ocean planning and management decisions should be based as far as
                                           possible on the best available information on the natural, social, and economic
                                           processes that affect ocean and coastal environments.
                                           When adequate information and knowledge are not available, decision-mak-
        Science-based, Precautionary and   ers should take a precautionary approach, actively seek to develop such
 4
        Adaptive Decision-making           knowledge, and refrain from undertaking activities that could potentially lead
                                           to harmful effects.

                                           Adaptive management allows decision-making to respond to the availability
                                           of new information concerning risks and sustainable opportunities.
                                           All users of the marine environment take responsibility for the impacts of
                                           their activities, by taking appropriate action, as well as by being transparent
  5     Duty of Care and Accountability
                                           about their impacts so that stakeholders are well informed and can exert their
                                           influence.

                                           Full stakeholder awareness and participation contributes to credible, accepted
                                           rules that identify and assign the corresponding responsibilities appropriately.
                                           A sustainable blue economy should therefore be based on active and effective
                                           stakeholder engagement and participation.

        Inclusive and Transparent          It is also critical that decision-making processes are conducted in a manner
 6
        Decision-making                    that is transparent and accountable to minimize the likelihood of disputes and
                                           to promote international cooperation.

                                           For the blue economy to be a success, partnerships between government, the
                                           private sector, and civil society must be built to ensure co-responsibility for
                                           ocean management and to empower stakeholders to participate effectively.



                            TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                70          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
S.NO.               PRINCIPLE                                                   DESCRIPTION

                                              There is a need to move away from the sectoral and species-based
                                              approaches, which characterize our current approach to managing the marine
                                              environment. Ecosystem approaches need to be further refined and made
                                              operational. Large-scale MSP and networks of MPAs, and other area-based
                                              management measures for biodiversity conservation purposes, should be
                                              integral parts of the blue economy.
 7      Ecosystem-Based Management
                                              Such processes must be participatory, accountable, transparent, equitable,
                                              and inclusive, to be responsive to present and future human uses and needs,
                                              including the needs of minorities and the most vulnerable groups in society.
                                              To make informed trade-offs, such processes should also use appropriate tools
                                              and methods to capture the range of benefits that ecosystem goods and
                                              services can bring to different stakeholders.
        Develop Ocean Solutions that          Sustainable energy provision is fundamental to the transition to a low-carbon
        will reduce climate change risks      economy, and the basis for progressing toward sustainable development
 8
        and allow the development of cli-     globally. It is critical to ensuring progress in areas such as food, water, health,
        mate-change-related opportunities     gender equality, and poverty alleviation.
                                             The benefits from the use of common ocean resources, and the responsibil-
                                             ities for their continued health and productivity, should be shared by all citi-
                                             zens. Governments should govern marine resource use based on the interests
        Sharing of Benefits Derived from the
 9                                           of the whole community and the interests of intergenerational equity.
        Blue Economy
                                              Economic instruments such as taxes, subsidies, and fees can help by internaliz-
                                              ing environmental and social benefits, costs, and risks to society of ocean use.
                                              Human development in harmony with the environment is fundamental to the
                                              achievement of sustainable development, so that individuals and societies
                                              are empowered to achieve positive social and environmental outcomes.
 10     The Right to Development
                                              The value of the resources provided by the oceans must be recognized and
                                              opportunities for their economic development optimized to meet society’s
                                              needs and promote the well-being of coastal communities.




                                                                                     Annexes            71
Annex 3. Contribution of the Blue Economy to
Selected SDGs and Some of Their Targets
          SDG 13: Climate Action                                          SDG 1: End Poverty                                      SDG 2: End Hunger, Achieve
                                                                                                                                   Food Security & Improved
         Strengthen resilience and           Eradicate extreme poverty                                                                     Nutrition
         adaptive capacity to
         climate-related hazards and         Reduce by at least half the proportion of men, women, and children of all ages        End hunger and ensure access
         natural disasters                   living in poverty in all its dimensions                                               by all people, and address the
         Integrated climate change           Ensure all have equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to basic        nutritional needs of
         measures into national              services, ownership and control over land and other forms of property,                adolescent girls, pregnant and
         policies, strategies and            inheritance, natural resources, appropriate new technologies and ﬁnancial services    lactating women and older
                                                                                                                                   persons
         planning                            Build resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations
                                                                                                                                   Ensure sustainable food
                                             Create sound policy frameworks based on pro-poor and gender-sensitive                 production systems
         SDG 12: Responsible                 development strategies
     Consumption and Production
         Achieve the sustainable
         management and eﬃcient use                                                                                                 SDG 6: Clean Water and
         of natural resources                                                                                                             Sanitation
         Reduce food losses along                                                                                                  Improve water quality by
         production and supply chains                                                                                              reducing pollution, halving
                                                                                                                                   the proportion of untreated
         Reduce waste generation                                                                                                   wastewater
         through prevention, reduction,
         recycling and reuse
                                                                                                                                  SDG 7: A ordable and Clean
                                                                                                                                            Energy
      SDG 11: Sustainable Cities &
            Communities                                                                                                            Increase substantially the share
                                                                                                                                   of renewable energy in the
         Reduce the adverse per capita                                                                                             global mix
         environmental impact of cities
         Increase the number of cities       A Blue Economy in the Ocean
         and human settlements                                                                                                       SDG 8: Decent Work &
         adopting and implementing                                                                                                     Economic Growth
         integrated policies toward
         inclusion, resource eﬃciency,                                                                                             Sustainable per capita
         mitigation and adaptation to                                                                                              economic growth in LDCs
         climate change, and resilience                                                                                            Higher economic productivity
         to disasters                                                                                                              through diversiﬁcation,
                                                                                                                                   technology upgrading and
                                                                                                                                   innovation
     SDG 10: Reduced Inequalities                                                                                                  Improve global resource
                                                                                                                                   eﬃciency in consumption and
         Achieve and sustain income                                                                                                production and endeavor to
         growth for the bottom 40% of                                                                                              decouple economic growth
         the population at a rate higher                                                                                           from environmental
         than the national average                         SDG 14: Ocean Conservation & Sustainable Use                            degradation
         Empower and promote the                                                                                                   Achieve full and productive
         social, economic and political       Prevent and reduce marine pollution
                                                                                                                                   employment and decent work
         inclusion of all                     Protect marine and coastal ecosystems                                                for all women and men
                                              Eﬀectively regulate ﬁshing, and end overﬁshing, illegal, unreported and              Protect labor rights and
     SDG 9: Industry, Innovation &            unregulated ﬁshing                                                                   promote safe and securing
             Infrastructure                   Conserve at least 10% of coastal and marine areas                                    working environments for all
                                                                                                                                   workers
         Quality, reliable, and               Increase economic beneﬁts to SIDS from sustainable use of ocean resources
         sustainable infrastructure                                                                                                Promote sustainable tourism
Source: United Nations (2016).




                                           TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                                 72        SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Annex 4. Grenada’s Blue
Growth Coastal Master Plan

T
           he Government of Grenada’s Blue Growth Investment Prospectus to generate investment,
           jobs, and growth is based upon a high-level coastal development master plan for Grenada,
           Carriacou, and Petite Martinique that outlines a ‘Blue Growth’ and ‘Sustainable Nation’ strategy.
           The ‘Blue Growth’ and ‘Sustainable Nation’ strategy outlines an approach for development that will
           improve sustainable productivity at land and at sea so as to benefit all economic sectors. Blue eco-
nomic development must also be sustainable and respect the marine environment. The Blue Growth strategy
is based on maritime clusters—groupings of industries, suppliers, and educational/research institutions that
reinforce each other through their close proximity.

A ‘Smart Growth’ strategy for urban planning will concentrate growth in development centers with mixed-
use components. Open spaces, farmland, natural beauty, and critical environmental areas will be preserved
and enhanced. Specific Development Incentive Zones in Grenada, Carriacou, and Petite Martinique consid-
ered the following factors: (a) Development must be in harmony with the MPAs and (b) Development must
enhance the existing cultural characteristics and activities of the area and promote its strengths in the global
market. Development opportunities have been evaluated and prioritized to determine which projects could
be combined for greater efficiency and investor interest, and which projects would have the most spin-off
development opportunities. As a result, a number of strategic projects have been identified and included in
an investment prospectus for global tourism, boutique tourism, fisheries/aquaculture, marine services, coastal
residences, shipping, and industries. The Government of Grenada is encouraging investment into strategic
projects via public-private partnerships, and/or private development. Special development incentives for
these projects were prepared.



Planning Process
Phase 1 planning process consisted of three stages of development:38 Stage A: Data gathering, stakeholder
meetings, vision; Stage B: Developing blue growth planning options; and Stage C: Documenting the final
blue growth master plan. The planning process involved a series of meetings with Grenada key stakeholders,
private sector entities, and community groups; visit to potential sites and identification of development alter-
natives; planning workshops; and preparation and presentation of reports to the Government for their review
and approval.

Consultations with key government counterparts provided critical data and input into the process to as-
sure that the report is comprehensive and addressed the key planning issues. Additional key stakeholders
who participated in planning meetings and workshops provided insight and assisted in the evaluation of
alternative development options. The ‘consensus-building’ process included stakeholder meetings and a
blue growth planning forum. The principal consultant met with key stakeholders to review both the Stage
A Report findings as well as to discuss key issues and/or potential planning opportunities. Key stakeholders


38	 Raymond Moldenhauer, Director of RM STRATEGIES and the Principal Strategic Planning Consultant, led the Coastal Master Planning process and
    was responsible for the development of the Phase 1 reports and coordination with government advisors and government consultants.




                                                                                                                                Annexes           75
              Box A4.1. Three Stages of Development of Phase 1 Planning Process

                        ata Gathering, Stakeholder Meetings, Vision
              STAGE A: D
                     ■■ Island tours and meetings in Grenada with key stakeholders

                     ■■ Gather planning data (topographic, infrastructure, demographics, planning, photos,…)

                     ■■ Gather previous master plans and coastal development plans, as well as information on legacy
                       projects, existing projects, and planned projects (to the extent that these are readily available).
                     ■■ Discuss planning, infrastructure, and sustainability issues that a master plan must address with
                       key stakeholders, government advisors and counterparts, consultants, and where feasible,
                       community leaders.
                     ■■ Prepare a preliminary report that summarizes key findings

                        eveloping Blue Growth Planning Options
              STAGE B: D
                     ■■ Prepare preliminary planning concepts for key blue growth development zones

                     ■■ Review preliminary planning concepts with key stakeholders, government advisors and
                       counterparts during planning workshops in Grenada
                     ■■ Determine high-priority initiatives and potential government blue growth policies

                     ■■ Prepare a preliminary report that summarizes key conclusions

                        ocumenting the Final Blue Growth Master Plan
              STAGE C: D
                     ■■ Refine planning concepts for strategic projects in Grenada, Carriacou, and Petite Martinique

                     ■■ Develop market sector investment prospectuses

                     ■■ Prepare the final report and presentation

                     ■■ Present the blue growth conceptual coastal master plan to the government and key
                       stakeholders


Figure A4.1. Stakeholder Meetings                                      represented Tourism, Forestry and Fisheries, Ag-
                                                                       riculture, Economic and Technical Cooperation,
                                                                       Physical Planning, and the Port Authority. Key dis-
                                                                       cussion points were summarized.

                                                                      As part of defining the vision, the Stage A Report
                                                                      summarized the strengths, weaknesses, and
                                                                      threats for each of the islands, then identified
                                                                      where the existing blue growth economic activ-
                                                                      ities and proposed blue growth projects were
                                                                      currently located. Multiple coastal sites were iden-
                                                                      tified, noting both the current as well as potential
                                                                      land use opportunities. The areas to be designated
                                                                      for blue growth development must also consider
                                                                      the sustainable livelihoods of the residents, while
                                                                      providing the ‘right’ opportunities to use the natu-
            ral resources in the most sustainable manner. The plan also identified the current areas in Grenada, Carriacou,
            and Petite Martinique that are considered to be environmentally fragile and in need of protection.

            
            All of the development concepts that were explored considered the following factors:

                  ■■ 
                     Development must be in harmony with the existing and proposed MPAs

                  ■■ 
                     Development must enhance the existing cultural characteristics and activities

                  ■■ 
                     Development should be specific to a region to best promote its attributes and strengths



                            TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
                 76         SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure A4.2. Blue Growth Designated Areas




 otential projects within each market sector were evaluated based on the potential market, environment,
P
appropriate project scale, infrastructure, and support facilities available to achieve a ‘smart growth’ approach.

 reliminary blue growth development zones were identified for each island, with the intent to strategically
P
locate blue growth activities in the most appropriate regions and with the goal to promote economic activity
throughout the islands to the extent feasible.


Figure A4.3. Potential Projects Within Each Sector




                                                                                     Annexes           77
Figure A4.4. Marine Tourism




 ine focused Blue Growth Marine Centers of Excellence will promote Grenada in both the Caribbean and
N
global markets:

1.	 MARINE SERVICES - D   evelopment of new full-service marinas on Petite Martinique and Carriacou will
    enhance their strategic location as a ‘Gateway to the Grenadines’ and southern safe haven during the
    hurricane season. New jobs will help to boost the economy in those areas and allow residents to pursue
    work without having to leave the islands.

2.	 BOUTIQUE TOURISM - N     ew smaller-scale resort hotels with high-end amenities will help increase the
    international tourism business to northern Grenada, Carriacou, and Petite Martinique. The relocation of



Figure A4.5. Blue Growth Economic Opportunties




                TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
    78          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure A4.6. Blue Growth Centers of Excellence




    the existing Lauriston Airport in Carriacou to Dumfries, with a longer runway that will accommodate com-
    mercial airlines, will open the door for new tourism opportunities.

3.	 MARINE RESEARCH - N      orthern Grenada, with access to the pristine ocean waters surrounding Ronde
    Island, the Leatherback Turtle nesting area near Levera, and the submerged volcano—Kick Em Jenny
    just off shore—should establish itself as the base of operations for significant marine research into the
    potential benefits from the ocean’s biological resources and unique environment. Facilities that foster
    research activities by academic, private, government, and international institutions could include: Ocean
    Life Research, Turtle Research, and expanded Submarine Volcano Research.

4.	 ECOTOURISM -     With its close proximity to Mount St. Catherine, the highest mountain peak in Grenada,
    and to numerous waterfalls, Victoria is a prime location to promote Ecotourism in Grenada. The scenery
    is breathtaking and the flora and fauna of the rainforest will be major draws for hikers. Development will
    highlight activities centered on Healthy People and a Healthy Planet, including Renewable and Efficient
    Energy.

5.	 FISHERIES/AQUACULTURE - T        he village of Gouyave is the ‘Fishing Capital of Grenada’ and host to weekly
    ‘Fish Friday’ festivals. Development here will further promote the fishing industry in Grenada with increas-
    ing exports to North America and Europe. CRFM members were also recently urged to reverse the decline
    in aquaculture. In addition to the promotion of the fishing industry, new development should advance
    Gouyave as a Fisheries and Aquaculture leader in the region.

6.	 GLOBAL TOURISM - T     he southwest quadrant of Grenada, with the international airport and cruise ship
    terminal will further promote development with a focus on Grenada as a world-class tourism center for
    hospitality, education, medical care, and sports. New facilities that will enhance the global market image
    include a Grand Anse Tourism Center, Medical Tourism Hospital, and Wellness Campus, Hotel/Casino,
    Regional Sports Center and Village, and the site for the proposed Blue Growth and Oceans Governance
    Institute.

7.	 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY -This area, with proximity to the airport, major businesses in St. George's,
    and St. George’s University, is envisioned as a high-tech knowledge corridor for new international ven-
    tures and services in concert with the proposed new Google partnership.




                                                                                      Annexes           79
Figure A4.7. Blue Growth Incentive Zones




8.	 COASTAL RESIDENTIAL -     The southeast coast of Grenada, with numerous peninsulas and protected
    coves, is ideal for the development of marina communities for residents as well as retired expats. The
    developments will range from individual homes to villas and multi-family apartment complexes.

9.	 SHIPPING AND INDUSTRY - R     elocation of the port to Grenville, in conjunction with a free trade industrial
    zone and cargo air terminal, will increase Grenada’s role in the shipping industry while allowing the de-
    velopment of light industrial activities and other new economic opportunities for Grenada’s east coast.

 and within each of the proposed development zones was identified along with a list of potential projects
L
that would be provided special Blue Growth Incentive Packages by the government.


Potential strategic projects were discussed based on the following criteria:

      ■■ 
         The plan must consider conservation and protection of the environment.

      ■■ 
         The plan must reflect the ‘Pure Grenada’ brand.

      ■■ 
         The plan must integrate with Grenada’s strategic plan and coastal zone management plan.

      ■■ 
         The plan should be ‘transformative’ and address the economic, environmental, and social impact.

      ■■ 
         The plan should allow opportunities for local investment.


From the list of strategic projects, the following criteria was used to determine priority projects:

      ■■ 
         The project is sustainable.

      ■■ 
         The project promotes economic, environmental, and social goals.

      ■■ 
         The project addresses a global and/or Caribbean market.

      ■■ 
         The project does NOT require a government infrastructure investment.

      ■■ 
         The project has a high potential for private investment.


                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     80          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure A4.8. Blue Growth Strategic Projects.




      ■■ 
         The project creates both short-term and long-term jobs.

      ■■ 
         The project is likely to create ‘spin-off’ projects and opportunities.

 reliminary design concepts were developed for the priority projects to best convey the vision to investors.
P
These diagrams and benchmark images are indicative of the desired project scope and scale, but are not final
designs. The investor is invited to discuss alternative concept plans and/or a project scale that may better
meet the investor's financial pro forma.

 he Blue Growth vision for St. George’s Harbor takes advantage of three very prominent ‘gateway’ sites that
T
will be developed with large-scale ‘Anchor Projects’ that will transform the harbor into one of the most


Figure A4.9. Blue Growth vision for St. George’s Harbor




                                                                                  Annexes           81
Figure A4.10. Blue Growth Vision and Architectural Character




Figure A4.11. Blue Growth Vision and Architectural Character




desirable destinations in the Caribbean. Their success is expected to generate numerous ‘spin-off’ develop-
ment opportunities around The Carenage and Esplanade for new commercial, retail and restaurants, and
cultural event centers.

 he project scale and architectural character are also described via the use of sketch-up 3D modeling and/or
T
the depiction of other relevant ‘Benchmark Projects.'

Documenting the Plan:The blue growth strategic projects have been documented in market-based invest-
ment prospectuses that can be shared with key investors, in the following areas: Global Tourism, Boutique
Tourism, Fisheries/Aquaculture, Marine Services, Coastal Residential, and Shipping and Industry. Each of the
projects include the following key information: Site Location, Current Land Ownership, Program Summary,
Project Description, Preliminary Site Plan, Concept and/or Benchmark Images and Preliminary Project Cost.


                TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     82         SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Figure A4.12. Blue Growth Vision and World Trade Center




Figure A4.13. Strategic Projects




Integrating the Coastal Master Plan with
Marine Transportation Planning

Blue growth development will be supported by the following marine transportation projects:

Dumfries Airport

The current airport runway in Carriacou does not allow for larger commercial jets to land and take off. The
relocation of the airport to Dumfries will allow for direct commercial flights to Carriacou, which will increase
tourism and also open up land for the development of other economic activities including a Commercial
Center, Fishing Village, Aquaculture Center, and Marine Housing.


                                                                                    Annexes           83
West Coast Ferry Service

The blue growth master plan promotes the expansion of the current ferry service from St. George’s to Hillsbor-
ough, Carriacou, and on to Town Dock in Petite Martinique to include Sandals, Gouyave, Victoria, and Sauteurs.

East Coast Highway

With the relocation of the port to Grenville, a new East Coast Highway will be built to move goods and ser-
vices to St. George's. This plan will open up additional land along the Southeast Coast for the development of
marine residential communities on the numerous peninsulas. A second phase of an East Coast Highway may
include a Northeast Highway from Grenville to Sauteurs.

St George’s Harbor Water Taxi Service

As St. George’s Harbor is developed, a new market for regularly scheduled water taxis would connect the
Cruise Ship Esplanade with Portofino, the Carenage, the proposed Central Harbor Development, the Lagoon,
Port Louis Marina, and finally around the corner to the Port Louis Phase 2 development project.

Inter-Island Ferry Service

An Inter-Island Ferry Service might also be developed to include Trinidad, Union Island, St. Vincent, St. Lucia,
Martinique, Dominica, and Barbados.




                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     84          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
Reference List
Ababouch, L. 2015. Fisheries and Aquaculture in the       Bowen, A., and C. Hepburn. 2014. “Green Growth: An
      Context of Blue Economy. Senegal: UN Econom-             Assessment.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy
      ic Commission for Africa.                                30 (3): 407–22. doi:http://oxrep.oxfordjournals.
Agardy, T. 2009. “Is Ocean Zoning the Solution to Dy-          org/content/by/year.
      ing Marine Ecosystems?” Scientific American.        Brakenhoff, R. 2015. “Outlook for Offshore Energy.”
      http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/               Oil & Gas Financial Journal. http://www.ogfj.
      is-ocean-zoning-the-solution/.                           com/articles/print/volume-12/issue-4/fea-
Agnew, D.J., J. Pearce, T. Peatman, T. Pitcher and P.          tures/outlook-for-offshore-energy.html.
      Ganapathiraju. 2008. The Global Extent of Illegal   Bremere, I., M. Kennedy, A. Stikker, and J.
      Fishing. London: Marine Resources and Fisher-            Schippers. 2001. “How Water Scarci-
      ies Consultants Ltd.                                     ty Will Affect the Growth in the Desali-
Barbier, E. B. 2012. Moving Beyond GDP: How to Factor          nation Market in the Coming 25 Years.”
      Natural Capital into Economic Decision Making.           Desalination 138: 7–15. https://www.re-
      World Bank. http://www.wavespartnership.                 searchgate.net /profile/Jan _ Schipp ers/
      org/sites/waves/files/images/Moving_Be-                  publication/222551931_How_water_scarci-
      yond_GDP.pdf.                                            ty_will_effect_the_growth_in_the_desali-
Bhola-Paul, Helen M. 2015. “Tourism Challenges and             nation_market_in_the_coming_25_years/
      the Opportunities for Sustainability:                    links/00b495390d106478db000000.pdf.
A Case Study of Grenada, Barbados, and Toba-              Bruckner, A.W. 2002. “Life-Saving Products from Cor-
      go.” Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Man-             al Reefs.” http://issues.org/18-3/p_bruckner/.
      agement 3 (9–10): 204–213. http://www.              Bunker, Kaitlyn. 2015. “A Caribbean Island Says
      davidpublisher.org/Public/uploads/Contrib-               Goodbye Diesel and Hello 100% Renewable
      ute/55dc2c742d782.pdf.                                   Electricity.” RMI Outlet. http://blog.rmi.org/
Bhomia, R.K., J.B. Kauffman and T.N. McFadden. 2016.           blog_2015_01_07_a_caribbean_island_says_
      “Ecosystem Carbon Stocks of Mangrove For-                goodbye_to_diesel_fuel.
      ests along the Pacific and Caribbean Coasts of      Burke, L., and J. Maidens. 2004. Reefs at Risk in the Ca-
      Honduras.” http://link.springer.com/article/10.1         ribbean. Washington, DC: World Resource Insti-
      007%2Fs11273-016-9483-1.                                 tute. pdf.wri.org/reefs_caribbean_full.pdf. Last
Blankespoor, B., S. Dasgupta, and G. M. Lange. 2016.           accessed on April 22, 2016.
      “Mangroves as Protection from Storm Surges in       Burke, L., K. Reytar, M. Spalding, and A. Perry. 2011.
      a Changing Climate.” Policy Research Working             Reefs at Risk Revisited. Washington, DC: World
      Paper 7596. World Bank, Washington, DC.                  Resources Institute.
Blau, J., and L. Green. 2015. “Assessing the Impact of    Caribbean Desalination Association (CaribDA). 2016.
      a New Approach to Ocean Management: Evi-                 http://www.caribda.com/.
      dence to Date from Five Ocean Plans.” Marine        Caribbean Maritime. 2014. “Trinidad - Concerns Over
      Policy 56: 1–8.                                          La Brea Post Development.” http://www.ca-
Blue Ribbon Panel. 2013. Blue Ribbon Panel Report to           ribbean-maritime.com/index.php/latest22/
      the Global Partnership for Oceans. Washington,           issue-23-october-2014-january-2015-the-year-
      DC: World Bank.                                          ahead/258-trinidad-concerns-over-la-brea-
Boonzaier, L., and D. Pauly. 20016. “Marine Pro-               port-development.html.
      tection Targets: An Updated Assessment of           CARICOM. “Caribbean Community Energy Policy.”
      Global Progress.” Oryx 50 (1): 27–35. http://            Trinidad and Tobago, March 1, 2013. http://
      journals.cambridge.org/action/displayFull-               www.caricom.org/jsp/community_organs/en-
      text?type=1&fid=10083426&jid=ORX&volu-                   ergy_programme/CARICOM_energy_policy_
      meId=50&issueId=01&aid=10083421&new-                     march_2013.pdf.
      Window=Y.                                           CEPAL. 2009. Maritime Sector and Ports in the Caribbe-
                                                               an: The Case of CARICOM Countries. http://repos-


                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     86          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
     itorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/6344/        ENI. 2015. “Eni Starts Production at Perla Giant Gas
     S0900073_en.pdf?sequence=1.                               Field Offshore Venezuela.” Press Release. http://
Colgan, C. S. 2016. Measurement of the Ocean Econ-             www.eni.com/en_IT/media/press-releas-
     omy from National Income Accounts to the                  es/2015/07/Eni_starts_production_at_Perla_
     Sustainable Blue Economy. Journal of Ocean                offshore_Venezuela.shtml.
     and Coastal Economics: Vol. 2, Article 12.           EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2016.
CLME Project. 2011. Caribbean Large Marine Ecosys-             “Drinking Water Contaminants - Standards
     tem Regional Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis.           and Regulations.” https://www.epa.gov/
     http://iwlearn.net/iw-projects/1032/reports/              dwstandardsregulations. Cited in http://
     clme-regional-tda-1.                                      w w w.c t.gov/dph/lib/dph/drinking _wa-
Commonwealth Secretariat. 2013. “The Develop-                  ter/pdf/dwc_fed_fund.pdf            and     http://
     ment of a National Maritime Policy for the                o p ensiu c . lib. siu .e du /cgi /v iewco ntent .
     Commonwealth of The Bahamas: A Situation                  cgi?article=1063&context=ucowrconfs_2006.
     Analysis Prepared for the Ministry of Transport      EU (European Union)-U.S. Conference Series. 2011.
     and Aviation on Behalf of the Government of               Sustainable Oceans: Reconciling Economic Use
     The Bahamas.” Unpublished Advisory Report.                and Protection. Conference Proceedings. http://
Corbin, C., J. Daniel, and M. Vogeley. 2014. “Wastewa-         www.draeger-stiftung.de/fileadmin/user_up-
     ter Policy Development in the Caribbean: The              load/konferenzen_2013/oceans_report_2013.
     Way Forward.” Paper presented at the 23rd An-             pdf.
     nual CWWA Conference and Exhibition “Water,          Evans, A. 2015. Identification of Marine Data Availabili-
     Waste & Energy in the Caribbean,” sponsored               ty for The Bahamas. Desktop study prepared by
     by the Caribbean Water & Wastewater Asso-                 Maritime Limits and Boundaries Services Limit-
     ciation, October 6–10, 2014. http://www.gef-              ed for the Commonwealth Secretariat, London.
     crew.org/images/papers_and_presentations/            FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2011. “Re-
     CReW_C2_Regional_WWPolicyDevWayFor-                       view of the State of World Marine Fishery Re-
     ward_CWWAPaper_CCorbin_Oct2014.pdf.                       sources.”       http://www.fao.org/docrep/015/
Costello, M.J., Coll M., Danovaro R., Halpin P., Ojave-        i2389e/i2389e.pdf. Last accessed on April 22,
     er H., et al. 2010 A Census of Marine Biodiversity        2016.
     Knowledge, Resources, and Future Challeng-           	    . 2012. The State of World Fisheries and Aquacul-
     es. PLoS ONE, 5(8): e12110. doi:10.1371/journal.          ture. ISSN 1020-5489. Rome: FAO.
     pone.0012110.                                        	    . 2014a. The State of World Fisheries and Aquacul-
Diaz, R. J., and R. R. Rosenberg. 2008. “Spreading             ture. Rome: FAO.
     Dead Zones and Consequences for Marine               	    . 2014c. Global Blue Growth Initiative and Small
     Ecosystems.” Science 321: 926.                            Island Developing States (SIDS). http://www.fao.
Doney, S. 2010. The Growing Human Footprint on                 org/3/a-i3958e.pdf.
     Coastal and Open-Ocean Biogeochemistry.              	    . 2014d. Securing Fish for the Caribbean. http://
     Science, 328: 1512-1516.                                  www.fao.org/3/a-ax904e.pdf. Last accessed on
Economist Intelligence Unit. 2015. “The Blue Econ-             April 21, 2016.
     omy: Growth, Opportunity and a Sustainable           	    . 2014e. Small Island Developing States: The Sus-
     Ocean Economy.” Briefing Paper for the World              tainable Intensification of Caribbean Fisheries and
     Ocean Summit 2015. http://www.economist-                  Aquaculture. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3932e.
     insights.com/sites/default/files/Blue%20Econ-             pdf. Last accessed on April 25, 2016.
     omy_briefing%20paper_WOS2015.pdf.             Last   	    . 2015. Combating IUU Fishing in the Caribbean
     accessed on March 8, 2016.                                through Policy and Legislation. FAO Issue Brief
Ehler, C., and F. Douvere. 2007. Visions for a Sea             # 15. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5291e.pdf. Ac-
     Change: Report of the First International Work-           cessed on May 12, 2016.
     shop on Marine Spatial Planning. Integover-          	    . 2016. “FishStatJ.” Application version 2.12.5.
     mental Oceanographic Commission and                       http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/soft-
     Man and the Biosphere Program. Paris: Unit-               ware/fishstatj/en. Last accessed on April 20,
     ed Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultur-           2016.
     al Organization.                                     	    . 2016b. FishStatJ Database. Global Capture
EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration). 2015.            Fisheries Production - Tonnes.
     www.eia.gov.                                         GENI. 2003. Caribbean Fact Sheet. http://www.geni.
	    . 2016. International Energy Statistics. https://         org/globalenergy/library/national_energy_
     www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/IEDIndex3.                 grid/cuba/carib.shtml.
     cfm?tid=50&pid=53&aid=1.                             Global Ocean Commission. 2014a. From Decline to
                                                               Recovery: A Rescue Package for the Global Ocean.


                                                                                  References             87
     Report Summary. http://www.some.ox.ac.uk/                     news/9508-jamaica-seeks-operator-for-22-mil-
     wp-content/uploads/2016/03/GOC_Summa-                         lion-teu-kingston-container-terminal-.
     ry_2015_AUG-1.pdf.                                       Jouvet, Pierre-André, and Christian de Perthuis. 2013.
Global Partnership for Oceans (GPO). 2014. Water                   “Green Growth: From Intention to Implementa-
     Quality Management Report for the Wider Carib-                tion.” International Economics 134 (August): 29–
     bean Region. Draft report.                                    55. doi:10.1016/j.inteco.2013.05.003.
Greenhill, L., A. Hughes, J. G. Day, and M. S. Stanley.       Laffoley, D. 2013. “A New Approach to Ocean Gover-
     2015. “Blue Knowledge: A Strategic Approach                   nance: Practical Ways to Fast Track the Green
     to Developing Knowledge to Transition to a                    Economy.” Commonwealth Secretariat Dis-
     Blue Economy.” Island Studies: Indian Ocean.                  cussion Paper 14. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.
     Seychelles: University of Seychelles.                         org/commonwealth/environment-and-sus-
Hamilton, S. E., and D. Casey. 2016. “Creation of a                tainable - development /a - new -ap -
     High Spatio-temporal Resolution Global Da-                    proach-to-ocean-governance_5k3w8f b-
     tabase of Continuous Mangrove Forest Cover                    9p9hh-en.
     for the 21st Century (CGMFC-21).” Global Ecolo-          Lattemann, S., M. D. Kennedy, J. C. Schippers, and
     gy and Biogeography 25 (6):729-738. doi:10.1111/              G. Amy. 2010. “Global Desalination Situation.”
     geb.12449.        http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/             In Sustainability Science and Engineering, edit-
     doi/10.1111/geb.12449/abstract.                               ed by Isabel C. Escobar and Andrea I. Schäfer,
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. 2015. Reviving the Ocean Econo-                 7–39, Volume 2. Elsevier. ISSN 1871-2711, ISBN
     my: The Case for Action - 2015. Gland, Switzerland            9780444531155,             http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
     and Geneva: World Wildlife Fund International.                S1871-2711(09)00202-5.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. World Eco-           Liquete, C., C. Piroddi, E. G. Drakou, L. Gurney, S.
     nomic Outlook Database. http://www.imf.                       Katsanevakis, A. Charef, and B. Egoh. 2013. “Cur-
     org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2015/01/weodata/                     rent Status and Future Prospects for the As-
     download.aspx. Last accessed on September                     sessment of Marine and Coastal Ecosystem
     4, 2015.                                                      Services: A Systematic Review.” PLOS ONE 8 (7):
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).                  e67737.
     2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science          Lucintel. 2015. Global Marine Port and Service Indus-
     Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the                 try 2015-2020: Trends, Forecast and Opportuni-
     Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-                   ty Analysis. http://www.researchandmarkets.
     mental Panel on Climate Change (Stocker, T.,                  com/research/df32nq/global_marine.
     Dahe, Q. and Plattner, G.K., lead authors). Cam-         Mauritius Prime Minister’s Office. 2013. The Ocean
     bridge, United Kingdom and New York: Cam-                     Economy: A Roadmap for Mauritius. http://
     bridge University Press.                                      www.oceaneconomy.mu/PDF/Brochure.pdf.
InvesTT. 2012. “Government to Invest US$3 Billion             McGinnis, M. V. 2016. Science and Sensibility: Negotiat-
     In Maritime Projects.” http://www.investt.                    ing and Ecology of Place. California: University of
     co.tt/blog/investt-blog/2013/march/govern-                    California Press.
     ment-to-invest-us3-billion-in-maritime-proj-             Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA). 2005. Mil-
     ects.                                                         lennium Ecosystem Assessment. Ecosystems and
Jabareen, Y. 2009. “Building a Conceptual Frame-                   Human Well-Being: General Synthesis. Washing-
     work: Philosophy, Definitions and Procedure.”                 ton, DC: World Resources Institute.
     International Journal of Qualitative Methods 8           Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative
     (4):49–62.                                                    Data Analysis: An Expanded Source Book. 2nd
Jakob, Michael, and Ottmar Edenhofer. 2014. “Green                 edition. Newbury Park: Sage.
     Growth, Degrowth, and the Commons.” Ox-                  Miloslavich, P., J.M. Diaz, E. Klein, J.J. Alvarado, C. Diaz,
     ford Review of Economic Policy 30 (3): 447–68.                J. Gobin, E. Escobar-Briones, J.J. Cruz-Motta,
     doi:http://oxrep.oxfordjournals.org/content/                  E. Weil, J. Cortes, A.C. Bastidas, R. Robertson,
     by/year.                                                      F. Zapata, A. Martin, J. Castillo, A. Kazandijian,
Jambeck, J. R., R. Geyer, C. Wilcox, T. R. Siegler, M. Per-        M. Ortiz. 2010. Marine Biodiversity in the Ca-
     ryman, A. Andrady, R. Narayan, and K. Lavender                ribbean: Regional Estimates and Distribution
     Law. 2015. “Plastic Waste Inputs from Land into               Patterns. Plos One: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371.
     the Ocean.” Science 347 (6223): 768–771. http://              journal.pone.0011916.
     www.sciencemag.org/content/347/6223/768.                 Montaser, R. and H. Luesch. 2011. Marine natural
     Last accessed on April 22, 2016.                              products: a new wave of drugs? Future Med.
JMS (JŪRA MOPE SEA). 2013. “Jamaica Seeks                          Chem. 3(12): 1475-1489.
     Operator for 2.2 Million-TEU Kings-                      Narayan, S., M. W. Beck, B. G. Reguero, I. J. Losada, B.
     ton Container Terminal.” http://jura.lt/en/                   van Wesenbeeck, N. Pontee, J.N. Sanchirico, J.C.


                  TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     88           SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
      Ingram, G.M. Lange, K.A. Burks-Copes. 2016.               ply+chains&ots=Eh52nGxpmy&sig=xegK-
      “The Effectiveness, Costs and Coastal Protec-             jMA6sxR8ta4YV2r5a9nAyBo.
      tion Benefits of Natural and Nature-Based De-       Park, K. S., and J. T. Kildow. 2015. “Rebuilding the Clas-
      fences.” PLOS ONE 11 (5): e0154735. doi:10.1371/          sification System of the Ocean Economy.” Jour-
      journal.pone.0154735.                                     nal of Ocean and Coastal Economics 2014 (4).
Narloch, Ulf, Tomasz Kozluk, and Ainsley Lloyd.           PEi (Power Engineering International). 2010. “Bo-
      2016. “Measuring Inclusive Green Growth at                naire: Island of Green Dreams.” http://www.
      the Country Level: Taking Stock of Measure-               powerengineeringint.com/articles/print/vol-
      ment Approaches and Indicators.” Working                  ume-18/issue-5/features/bonaire-island-of-
      Paper 02, Green Growth Knowledge Platform.                green-dreams.html.
      http://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/                Pendleton, L., D.C. Donato, B.C. Murray, S. Crooks,
      sites/default/files/downloads/resource/Mea-               W.A. Jenkins, S. Sifleet, C. Craft, J.W. Fourqurean,
      suring_Inclusive_Green_Growth_at_the_                     J.B. Kauffman, N. Marba, P. Megonigal, E. Pid-
      Country_Level.pdf.                                        geon, D. Herr, D. Gordon, and A. Baldera. 2012.
Neumann, B., A.T. Vafeidis, J. Zimmermann, and R.J.             Estimating Global “Blue Carbon” Emissions from
      Nicholls. 2015. Future Coastal Population Growth          Conversion and Degradation of Vegetated Coast-
      and Exposure to Sea Level Rise and Coastal Flood-         al Ecosystems. http://journals.plos.org/plosone/
      ing – A Global Assessment. http://journals.               article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0043542.
      plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.        PlasticsEurope. 2013. Plastics - The Facts 2013. www.
      pone.0118571.                                             plasticseurope.org/Document/plastics-the-
Nellemann, C., E. Corcoran, C.M. Duarte, L. Valdes, C.          facts-2013.aspx?FolID=2. Last accessed on Sep-
      De Young, L. Fonseca, and G. Grimsditch, eds.             tember 4, 2015.
      2009. Blue Carbon: A Rapid Response Assess-         PwC. 2014. Colombia Oil & Gas Industry 2014: An
      ment. UNEP, GRID-Arendal.                                 Overview.            https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and                oil-gas-energy/publications/assets/pwc-co-
      Development). 2011. Towards Green Growth: A               lombia-oil-gas-industry-2014.pdf.
      Summary for Policymakers. http://www.oecd.          Roberts, C.M., J.C. McClean, J.E.N. Veron, J.P. Hawkins,
      org/greengrowth/48012345.pdf. Last accessed               G.R. Allen, D.E. McAllister, C.G. Mittermeier, F.W.
      on January 28, 2016.                                      Schueler, M. Spalding, F. Wells, C. Vynne, and
	     . 2014. Green Growth Indicators 2014. Paris:              T.B. Werner. 2002. Marine Biodiversity Hotspots
      OECD. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/               and Conservation Priorities for Tropical Reefs.
      book/9789264202030-en.                                    Science 295 (5558):1280-1284. http://science.sci-
	     . 2016. The Ocean Economy in 2030. Paris: OECD.           encemag.org/content/295/5558/1280.
      http://www.oecd.org/environment /the-               Roberts, J. 2015. “The Blue Economy: From Concept
      ocean-economy-in-2030-9789264251724-en.                   to Reality in the Caribbean Region.” Discussion
      htm                                                       Paper for the Caribbean Regional Dialogue
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation                    with the G20 Development Working Group.
      and Development), and ITF (International            Rodrigue, J.P., and A. Ashar. 2015. Transshipment
      Transport Forum). 2015. ITF Transport Out-                Hubs in the new Panamax Era: The Role of
      look 2015. OECD Publishing/ITF. http://dx.doi.            the Caribbean. Journal of Transport Geography
      org/10.1787/9789282107782-en.                             51:270-279.         http://www.sciencedirect.com/
OECS (Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States).                science/article/pii/S0966692315001842.
      2016a. OECS Marine Research Strategy. Castries,     Rystad Energy. 2016a. “Cube Browser Data.” Licensed
      St Lucia: OECS Commission. http://www.oecs.               software. http://www.rystadenergy.com/Prod-
      org/our-work/units/ogu.                                   ucts/EnP-Solutions/UCubeFree. Last accessed
	     . 2016b. OECS Ocean Data and Best Practices.              on April 20, 2016.
      Castries, St Lucia: OECS Commission. http://        	     . 2016b. UCubeFree Database. Accessed on
      www.oecs.org/our-work/units/ogu.                          April 28, 2016.
	     . 2016c. OECS Code of Conduct for Responsible       Silver, J. J., L. M. Campbell, L. W. Fairbanks, and R.
      Marine Research. Castries, St Lucia: OECS Com-            L. Gruby. 2015. “Blue Economy and Compet-
      mission. http://www.oecs.org/our-work/units/              ing Discourses in International Oceans Gover-
      ogu.                                                      nance.” Journal of Environment & Development
Olivier, and Slack. 2007. Ports, Cities, and Glob-              24 (2): 135–160.
      al Supply Chains. https://books.google.com/         Smulders, Sjak, Michael Toman, and Cees Withagen.
      books?hl=en&lr=&id=PfOcUn9GCc4C&oi=f-                     2014. “Growth Theory and ‘Green Growth.’” Ox-
      nd&pg=PR11&dq=ports+cities+global+sup-                    ford Review of Economic Policy 30 (3): 423–46.




                                                                                   References            89
     doi:http://oxrep.oxfordjournals.org/content/         United Nations. 2014. SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
     by/year.                                                  Action (SAMOA) Pathway. Resolution Adopt-
Spalding, M., M. Kainuma, and L. Collins. 2010. World          ed by the General Assembly on 14 September
     Atlas of Mangroves. London, U.K.: Earthscan.              2014. A/RES/69/15. Sixty-Ninth Session of the
Sukhdev, P., S. Stone, and N. Nuttal. 2010. Green Econ-        United Nations General Assembly. New York:
     omy: Developing Country Success Stories. Nairo-           United Nations.
     bi: UNEP.                                            United Nations. 2016. First Global Integrated Marine
Sumaila, U.R., A.D. Marsden, R. Watson and D. Pauly.           Assessment (World Ocean Assessment). Division
     2007. “A Global Ex-vessel Fish Price Database:            for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. New
     Construction and Applications.” J Bioecon 9               York: United Nations.
     (39): 39–51.                                         UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and
Swartz, W., U.R. Sumaila, and R. Watson. 2012. “Glob-          Development). 2012. Review of Maritime Trans-
     al Ex-vessel Fish Price Database Revisited: A             port. http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/
     New Approach for Estimating Missing Pric-                 rmt2012_en.pdf.
     es.” Environ Res Econ 56:467-480 doi:10.1007/        	    . 2016. Review of Maritime Transport. http://
     s10640-012-9611-1.                                        unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/rmt2015_
The Government of The Bahamas. 2014. “PM Eyes                  en.pdf. Last accessed on April 21, 2016.
     $250 Million Expansion to Freeport Contain-          UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for
     er Port.” Press Release. https://www.bahamas.             Africa). 2014. Unlocking the Full Potential of the
     gov.bs/wps/portal/public/gov/government/                  Blue Economy: Are African Small Island Develop-
     news/pm%20eyes%20%24250%20million%20                      ing States Ready to Embrace the Opportunities?
     expansion%20to%20freeport%20container%20                  Addis Ababa: UNECA. http://www.climdev-af-
     port/!ut/p/b1/vZHJbqNAEIafJQ_g0E3TLMc-                    rica.org/sites/default/files/unsummit2014/
     GA2a12TEXhM1ig1kMjnF4-nGkOWRGmpnLJF-                      Blue%20Economy%20-%20EN.pdf. Accessed
     Wnkn7Vp_qKSqiYSrrsfq6y27nvssvHnLApAqp-                    on May 13, 2016.
     FCMNbvMISoAVIQdggSHUgFVHxZg9Fuddm-                   UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme).
     mXjpVB1xULW9JBclcY_jgWSW4meDrsRXbg53A-                    2011. “Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to
     KEhSLZZJPeTv4RRUd3NirECz2gBvRz1vDaLZiX-                   Sustainable Development and Poverty Erad-
     lhndofNIU-nXnHT2bb4ouiOvwtnRTfNpJunvX-                    ication - A Synthesis for Policymakers.” www.
     RT2XvEo8eX1mXztp7fbRkNZRprhxNqYanYfF-                     unep.org/greeneconomy.
     FlfuhYnfrknEMndY-7Anxdv2wWbtConTCgVwT-               	    . 2012a. Green Economy in a Blue World.
     N92WFRj2Lw8j90_jwV_KAL-7SL5NaKaBAMN-                 	    . 2012b. Global Environmental Outlook 5: Sum-
     brGJDAU6Hv0z8BfE_hngPm3wQ_DcAIjrQQf-                      mary for Policymakers. Nairobi: UNEP.
     wHEf5VAyY1KvfB21pFrdeHNqXaeDL2AAAGnYz-               	    . 2014a. Wealth in the Oceans: Deep Sea Min-
     RnZw0W3bg7YpWrAOzVvtAJ9TND_AhpXvd-                        ing on the Horizon? http://www.unep.org/pdf/
     nnoBiIheRCM1u_ALe0LT6AEWSPAwFPRVwNV-                      GEAS_May2014_DeepSeaMining.pdf.
     vOWfGjl_RzD9VMB-NxB_FVDdWo70odQX-                    	    . 2014b. “Using Indicators for Green Economy
     P5SizYawJtrK8LuB__-HOpWcD-3rfGxfwStmI-                    Policymaking.”
     MYCpAWW5mgOclTY7dnHYbLmteymp8A-                      	    . 2015a. Indicators for Green Economy Policymak-
     C9lkzcquN7m5aJedLf2L2SiBqp2mIFwFHZtlIL-                   ing: A Synthesis Report of Studies in Ghana, Mauri-
     pszLmMjxYjxxHW9rpprVDZ42Z15KArvi0Le-jFn-                  tius and Uruguay.
     1mjq9A3fixd4PZ758mCu5mJgJDwOQiow4pB-                 	    . 2015b. “The Green Economy Progress Mea-
     JE3-Wveq4Lp1He3Ai_TS5aqWW41pky8DWvMIN-                    surement Framework - Working Paper.” http://
     yX0eL_6kGavZbrPbUijaEHrMHG3qlE_orgHo0JTh-                 web.unep.org/greeneconomy/sites/unep.org.
     StKS1dNFNDhZsp-QngtFcLmMnc6V2i29w4ew-                     greeneconomy/files/publications/gep-work-
     b12lp-xN3xbU0N5N1uXhp0YVeXn5AYPMxRA!/                     ing-paper-draft-for-consultation.pdf
     dl4/d5/L2dBISEvZ0FBIS9nQSEh/.                        UNEP-CEP (United Nations Environment Pro-
Transboundary Water Assessment Programme                       gramme-Caribbean Environment Programme).
     (TWAP). 2015. Caribbean Large Marine Ecosys-              2010. Regional Sectoral Overview of Wastewa-
     tem: Transboundary Water Assessment. UNEP,                ter Management in the Wider Caribbean Region.
     Kingston.                                                 CEP Technical Report 66.
United Nations. 2012. The Future We Want: Out-            Waite, R., M. Beveridge, R. Brummett, S. Castine, N.
     come Document of the United Nations Con-                  Chaiyawannakarn, S. Kaushik, R. Mungkung, S.
     ference on Sustainable Development. https://              Nawapakpilai, and M. Phillips. 2014. “Improving
     sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/doc-                Productivity and Environmental Performance
     uments/733FutureWeWant.pdf                                of Aquaculture.” Working Paper, Installment 5



                 TOWARD A BLUE ECONOMY: A PROMISE FOR
     90          SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN
     of Creating a Sustainable Food Future, World
     Resources Institute, Washington, DC.
WEF. 2016. The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking
     the future of plastics. World Economic Forum.
     http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_
     New_Plastics_Economy.pdf
World Bank. 2006. Where is the Wealth of Nations?
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
	    . 2012a. Toward a Green, Clean, and Resilient World
     for All: A World Bank Group Environment Strategy
     2012–2022. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
     ENVIRONMENT/Resources/Env_Stratgy_2012.pdf
	    . 2012b. Moving Beyond GDP: How to Factor
     Natural Capital into Economic Decision Mak-
     ing. http://www.wavespartnership.org/sites/
     waves/files/images/Moving_Beyond_GDP.
     pdf.
	    . 2013. Fish to 2030: Prospects for Fisheries and
     Aquaculture. Washington, DC: World Bank.
	    . 2014. World Development Indicators. Washing-
     ton, DC: World Bank. http://data.worldbank.
     org/country/grenada.
	    . 2015. “There’s Tremendous Interest in
     Adopting Renewables across the Caribbe-
     an.”       http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/
     feature/2015/01/27/renewables-caribbean.
	    . 2016. “GDP at Market Prices (Current US$).”
     http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.
     MKTP.CD.
World Bank and FAO (2009) The Sunken Billions: The
     Economic Justification for Fisheries Reform.
     Washington, D.C: World Bank.
World Ocean Council. Frequently Asked Questions.
     http://www.oceancouncil.org/site/faq.php.
World Travel and Tourism Council. http://www.wttc.
     org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20im-
     pact%20research/economic%20impact%20
     2015%20summary_web.pdf.
WTTC (World Travel and Tourism Council). 2014.
     http://www.wttc.org/~/media/files/reports/
     economic%20impact%20research/region-
     al%20reports/caribbean2014.ashx.
	    . 2015. Travel and Tourism. Economic Impact:
     Caribbean.




                                                           References   91
