    Report No: AUS3381
.




    Republic of Peru

    Robust Decision-Making in the Water
    Sector
    A Strategy for Implementing Lima’s Long-Term Water
    Resources Master Plan

.
    June 30, 2015


.
    Authors:
    Nidhi Kalra1, David G. Groves1, Laura Bonzanigo2, Edmundo Molina Perez1, Cayo
    Ramos3, Carter Brandon2, and Ivan Rodriguez Cabanillas4




    GWADR
    LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
.




                                                                 1. Evolving Logic, Inc.
                                                                    2. The World Bank
                                                  3. Universidad La Molina, Lima, Peru
                                                                          4. SEDAPAL
.
    Standard Disclaimer:
.
    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
    Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views
    of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
    guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
    information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning
    the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
.
    Copyright Statement:
.
    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
    permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
    World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the
    work promptly.

    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to
    the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400,
    fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
    Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
    pubrights@worldbank.org.
   Vice President:   Jorge Familiar Calderón
  Country Director   Alberto Rodriguez
 Practice Manager:   Wambui Gichuri
Task Team Leader:    Carter Brandon
   Acknowledgments
   The task team leader and authors thank the many people who have made this project
possible and contributed to its success. These include: Juan Carlos Barandiaran, Cesar
Bedon Nunura, Daniel Benvenutto, Yolanda Andia Cardenas, Josue Cespedes Alarcon,
Omar Concepcion Yanac, Marisa Escobar, Marianne Fay, Rut Sigrun Arteaga Gil, Sue
Goldmark, Ivo Imparato, Eduardo Ismodes, Lizmara Kirchner, Mara Elena La Rosa, Iris
Marmanillo, Gabriela Puente-Arnao, Ana Rosa Quispe C., Diego Rodriguez, Manfred
Schuetze, Ankur Shah, Marco Vargas Medina, Griselle Felicita Vega, Violeta Wagner,
and David Yates.




                                                                                         4
Table of Contents

1 Introduction ................................................................................................................... 8
2 Methodology ............................................................................................................... 12
      2.1 Methods for Robust, Adaptive Water Management .................................... 13
      2.2 Methodological Steps in this Study ............................................................. 14
3 Engagement with SEDAPAL and Stakeholders ......................................................... 16
4 Scope of the Analysis.................................................................................................. 17
      4.1 Policy Levers (L) ......................................................................................... 18
      4.2 Metrics (M) .................................................................................................. 19
      4.3 Uncertainties (X) .......................................................................................... 19
      4.4 Models (R) ................................................................................................... 22
       4.4.1 Water Management Model ...................................................................... 22
       4.4.2 Interactive, Analytic Decision Support Tool ........................................... 24
5 Baseline Vulnerability ................................................................................................ 24
      5.1 Does Lima’s Current System Achieve Water Reliability? .......................... 24
      5.2 Could SEDAPAL Achieve Future Water Reliability Without Further
            Investment? .................................................................................................. 24
      5.3 Would Implementing the Complete Master Plan Ensure Future Water
            Reliability? ................................................................................................... 26
6 Portfolio Development and Analysis .......................................................................... 27
      6.1 How Can We Develop Portfolios To Robustly Implement the Master Plan?
            ...................................................................................................................... 27
      6.2 Can Smaller Portfolios Achieve Water Reliability More Efficiently Than
            Implementing All Projects? ......................................................................... 31
      6.3 What Are the Implications If Not All Projects Are Feasible? ..................... 34
7 A Robust, Adaptive Strategy of No-Regret Investments ............................................ 37
8 Discussion and Conclusions ....................................................................................... 41
      8.1 Key Analytical Findings and Recommendations for SEDAPAL ................ 41
      8.2 A Follow-On Analysis Could Help SEDAPAL Develop an Integrated
            Portfolio With Nearer Term Priorities ......................................................... 43
      8.3 SEDAPAL Could Use DMU Approaches In Other Planning Efforts ......... 43
      8.4 Lessons Learned........................................................................................... 44
       8.4.1 The Value of Methodological Impartiality and Flexibility ..................... 44
       8.4.2 The Value of Participatory Analysis and the Stakeholder’s Commitment
                 to Innovation............................................................................................ 45
      8.5 Conclusions .................................................................................................. 45
9 References ................................................................................................................... 46

                                                                                                                                   5
Appendix A. Creating Demand and Streamflow Futures ................................................. 49
      Generating Demand Futures ................................................................................. 49
      Generating Streamflow Futures ............................................................................ 50
      Assessing Project And Portfolio Performance With Futures ................................ 51




                                                                                                                  6
Abstract
    How can water resource agencies make smart investments to ensure long-term water
reliability when the future is fraught with deep climate and economic uncertainty? We helped
SEDAPAL, the water utility serving Lima, Peru, answer this question by drawing on state of
the art methods for decision making under deep uncertainty. These methods provide
techniques for evaluating the performance of a water system over a wide range of plausible
“futures” and then developing strategies that are robust across these futures. Rather than
weighting futures probabilistically to define an optimal strategy, these methods identify the
vulnerabilities of a system and then evaluate the key tradeoffs among different adaptive
strategies. Through extensive iteration and collaboration with SEDAPAL, we used these
methods to define an investment strategy that is robust, ensuring water reliability across as
wide a range of future conditions as possible while also being economically efficient. Upon
completion, the study helped SEDAPAL realize that not all projects included in the Master
Plan were necessary to achieve water reliability, and that it could save 25% (over $600
million) in investment costs. Second, it helped focus future efforts on demand side
management, pricing, and soft infrastructure, a refocusing that is difficult to achieve in
traditional utility companies. Third, it helped SEDAPAL gain the support of regulatory and
budget agencies due to the careful analysis of alternatives. Fourth, it allowed them to
postpone lower priority investments, and to analyze future options based on climate and
demand information that simply is not available now.

Resumen
    ¿Cómo pueden las agencias de agua realizar inversiones inteligentes con el objetivo de
asegurar la disponibilidad de agua en el largo plazo, cuando el futuro es caracterizado por
incertidumbres climáticas y económicas? El Banco Mundial ayudó a SEDAPAL, la agencia
encargada de la provisión del servicio de agua en Lima – Perú, a responder a esta pregunta a
través de nuevos métodos de gestión para el manejo de incertidumbres. Estas metodologías
proponen técnicas para evaluar el desempeño del sistema de agua bajo una gama amplia de
escenarios “futuros” plausibles, y para desarrollar estrategias de inversión que sean robustas
ante estos escenarios. En lugar de atribuir probabilidades a esos escenarios futuros para
definir la estrategia óptima, estos métodos permiten identificar las vulnerabilidades del plan y
evaluar los trade-offs claves entre las diferentes opciones disponibles. En colaboración
estrecha con SEDAPAL, usamos estos métodos para definir una estrategia de inversión que
garantice la seguridad y la sostenibilidad del agua en la gama más amplia de escenarios
futuros, siendo al mismo tiempo eficiente en términos de costo. Esto estudio ayudó a
SEDAPAL a reconocer que podrían alcanzar la confiabilidad requerida ahorrando 25% (más
de US$600 millones) del presupuesto inicialmente estimado. Asimismo, les ayudó a enfocar
los esfuerzos futuros en la gestión de demanda, dado que el análisis mostró que con las
infraestructuras planeadas no podrían alcanzar fiabilidad en todos los escenarios futuros. Por
otro lado, el estudio ayudó a SEDAPAL a ganar la confianza sobre el presupuesto ante las
agencias reguladoras. Finalmente, le ayudó a posponer las inversiones menos urgentes y
dejarlas para el medio plazo en función de las condiciones de clima y demanda de ese
momento.



                                                                                           7
 Robust Decision-Making in the Water Sector
 A Strategy for Implementing Lima’s Long-Term Water
 Resources Master Plan


1 Introduction
    Lima, the capital of Peru, faces major water-related challenges. Home to
approximately 9.8 million people (INEI, 2013), it is the fifth largest metropolitan area in
Latin America. With average precipitation of just 6 mm per year (WMO, 2015), it is also
the second largest desert city in the world. A rapidly growing population with
approximately one million underserved urban poor, current water shortages, competition
for water between sectors, and climate change impacts may leave the region under
perpetual water stress.
    SEDAPAL, Lima’s water utility, provides water to most of the metropolitan region,
which includes the adjacent port district of Callao of approximately one million people
(INEI, 2013). Nearly all of SEDAPAL’s supplies are drawn from the Chillón, Rimac, and
Lurin river basins in the region. Recognizing the urgency of Lima’s water situation,
SEDAPAL has developed an aggressive multi-billion dollar Master Plan, which includes
twelve major infrastructural investments projects that SEDAPAL proposes to implement
between now and 2040 at a cost of US $2.3billion. SEDAPAL is further considering two
additional water supply projects for a cost of US $400 million. As Figure 1-1shows, these
fourteen investments are a mix of reservoirs, water treatment plants, desalination plants,
and tunnels to transfer water between watersheds. Together, the investments are designed
to meet the 30% increase in water demand that SEDAPAL projects for the coming
decades. Lima’s demand for water is distributed across four regions:

      Central Lima, which has 85% of demand and is in the Rimac basin;
      Northern Lima and Callao, which has 7% of demand and is in the Chillón basin;
      Eastern Lima, which has 6% of the city’s demand and is also in the Rimac basin;
      Southern Lima, which has 2% of the city’s demand and is in the Lurin basin.

In 2014, SEDAPAL submitted its Master Plan to national regulators for approval.In mid-
2015, SEDAPAL obtained the Master Plan’s approval including management goals, rate
formula, and tariff structures for the regulatory 5-year period 2015-2020.




                                                                                          8
     Figure 1-1:Map of projects in the Master Plan and demand areas in Lima




    Consistent with the state of practice at many water utilities, SEDAPAL developed its
Master Plan by projecting future demands based on recent socioeconomic trends and by
projecting future water supply based on historical climate conditions. Yet future water
supply and demand in Lima may differ markedly from that of the past. Rapid growth in
recent years, particularly through informal settlements in the outskirts of the city, could
continue (Plöger, 2012). This growth could accelerate if migration from rural areas
increases (INEI, 2001), or could level off if current socioeconomic pressures change.
Simultaneously, climate change may alter the availability of water supplies to Lima. In
the past, Lima relied heavily on glacier melt for its water. However, two-thirds of the
glaciers feeding the Rimac's headwaters have disappeared, decreasing the river's glacier-
contributed volume by 90% in the past 40 years (Vince, 2010). Today, Lima’s water
supply depends primarily on precipitation in the upper watersheds. Future precipitation

                                                                                          9
changes are uncertain—rainfall may increase or decrease—but droughts may also
become more severe and more common (IPCC, 2014). The combined effects on
streamflow in the basins that serve Lima are highly uncertain.
    These uncertainties raise important questions for decision makers concerned with
water reliability in Lima. Are the capital projects in the Master Plan sufficient to ensure
reliability in the face of deeply uncertain future climate change and demand? On the other
hand, are all proposed projects necessary to achieving reliability? Many projects are
challenging to implement—how should considerations of project feasibility shape the
city’s investment strategy? Ultimately, how should projects be prioritized? Which should
be implemented now, which can be delayed until they are necessary, and what specific
indicators would trigger their implementation?
    This study draws upon state-of-the-art methods for decision making under deep
uncertainty (DMU) to give SEDAPAL and decision makers in Lima answers to these
pressing questions. It draws upon several methodologies including Robust Decision
Making, Decision Scaling, and Adaptive Pathways, to prioritize the investments in
SEDAPAL’s Master Plan. Together these methods help define an investment strategy
that is robust, ensuring water reliability across as wide a range of future conditions as
possible while also being economically efficient. This strategy has two key characteristics
of a robust plan:
   1. It is no-regret. It identifies investments and projects that are useful no matter what
      the future brings;
   2. It is adaptive. It guides decision makers on how to implement future investments
      and projects as climate, demand, and other future conditions evolve.
   The strategy is defined in a decision tree as shown in Figure 1-2. It consists of a set of
near-term, no-regret investments that SEDAPAL can embark upon now; signposts of
specific project feasibility, streamflow, and demand conditions SEDAPAL should
monitor in the medium and long term; and sets of deferred projects that SEDAPAL
should implement if the signposts are triggered. Section 7 describes the strategy and
decision tree in detail.
    Importantly, the strategy prioritizes among the fourteen supply-side investments. Yet
efficiency and demand management will play a key role in ensuring water reliability in
Lima, particularly as they may be more cost effective than some of the supply-side
investments. At the time of this project, SEDAPAL sought to focus its analysis on the
Master Plan projects as it concurrently explored ideas for demand side and efficiency
options. Therefore, while this analysis does not explicitly evaluate efficiency and demand
management actions, it highlights the need for such actions by testing the limits of the
water reliability that can be achieved with the proposed projects. In Section 8, we
recommend evaluating demand and efficiency actions alongside supply-side investments
in a follow-on analysis to develop an integrated water resource management plan.




                                                                                          10
        Figure 1-2: Schematic of a decision tree of investments for SEDAPAL




    This project helps SEDAPAL understand its Master Plan more fully. It enables
SEDAPAL to assess climate change threats without first needing to predict the future
climate. It helps SEDAPAL identify projects that are particularly important for achieving
water reliability. And, it reveals the strengths and vulnerabilities of its Master Plan
concisely—as a specific set of conditions in which the Master Plan and related projects
can achieve water reliability and in which additional actions may be necessary. It also
helps SEDAPAL implement its Master Plan robustly by identifying near-term, no-regret
projects that it can embark upon now, while pursuing additional actions adaptively as
future conditions evolve.
    An interactive, analytical decision support tool accompanies this paper. Figure 1-3
shows a screenshot of the first page of this tool. We used this tool for the analysis and at
project workshops to help SEDAPAL’s staff and managers understand the anal ysis. Each
of the analytical figures in this paper is a screenshot of an interactive component of the
decision support tool. The tool is available online at https://goo.gl/BRojPW.




                                                                                          11
Figure 1-3: Title screen of the SEDAPAL Master Plan decision support tool, which
                      can be viewed at https://goo.gl/BRojPW




    The remainder of this paper describes this analysis. Section 2 presents the
methodologies behind the analysis, Section 3 describes how they were used to engage
with stakeholders in Lima, and Section 4 presents the key elements of the analysis that
emerged from the stakeholder engagement. The analysis and findings are presented in the
next three sections. Section 5describes the baseline vulnerability of the current system
and of the full Master Plan and related projects. Section 6 shows the portfolios and an
assessment of how they can help SEDAPAL achieve water reliability efficiently. Section
7 presents a robust, adaptive decision tree of no-regret projects based on those results.
The final section summarizes key findings, next steps, and future applications. In
addition, Appendix A accompanies Section 4, providing details on the demand and
streamflow uncertainties.



2 Methodology
    Water resources planners are increasingly turning to decision making under
uncertainty (DMU) methods to address climate change and other uncertainties in their
long-term plans (Brown, 2010; Groves et al., 2008). Central to these approaches is the
recognition that it is not possible to determine the likelihoods of plausible future states of
the world in order to identify “optimal” water management strategies. The most
appropriate set of water management investments may differ significantly depending on
what the future holds. Therefore, developing an optimal strategy and then exploring
performance sensitivities does not provide the necessary information to determine a


                                                                                            12
prudent course of action. Instead, the goal must be to identify “robust” strategies—those
that will perform satisfactorily across the wide range of possible futures (Groves et al.,
2014b).
    Robust water management strategies generally consist of a portfolio of individual
management decisions, such as new infrastructure, operational procedures, or water use
efficiency programs. The implementation of the portfolio is not predefined, but rather is
adaptive and adjusts in response to new information about future conditions. As there are
generally many different ways to achieve water management objectives, evaluating
tradeoffs among the different options and portfolios is critical to the final decision
making and achieving stakeholder support for policies.


2.1 Methods for Robust, Adaptive Water Management
    Developing robust, adaptive water management strategies requires new analytic
techniques. Water agencies must consider more than just the historical hydrologic record
when projecting future hydrologic conditions. For systems that are supply limited,
evaluating a range of demand projections is also essential to understanding the full range
of possible water management needs. Other factors important to the design and
performance of a water management system (for instance, water regulations or
investment effectiveness) are also highly uncertain and should be explored.
     DMU methods provide techniques for evaluating the performance of a water system
over a wide range of plausible futures and then developing strategies that are robust
across these futures (Kalra et al., 2014). Rather than weighting futures probabilistically to
define an optimal strategy, DMU methods identify the vulnerabilities of an agency or
utility’s system and then evaluate the key tradeoffs among different adaptive strategies.
Through iteration, often with extensive and direct participation of decision makers and
stakeholders, a robust, adaptive strategy is identified. Such a strategy defines a set of
near-term investments, signposts—conditions that would trigger new actions or
adjustments—and deferred actions for possible future implementation.
    Early applications of these methods to water planning include Robust Decision
Making (Groves and Lempert, 2007; Lempert et al., 2003) (RDM) studies in Southern
California (Groves et al., 2008, 2014a; Lempert and Groves, 2010) and the U.K. (Dessai
and Hulme, 2007). These applications illustrated techniques for generating and evaluating
a large ensemble of futures, identifying the key vulnerabilities of current management
through a process called “scenario discovery” (Bryant and Lempert, 2010), and then
highlighting key tradeoffs among the most robust strategies. The Southern California
application also introduced rudimentary adaptivity into the robust strategies based on
implementing additional management actions if the gap between water demand and
available supply grew too small. Recent other applications include two pilot studies for
the Water Resources Foundation (Groves et al., 2014b), an evaluation of the Integrated
Resources Plan of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (Groves et al.,
2014a), an application to flood risk mitigation in Vietnam (Lempert et al., 2013a), and for
the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation’s Colorado River Basin Study (Bureau of Reclamation,
2012; Groves et al., 2013).


                                                                                          13
    Concurrently, a related methodology has been developed called Adaptation Pathways
(Walker et al., 2001), which focuses on defining a comprehensive set of alternative
sequences of decisions and identifying the conditions that could guide decision makers
along the most appropriate sequence. Haasnoot et al. (2013) demonstrates this approach
for flood control in the Netherlands, which includes novel visualizations of different
sequences of investments, called “pathways.” Another related methodology, called
Decision Scaling (Brown et al., 2012), has been described and applied in the Great Lakes
region (Brown et al., 2011) and the Niger River Basin (Brown, 2011). Decision Scaling
provides techniques for extensively exploring plausible climate conditions to define the
key climate-related thresholds that distinguish different robust strategies.
   The World Bank is supporting other projects organized around DMU in several
developing countries. These projects range from hydropower investments in Nepal and
Africa (Cervigni et al., 2015), urban flood management in Sri Lanka, and transport
network’s vulnerability in Peru and Ecuador. A conceptual framework has also recently
been developed by the Water Global Practice to guide project planners through the
application of DMU techniques to climate change risk assessment and risk management.
   These methods recognize the importance of decision maker and stakeholder
involvement in the decision analysis. For example, to help SEDAPAL planners gain a
deeper appreciation for “deep uncertainty”, the study team facilitated a “serious game”
(Mendler de Suarez et al., 2012) called “Decision for the Decade”.1 The study team then
developed participatory, interactive decision support tools to evaluate simulation results
and develop portfolios of water management investments. The tools developed are
similar to those recently used to support the development of Louisiana’s 2012 Coastal
Master Plan (CPRA, 2012; Groves and Sharon, 2013) and the Bureau of Reclamation’s
Colorado River Basin Study (Bureau of Reclamation, 2012; Groves et al., 2013).


2.2 Methodological Steps in this Study
    This study is based on the sequence of analytic steps described in the RDM literature,
and it assimilates techniques from the other related DMU methodologies. Specifically,
this study is guided by Robust Decision Making, which offers a structured approach to
stress testing a water management plan and evaluating tradeoffs among alternatives.
Consistent with Decision Scaling, it evaluates SEDAPAL’s system across a wide-range
of hydrologic conditions developed by adjusting historical streamflow by incremental
amounts using the Delta Method (Anandhi et al., 2011). The study uses an interactive,
analytic decision support approach to define alternative portfolios consistent with
different budgets, SEDAPAL’s concerns about the feasibility of certain projects, and
uncertain future supplies and demands(Groves et al., 2014c). Lastly, it uses concepts
from the adaptive planning literature to define a robust and adaptive decision tree for
SEDAPAL’s investments.



    1
      Information on this “serious game” can be found on the web at:
http://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/page/decision-making-under-uncertainty-testing-methodologies-
real-world

                                                                                                    14
   Figure 2-1 shows the basic iterative steps described in the RDM literature and
highlights where techniques from other methods are incorporated.

                       Figure 2-1: DMU steps used to guide study




                    Note: Figure adapted from Lempert et al. (2013b)

    The DMU approach used in this study began with a decision structuring exercise
(Step 1,Figure 2-1). The study team worked with SEDAPAL planners to identify the key
risk factors that might affect the success of the Master Plan, to define the elements of the
Master Plan to evaluate, and to specify the performance metrics that would be used to
assess the Plan’s robustness. Based on this information, the team developed a water
management model to simulate the performance of SEDAPAL’s system under different
futures and levels of investment. Sections 3 and 4 provide details from this step.
    Our analysis first defined the baseline vulnerabilities, described in Section 5. We
evaluated the performance of SEDAPAL’s current water management system in 2040
across 300 different plausible future scenarios of future supplies and demand using the
water management model (Step 2, Figure 2-1). We then assimilated these results into a
decision support tool and identified the key vulnerabilities—that is, the key uncertain
drivers that would lead SEDAPAL’s plan to not achieve its goals (Step 3, Figure 2-1).
    We then returned to Step 1 and developed a large set of portfolios of projects--all
variations of the SEDAPAL Master Plan. To do this, we evaluated the performance of
each individual project across the 300 futures and then used an interactive, analytical
decision support tool to define optimal portfolios for each of the 300 futures. By
evaluating the vulnerabilities of each portfolio, we honed in on a small set of different
portfolios that would achieve SEDAPAL’s goals under the wide range of different
futures. This portfolio analysis is described in section 6.

                                                                                            15
    Our last analytic step was to develop a single, adaptive strategy for SEDAPAL. By
analyzing simulation results of each portfolio, we identified the key ingredients of a
robust, adaptive strategy:

      Near-term no-regret projects—project included in all portfolios,
      Signposts—uncertain conditions that should trigger additional SEDAPAL
       investment,
      Deferred actions—additional investments to implement under different future
       conditions, and
      Remaining vulnerabilities—conditions in which any implementation sequence of
       Master Plan projects would not meet SEDAPAL’s goals.

This step is described in section 7.



3 Engagement with SEDAPAL and Stakeholders
    Following best practices in decision support, this project embedded analytics in an
intensive and structured participatory process with SEDAPAL and other stakeholders. It
began in December 2013 and the analysis was completed in March 2015, with this final
report published in the subsequent months. Figure 3-1 shows activities and milestones.
    This project kicked off with a multi-day workshop at SEDAPAL in December 2013
to build a shared understanding of the problem and cultivate relationships between
stakeholders and analysts. At the workshop, we collaboratively scoped the analysis (Step
1 in Figure 2-1) and elicited the key analytical elements discussed in Section 4. We
launched data gathering needed to build the WEAP model. We also held meetings to
keep other stakeholders abreast of the new study, including Peru’s National Water
Authority (ANA), the water supply and sanitation regulatory authority (SUNASS), local
non-governmental organizations, and municipal authorities. This workshop also
identified local members of the technical team from SEDAPAL and the University of
Callao. The importance of this workshop cannot be overstated, particularly in analyses
involving participants who are geographically dispersed, speak different languages, and
bring different skills to the effort.
    In April 2014 we held another set of workshops in which we presented preliminary
findings from the vulnerability analysis with and without full implementation of
SEDAPAL’s Master Plan. We met with both SEDAPAL’s management and other
stakeholders, and we adjusted the scope of the analysis based on their feedback. In
October 2014, we again met, this time to develop different implementation portfolios
using the interactive, analytic decision support tool. This enabled us to continuously
ensure that the analysis answered questions that were most important to SEDAPAL and
in a way that was practical for their planning.
    At the final workshop in March 2015, we presented the results to SEDAPAL’s board
of directors, other municipal and national stakeholders, and guests from several Andean
countries. The workshop was highly participatory, using modeling results and an


                                                                                         16
interactive planning tool to illustrate both the threats to water reliability and a strategy for
prioritizing investments that responds to those threats. It also included a one-day training
session with academics on the basics of this methodology.
    Finally, while the workshops were key opportunities for in-person engagement,
members of SEDAPAL’s technical staff were part of the analytical team throughout the
project; they brought their expertise on Lima’s water needs and SEDAPAL’s system and
goals. We met weekly—and at times daily—by phone. We attribute the success and value
of this project in large part to SEDAPAL’s enthusiasm for innovative analysis and their
commitment to participating in this analysis.


                               Figure 3-1: Project Timeline




4 Scope of the Analysis
    We organized the key components of the decision-centric analysis using an “XLRM”
framework (Lempert et al. 2003; Groves et al., 2014b). This framework was the focus of
the first workshop and helped to build a common understanding of the water management
challenges among the technical team and stakeholders throughout the project. It also
usefully guided data gathering and model development .
    The letters X, L, R, and M refer to four categories of factors:

    ● Policy levers (L) are actions that decision makers want to consider, in this case
      the components of SEDAPAL’s Master Plan and related investments;
    ● Exogenous uncertainties (X) are factors like climate change and demand that are
      outside the control of decision makers but that may affect the ability of actions to
      achieve decision makers’ goals;
    ● Metrics (M) are the performance standards used to evaluate whether or not a
      choice of policy levers achieves decision makers’ goals, e.g. water reliability; and
    ● Relationships (R), generally represented by simulation models, define how the
      policy levers perform, as measured by the metrics, under the various uncertainties.


    The XLRM matrix developed for this study is summarized inTable 4-1. This section
continues to describe the policy levers (L) under consideration, the metrics (M) used to
judge the effectiveness of those policies, the uncertainties (X), and lastly the models (R)
that quantify the relationships among the factors.



                                                                                             17
               Table 4-1: XLRM framework of key factors in this analysis

 Uncertainties (X)                         Policy Levers (L)

                                                 ●   12 projects in SEDAPAL’s Master Plan
     ●   Future water demand
                                                 ●   2 additional projects
     ●   Future stream flow
                                                 ●   Budget for infrastructure
     ●   Project feasibility
                                                 ●   (Efficiency and demand management)

 Models (R)                                Metrics (M)

                                                 ●   90th percentile of monthly met demand, as a
     ●   WEAP Model
                                                     percent of total demand
     ●   Interactive, analytic decision
                                                 ●   Cost of plan
         support tool



4.1 Policy Levers (L)
    SEDAPAL’s Master Plan consists of twelve investment projects; a mix of dams,
tunnels, water treatment plants, desalination plants, and tunnel transfers. SEDAPAL is
also considering two additional investment projects—Cañete transfer/water treatment
plant (WTP) and Chancay Reservoir—that were considered important to evaluate but not
part of this plan. Table 4-2summarizes the key characteristics of these projects. The first
column identifies the shorthand name we use for each project throughout this paper, the
second summarizes the key elements of each project, the third notes the amount of water
the project is intended to supply, and the fourth is the estimated cost of each project.


         Table 4-2: Master Plan and related projects evaluated in this analysis
 Project Name           Project Description          Additional Designed Supply By           Cost
                                                     Region and Season                       (M
                                                                                             USD)
 Atarjea WTP            Expansion of Atarjea         2 m3/s to Central Lima all year         1.6
                        WTP                          round
 Autisha Res /          Autisha Reservoir and        1.2 m3/s to Central Lima in the dry     21.9
 Lurigancho WTP         S. J. Lurigancho WTP         season only
 Cañete Trans /         Water transfer from          3.5 m3/s to Southern Lima (70%)         320
 WTP*                   river Cañete, South of       and 1.5 m3/s to Central Lima (30%)
                        Lima, with a WTP in          all year round
                        Lurin
 Casacancha Res         Casacancha Reservoir         1.8 m3/s to Central Lima in the dry     25
                                                     season only
 Chancay GW*            Groundwater extraction       1.5 m3/s to Northern Lima and           62
                        from the lower               Callao in the dry season only
                        watershed of the river
                        Chancay
 Chancay Res /          Chancay Reservoir and        2 m3/s to Northern Lima and Callao      274
 Huaral WTP             Huaral WTP                   all year round



                                                                                                    18
 Chosica WTP /      Chosica WTP and           0.6 m3/s to Central Lima (40%) and   97
 Graton Tunnel      enlargement of the        0.9 m3/s to Eastern Lima (60%) all
                    Graton tunnel             year round
 Lima Sur Desal     Lima Sur desalination     0.4 m3/s to Southern Lima all year   110
                    plant                     round
 Jacaybamba Res     Jacaybamba Reservoir      1.4 m3/s to Northern Lima and        145
                                              Callao in the dry season only
 Lurin WTP          Lurin WTP                 0.4 m3/s to Southern Lima in the     25
                                              wet season only
 Pomacocha Res /    Pomacocha Reservoir,      4.5 m3/s to Central Lima (90%) and   767
 Huachipa WTP       expansion of Huachipa     0.5 m3/s to Southern Lima (10%) in
                    WTP, and Trans-           the dry season only
                    Andean Tunnel #2
 Pun Run Res /      Pun Run Reservoir,        1.9 m3/s to Northern Lima and        200
 Chillón WTP        Trans-Andean Tunnel       Callao (80%) and 0.5 m3/s to
                    #2, and expansion of      Central Lima (20%) all year round
                    Chillón WTP
 S. Antonio Res /   San Antonio Escondido     1.1 m3/s to Northern Lima and        230
 Chillón WTP        Reservoir and             Callao (80%) and 0.3 m3/s to
                    Expansion of Chillón      Central Lima (20%) in the dry
                    WTP                       season; 0.8 m3/s to Northern Lima
                                              and Callao (80%) and 0.2 m3/s to
                                              Central Lima (20%) in the wet
                                              season
 Ventanilla Desal   Ventanilla desalination   1.5 m3/s to Northern Lima and        400
                    plant                     Callao all year round
 *Cañete Trans/WTP and Chancay GW are not part of SEDAPAL’s Master Plan but have been
      suggested as important investments to consider during the course of this analysis.


4.2 Metrics (M)
    In designing its Master Plan, SEDAPAL was principally concerned with achieving
water reliability as cost effectively as possible. For this analysis, SEDAPAL defines
water reliability as meeting 90% of demand 90% of the time, measured monthly. In other
words, water reliability is achieved if the 90th percentile of monthly met demand is at
least 90%. This led to the use of two primary metrics used to compare portfolios:
   1. The 90th percentile of monthly met demand (and whether this exceeds 90%), and
   2. The cost of the plan (e.g. portfolio of investments).
We also evaluated the supply that would be provided to each of Lima’s demand regions
to estimate the cost effectiveness of individual components of Lima’s Master Plan.


4.3 Uncertainties (X)
    We assess three key uncertainties that challenge SEDAPAL’s ability to achieve water
reliability:



                                                                                         19
    3. The level of demand in the city. Demand will be shaped principally by future
       population growth and per-capita water use. This varies in different districts.
       Overall, Lima and Callao currently have a demand of 855 Mm3 for a population
       of 9.5M. Official projections of 2040 population range from 11.5M to 15.5M and
       per-capita water consumption from approximately 170 to 240 l/p/day, giving a
       range of future demand of 730 Mm3 per year to 1,790 Mm3 per year.2
    4. Future stream flows. In the wet season, 90% of Lima’s water is drawn from the
       Rimac, Chillón, and Lurin Rivers. The remaining 10% comes from groundwater.
       In contrast, in the dry season 20% comes from groundwater sources. Climate
       change and other factors may alter water flows, but downscaled climate
       projections and rainfall-runoff model are not yet available for these river basins.
       We explored how the system responds to potential changes in monthly stream
       flows proportional to the minimum (-60%) and maximum (+90%) changes in
       monthly precipitation, as projected in the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report (AR4
       – see Figure 4-1).3 This approach is consistent with the principles of Decision
       Scaling, which seek to assess the sensitivity of investments to climate (Brown et
       al., 2012).


 Figure 4-1: Box plots of the changes in annual and seasonal precipitation projected
                    by 15 climate models in 3 emissions scenarios




    5. Project feasibility. SEDAPAL identified three of the candidate projects—
       Chosica WTP/Graton Tunnel, Cañete Trans/WTP, and Pun Run Res/Chillón
       WTP—as more difficult to implement than the remaining eleven. Chosica
       WTP/Graton Tunnel and Cañete Trans/WTP are challenging because SEDAPAL
       does not have full jurisdiction to implement them, and collaborative, cross-

    2
      This approach provides a broad range of total future water demand in Lima in order to help establish
limits of the Master Plan in ensuring water reliability. For this purpose, it is not necessary to differentiate
domestic, commercial, agricultural, and industrial water demand. (The latter three are much smaller than
municipal demands.) A future study that includes efficiency, reuse, and demand management policies
should make these distinctions, however, because different policies are appropriate for each sector. For
instance, recycled water may be appropriate for non-domestic uses.
    3
     The IPCC’s 5th Assessment Report was not available during the time this study was conducted.
Appendix A provides details on how we used these changes to develop futures.

                                                                                                             20
         jurisdiction projects can be particularly difficult. Pun Run Res/Chillón WTP is
         controversial because it transfers water from the Amazon region to Lima via a
         tunnel. Such a project can face environmental and other hurdles. We therefore
         consider two future conditions—a “full project feasibility” future condition in
         which the three difficult projects can be implemented, and a “limited project
         feasibility” future condition in which they cannot.


    Figure 4-2: 300 futures that are each a combination of demand and change in
                                      streamflow




    We have developed 600 future cases from these three uncertainties: 300
demand/streamflow conditions in each of two project feasibility conditions.4 We use
Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) (McKay et al., 1979), to develop 300 combinations of
future demand and streamflow as shown in Figure 4-2.The two project feasibility
conditions are the cases where more difficult projects can and cannot be implemented.
Thus, each future is defined by four variables: one future level of demand, two seasonal
monthly streamflow change factors, and one project feasibility condition. However, it is
parsimonious to summarize streamflow in terms of the change in the dry season (March

    4
      In choosing the number of futures, we seek to balance the competing goals of sufficiently exploring
the uncertainty space while keeping simulation run times low to allow for rapid iteration on the analysis
(each run of the WEAP model takes five minutes). While the choice of 300 climate and demand futures in
particular is arbitrary (for example, 250 or 500 may have worked just as well), as Figure 4-2 shows, these
300 futures efficiently cover the demand and climate uncertainty space. More importantly, our analysis
shows that these futures are sufficient to identify conditions in which plans and projects achieve and fail to
achieve water reliability. (Hypothetically, if there were ambiguity about performance in a particular part of
the uncertainty space, additional sampling in that region could add clarity.)

                                                                                                           21
to November), as these changes have a greater influence on water reliability than changes
in wet season flows (December to February) as explained in Appendix A. This allows us
to show the 300 futures in two dimensions: demand and changes in dry season
streamflow.


4.4 Models (R)
    The analysis uses two modeling tools. A model of the water management system is
used to evaluate the performance of the SEDAPAL system with and without new
projects. An interactive, analytic decision support tool provides interactive visualizations
of key results and supports the development of portfolios of projects based on individual
projects’ cost effectiveness and implementation and cost constraints.

4.4.1 Water Management Model
    This project uses a water-planning model developed in the Water Evaluation And
Planning (WEAP) modeling environment. WEAP is an industry-standard platform and
can represent major water supply and demand elements of a water management system in
a transparent and user-friendly way. This allows SEDAPAL planners and decision
makers to interact directly with the model, which helped build trust in its outputs and
intuition about its results.
    As summarized by Joyce et al. (2010):
        ... [t]he WEAP system is a comprehensive, fully integrated river basin analysis
        tool. It is a simulation model that includes a robust and flexible representation of
        water demands from different sectors, and the ability to program operating rules
        for infrastructure elements such as reservoirs, canals, and hydropower projects
        (Huber-Lee et al., 2006; Purkey et al., 2007; Yates et al., 2005a, 2005b, 2008).
        Additionally, it has watershed rainfall-runoff modeling capabilities that allow all
        portions of the water infrastructure and demand to be dynamically nested within
        the underlying hydrological processes. This functionality allows the modeler to
        analyze how specific configurations of infrastructure, operating rules, and
        operational priorities will affect water uses as diverse as instream flows, irrigated
        agriculture, and municipal water supply under the umbrella of input weather data
        and physical watershed conditions. This integration of watershed hydrology with
        a water systems planning model makes WEAP ideally suited to study the potential
        impacts of climate change and other uncertainties internal to watersheds.
     The SEDAPAL WEAP model represents Lima’s system through a series of demand
and supply nodes, connected via transmission links representing either natural streams or
engineered canals. The water demand in the Metropolitan area is represented by a
demand node for each of Lima’s four main regions: Central Lima, Eastern Lima,
Southern Lima, and Northern Lima and Callao. The model contains all existing water
infrastructure, including five reservoirs in the Alto Mantaro, two groundwater basins, and
all canals and transfer tunnels of the Marca I, II, and V,5 including a trans-Andean tunnel.


    5
     The three Marcas indicate the sequenced construction of the investments: Marca I began in 1960s,
Marca II at the end of 1990s, and Marca III-V in 2000s.

                                                                                                        22
The model also contains the existing water treatment plants of Atarjea and Chillón.
Additionally, each of the 14 proposed Master Plan projects can be modeled individually
or in different combinations.
    The WEAP model takes as input (i) monthly hydrological series, (ii) the depth, levels,
and operations of the reservoirs, and their evaporation, (iii) the design capacity of all
investments, and (iv) different demand scenarios, divided per demand region. Besides
water supply to the different areas of the city, the model also reports monthly water levels
in the reservoirs, groundwater extraction levels, and unmet demand. Figure 4-3.shows a
screenshot of the schematic of SEDAPAL’s water management system within WEAP.


   Figure 4-3. WEAP model schematic of SEDAPAL’s water management system




    This is SEDAPAL’s first model of the water system supplying Lima Callao, and they
will continue to use it for their planning after this project. Before the development of this
model, SEDAPAL’s project prioritization was based primarily on experts’ considerations
and the additional supply sought in different parts of the city. SEDAPAL did not have
tools that allowed for an integrated and dynamic analysis of different projects.
SEDAPAL’s continuous involvement in the model’s development helped both build
confidence in the model and its results, and increase the likelihood of a successful
technology transfer of the model to SEDAPAL for its future analyses.
    We developed a code to evaluate the WEAP model on the Amazon cloud, allowing
the simultaneous running of up to a hundred cases at once. First, we ran the baseline (i.e.,
without Master Plan) under the 300 water supply and demand futures we created, then the
baseline plus one individual project at the time, and finally, the first selection of
portfolios to identify which ones performed better across these futures.




                                                                                           23
    We post-processed the WEAP outputs to create a database with the performance of
the system (e.g., 90th percentile of met demand) for each project, portfolio, and region
under the 300 future combinations of streamflow and demand changes.

4.4.2 Interactive, Analytic Decision Support Tool
    An interactive, analytic decision support tool was developed using Tableau—a
business analytic software system.6 This tool helps visualize results from the simulation
model, allowing SEDAPAL planners to explore across the hundreds of cases evaluated. It
also provides the means for developing portfolios using an optimization module
developed in the R statistical programming language.7 The optimization module
estimates the optimal combination of projects that maximize the supply of water to the
SEDAPAL service area for each future, subject to a budget constraint and project
feasibility specifications. The decision support tool then reports the cumulative effects of
each optimal portfolio and supports the comparisons of projects selected for each
portfolio. The analytical figures in this paper are screenshots from the tool. It is available
online at https://goo.gl/BRojPW.



5 Baseline Vulnerability
    We present the results of this study by stepping through a series of questions about
the proposed investments and tradeoffs among portfolios. In this section, we assess the
performance of the baseline vulnerabilities of the current system and the Master Plan. In
section 6, we generate and evaluate portfolios of projects under different budgets. In
section 7, we use these portfolios to develop a decision tree that guides SEDAPAL
through an adaptive set of no-regret investments.


5.1 Does Lima’s Current System Achieve Water Reliability?
    Lima’s current water demand is approximately 855 Mm3. Using WEAP to evaluate
the performance of the current system under current and historical flow conditions and
current demand reveals that SEDAPAL’s existing system just achieves water reliability.
Lima meets 90.4% of the demand 90 percent of the time. (Recall that water reliability is
achieved when the 90th percentile of monthly met demand is above 90%.)


5.2 Could SEDAPAL Achieve Future Water Reliability Without
    Further Investment?
   It is useful to assess whether Lima could achieve water reliability in the future
without the proposed projects. This analysis reveals the need for future investments.



   6
       Information about Tableau can be found on the developers website--www.tableausoftware.com.
   7
       R is available from http://www.r-project.org/.

                                                                                                    24
    We assessed whether SEDAPAL could achieve future water reliability by evaluating
the performance of the current system in WEAP in each of the 300 plausible demand and
streamflow futures.
    Without the proposed projects, SEDAPAL cannot achieve water reliability in 2040 if
demand exceeds approximately 920 Mm3, regardless of future flows. This is somewhat
more than current levels of demand but much less than SEDAPAL’s projection for 2040
demand of 1125 Mm3 and far less than the highest plausible demand of 1800 Mm3. If
future flows decrease, SEDAPAL may not be able to ensure water reliability even if
future demand were less than today’s demand. These results confirm SEDAPAL’s need
to undertake major investments in either new water supply or efficiency and demand
management to achieve water reliability for Lima.
    Figure 5-1shows the results. Each mark represents a future. The size of each mark
indicates the 90th percentile of monthly met demand—smaller marks indicate lower met
demand and hence worse performance. Marks are also colored differently—blue circles
indicate that water reliability is achieved in that future and orange open circles indicate
that reliability is not.
    Without the proposed projects, SEDAPAL cannot achieve water reliability in 2040 if
demand exceeds approximately 920 Mm3, regardless of future flows. This is somewhat
more than current levels of demand but much less than SEDAPAL’s projection for 2040
demand of 1125 Mm3 and far less than the highest plausible demand of 1800 Mm3. If
future flows decrease, SEDAPAL may not be able to ensure water reliability even if
future demand were less than today’s demand. These results confirm SEDAPAL’s need
to undertake major investments in either new water supply or efficiency and demand
management to achieve water reliability for Lima.




                                                                                         25
          Figure 5-1: Performance of the current system in each of 300 futures




Note: Blue filled circles indicate futures in which water reliability is achieved; orange unfilled
circles indicate futures in which it is not achieved. The size of the mark indicates the 90th
percentile of monthly met demand.


5.3 Would Implementing the Complete Master Plan Ensure Future
    Water Reliability?
   We evaluate the performance of all proposed 14Master Plan projects together in
WEAP in each future.8We call this the “All Projects” portfolio. This analysis reveals the
highest degree of water reliability that could be expected with the proposed investments.
    Figure 5-2shows the performance of the All Projects portfolio. All Projects increases
the 90th percentile of monthly met demand (nearly all points are larger). Also, with All
Projects, SEDAPAL can achieve water reliability in many more futures (there are many
more blue points). As we might expect, there is also a clear interaction between future
streamflow and future demand in determining water reliability. If future streamflow
increases (e.g., due to a favorable climate), it can achieve water reliability up and beyond
forecasted levels of demand. However, if streamflow declines or demand is higher than
forecast, SEDAPAL may need to invest in aggressive efficiency and demand
management in order to achieve water reliability.

    8
      Two projects, S. Antonio Res / Chillón WTP and Pun Run Res / Chillón WTP, are mutually
exclusive. Only one or the other can be constructed, not both, because they are duplicative investments that
supply water to the WTP Chillón II. Our analysis shows that implementing San Antonio instead of Pun Run
nearly always leads to better performance than vice versa, and therefore the “All Projects” portfolio results
shown consist of 13 projects including San Antonio and excluding Pun Run.

                                                                                                          26
     Figure 5-2: Performance of the All Projects portfolio in each of 300 futures




Note: Blue filled circles indicate futures in which water reliability is achieved; orange unfilled
circles indicate futures in which it is not achieved. The size of the mark indicates the 90th
percentile of monthly met demand.



6 Portfolio Development and Analysis
    Implementing all 14 projects can ensure water reliability in many but not all plausible
futures. In some cases, however, a smaller set of projects may be sufficient (e.g., if
demand or streamflow are favorable), necessary (e.g., if some projects are too difficult to
implement), or preferable (e.g., for cost savings). Developing and evaluating portfolios of
projects—i.e., combinations of the 14 individual projects—can help SEDAPAL
understand tradeoffs between performance and cost and reveal how to prioritize among
the full set of potential investments.


6.1 How Can We Develop Portfolios To Robustly Implement the
    Master Plan?
    In this project, we use two smaller budgets—75%, and 50%—to develop and assess
the performance of smaller portfolios. For these two budgets and the full budget case, we
identify the portfolios that achieve the greatest water reliability under different project
feasibility, demand, and streamflow conditions. These portfolios form the basis of a
decision tree that guides no-regret, adaptive investment decision making for SEDAPAL.


                                                                                                     27
    We use the decision support tool to first identify optimal portfolios for each future
given budgetary constraints. To do this, the tool maximizes the amount of water that
would be supplied cumulatively by the projects in a given portfolio, for a given budget.
This approach generally selects the projects that are most cost effective—those that
deliver the most supply for a given level of investment.
    As described in Figure 4-3., each project is designed to supply a particular amount of
water to different areas of the city and in different seasons. However, the actual supply
delivered may be less than designed if the future is relatively dry and there is insufficient
water available, or if the future has relatively low demand and not all of the available
supply needs to be delivered. We estimate these future-specific effects by simulating in
WEAP each project individually in each future. Figure 6-1shows box plots of each
project’s monthly supply deliveries across the 300 futures for all of Lima, costs, and cost-
effectiveness. It shows that Atarjea WTP is more cost effective than other projects by
several orders of magnitude, given its large deliveries and low cost. It also shows that
Atarjea WTP, Autisha Res/Lurigancho WTP, Casacancha Res, and Pun Run Res/Chillón
WTP have negative deliveries to the city in some futures. This is because multiple parts
of the system draw upon the same limited sources of water. In some futures, these four
projects may divert water from other parts of the system that would have had greater
supply deliveries.


    Figure 6-1:Projects’ supply deliveries, costs, and cost-effectiveness across 300
                                       futures




                                                                                            28
Note: The Atarjea WTP is several orders of magnitude more cost
effective than other projects. We show it on a separate scale so that the
differences in cost effectiveness among other projects are visible. The
scales for supply delivered and project cost are the same for all
projects.

    Projects may also supply different amounts of water to regions in different futures, as
Figure 6-2 illustrates for two example futures. For instance, in a wetter climate with
higher demand, Chosica WTP/Graton Tunnel supplies water to Eastern Lima. When the
climate is drier and demand is lower, it supplies water to Central Lima instead because, in
this future, unmet demand is higher. Therefore, the portfolios calculated by the decision
support tool may differ across each future.



Figure 6-2: Projects’ monthly water supply deliveries to different regions of Lima in
                                    two futures




    In theory, this process could produce a unique portfolio for each future (there are over
16,000 possible portfolios). In practice, the tool’s optimizer identifies the same portfolio
as bringing highest yields for many futures. Furthermore, the portfolios suggested by the
tool may not necessarily provide the most water when the projects of the portfolios are
evaluated together by WEAP. This is because the supply delivered by a portfolio of
projects (evaluated together) may be different from the sum of their individually
calculated supply because of the interactions among projects.
    Given limited computational time, we do not run all suggested portfolios across all
futures. Instead, we re-evaluate in WEAP the most frequently suggested portfolios that,

                                                                                         29
together, cover at least 90% of futures. We then look across futures to find broad sets of
future conditions in which a given portfolio is best. Not surprisingly, different portfolios
are optimal under the two different project feasibility conditions since the subset of
available projects is different in each case. However, we find that for each combination of
budget and project feasibility condition, a single portfolio performs as well or better than
all others across all futures.
    For example, for the 75% budget in which all projects are feasible, the optimizer
suggests five unique portfolios (named A-E) across the 300 streamflow and demand
futures. Figure 6-3shows the portfolios that achieve reliability in each future when
evaluated in WEAP. Portfolio C achieves reliability in more futures than any other
portfolio and in every future where reliability is possible with the given investments.
Thus, Portfolio C is the best portfolio for this budget and feasibility condition.


  Figure 6-3: Portfolios that achieve water reliability in each future under a 75%
                          budget and full project feasibility

    All portfolios (A, B, C, D, and E) achieve reliability
    Only A, C, D, and E achieve reliability
    Only A, C, and E achieve reliability
    Only C achieves reliability
    Reliability not achieved with any portfolio




                                                                                          30
6.2 Can Smaller Portfolios Achieve Water Reliability More Efficiently
    Than Implementing All Projects?
   As shown in Figure 5-2 above, implementing all projects does not lead SEDAPAL to
meet its objectives under many higher demand and drier futures. In these cases,
additional investments would be needed. Furthermore, in the futures in which the
SEDAPAL’s objectives are met, it is possible that they could be met with fewer
investments, thus freeing up resources that could be used to expand the robustness of
SEDAPAL’s plan.
    Figure 6-4shows the performance of the best portfolio for each budget when projects
are fully feasible and, for comparison, the performance of the All Projects and Current
System (i.e. No Project) portfolios. The box plots summarize the 90th percentile of
monthly met demand across all 300 climate and streamflow futures. Water reliability is
achieved if this is above 90%, in the shaded blue region.


       Figure 6-4:Summary performance portfolios with full project feasibility




    First, we can see that all portfolios are much better at meeting demand than the
current system across the range of futures. Second, the portfolio that is best for 100%
budget and full project feasibility (third row in the figure) differs from the All Projects
portfolio (second row in the figure). The former omits Autisha Res / Lurigancho WTP
because in drier climates this project reduces the net supply delivered and in wetter




                                                                                              31
climates its added supply is not enough to change whether water reliability is met or not
in any future.9 The cost savings of US $22 million is a secondary benefit.
     Rows 3-5 in Figure 6-4summarize the performance of the portfolios for 100%, 75%,
and 50% budgets, in the condition that all projects can be implemented. There is no
difference in performance between 100% and 75% budget. The main difference of course
is the budget—US$2.48B vs. US$1.86B10.
    Examining the projects in each portfolio and the regional effects explains why there is
no decline in performance when reducing the budget. Figure 6-5shows the projects in the
most robust portfolio when all projects are feasible. The portfolios under 100% and 75%
budgets when all projects are available (the first two portfolios) are very similar. The
only difference is that S. Antonio Res / Chillón WTP and Ventanilla Desal are not
included in the 75% budget portfolio. Both of these projects serve Northern Lima, but
other projects that are in the portfolio also serve this demand area—Chancay GW,
Chancay Res / Huaral WTP, and Jacaybamba Res. Together, these three projects more
cost effectively and fully meet the demand in Northern Lima in all plausible streamflow
and demand futures. Therefore, the additional supplies to Northern Lima from S. Antonio
Res / Chillón WTP and Ventanilla Desal are not needed before 2040 and can be safely
delayed beyond this time horizon.
   Figure 6-4does show that there is some decline in the performance from a 75%
budget to a 50% budget, again assuming all projects are potentially implemented. As
Figure 6-5indicates, the most robust portfolio with a 50% Budget is the same as the 75%
budget portfolio, but without Chancay GW, Chancay Res/Huaral WTP, Jacaybamba Res,
and Lima Sur Desal. Without these three projects, this portfolio does not supply any
additional water to Northern Lima and Callao over the current system. The decrease in
overall met demand relative to the 75% budget portfolio is modest because Central Lima,
which has the largest share of demand, is still well supplied by this portfolio. However
met demand in Northern Lima and Callao declines significantly.




    9
      Autisha Res/Lurigancho WTP and Atarjea WTP both draw on resources from the Rimac River.
Atarjea WTP delivers water immediately while, with Autisha Res/ Lurigancho WTP stores water in the
reservoir before releasing it to the Lurigancho WTP. This makes Atarjea WTP more effective at meeting
the demand, and implementing Autisha Res/Lurigancho WTP in these conditions reduces water reliability.
In other futures, where Autisha Res/Lurigancho WTP increases the supply delivered, these deliveries rarely
make the difference between failing to achieve and achieving water reliability. In combination, with 100%
budget and full project feasibility it is preferable to omit Autisha Res/Lurigancho WTP .
     10
        The actual cost of the most cost-effective portfolio with 75% budget is 1.83B.

                                                                                                       32
Figure 6-5: Portfolios for 100%, 75%, and 50% budgets with full project feasibility




    Figure 6-6summarizes these tradeoffs between cost and water reliability across all
streamflow and demand conditions, when all projects are feasible. We can draw several
conclusions. First, a portfolio of six of the 14 projects (Atarjea WTP, Cañete Trans/WTP,
Casacancha Res, Chosica WTP / Gratón Tunnel, Huachipa WTP/ Pomacocha Res, and
Lurin WTP) can achieve water reliability at a cost of US $1.24 B (50% of the full Master
Plan cost) if future demand is near SEDAPAL’s projection and historical streamflow
conditions persist. If streamflow increases, this portfolio can accommodate more demand
while still ensuring reliability, but if streamflow decreases, demand must be less than
SEDAPAL projections for 2040.
    Second, in a few futures where demand is higher or streamflow is lower, adding four
projects—Chancay GW, Chancay Res / Huaral WTP, Jacaybamba Res, and Lima Sur
Desal—can achieve water reliability for a total cost of US $1.83 B (75% of the full
master plan cost). Third, there are no futures in which implementing the remaining two
projects—S. Antonio Res / Chillón II WTP and Ventanilla Desal—helps achieve water
reliability. These projects could be delayed until after 2040 without reducing system
performance. Finally, there are many plausible futures in which the proposed projects
cannot achieve reliability. In these futures, demand is slightly higher than SEDAPAL
projects but streamflow is much less than it has been historically; or, demand is much
higher SEDAPAL projects. In these cases, SEDAPAL would need to invest in efficiency
and demand management to achieve its reliability goals.




                                                                                       33
    Figure 6-6: Water reliability and cost tradeoffs when all projects are feasible




    Reliability achieved with US $ 1.24B
    Reliability achieved with US $ 1.83B
    Reliability not achieved


6.3 What Are the Implications If Not All Projects Are Feasible?
    We next examine the implications if SEDAPAL is unable to complete the three
projects it identified as more difficult to implement than others—Cañete Trans/WTP,
Chosica Graton, and Pun Run Res/Chillon II WTP. In this case, the portfolios constructed
with the 100%, 75%, and 50% budget constraints cannot include any of these three
projects, as shown in the portfolios in Figure 6-7. (This figure repeats the first three rows
of Figure 6-5.)




                                                                                          34
    Figure 6-7: Portfolios for 100%, 75%, and 50% budgets with full and limited
                                  project feasibility




    Figure 6-8shows a significant decrease in water reliability relative to the full project
feasibility conditions (This figure repeats the first five rows of Figure 6-4). This occurs
for two reasons First, Cañete Trans/WTP supplies more water to Central Lima—the
largest demand area—than any other project. Second, Chosica WTP/ Graton Tunnel is
the only project that supplies water to Eastern Lima, and it also provides water to Central
Lima. Thus, these two projects play a key role in meeting demand in the city and
SEDAPAL should seek ways of reducing the barriers to implementing these projects. In
contrast, Pun Run Res/ Chillon II WTP supplies water to Northern Lima and Callao,
sometimes by diverting water from Central Lima. As such, it sometimes has a negative
impact on water reliability given that Central Lima has much larger demand. Moreover,
Pun Run Res/ Chillon II WTP and S. Antonio Res / Chillón WTP are mutually exclusive
projects and in nearly every future, the latter is preferred to Pun Run Res. Therefore,
excluding Pun Run because of its low feasibility status does not affect water reliability in
the city.




                                                                                          35
    Figure 6-8: Summary of portfolio performance with full and limited project
                                    feasibility




    As Figure 6-8shows, there is essentially no performance effect of decreasing the
budget from 100% to 50% once these projects are removed—the box plots of
performance are nearly identical. Figure 6-9shows this in further detail with tradeoffs
between cost and water reliability. First, without Cañete Trans/WTP and Chosica
Res/Graton Tunnel, water reliability can only be achieved if demand is lower than
SEDAPAL’s projections or, if the future is particularly dry, if demand is lower than it is
today. Second, in futures where water reliability is still possible, it can almost always be
achieved with six projects -- Atarjea WTP, Chancay, Chancay / Huaral, Huachipa WTP /
Pomacocha Res, Lima Sur Desal, and Lurin WTP. This portfolio costs US $1.24B, 50%
of the total Master Plan cost. Third, adding the remaining projects with a 75% or 100%
budget only ensures water reliability in one of the 300 futures. Thus, if SEDAPAL cannot
implement Chosica Res/ Graton Tunnel and Cañete Trans/WTP, it should forego
implementing the eight remaining proposed projects and instead invest in efficiency and
demand management.




                                                                                         36
 Figure 6-9: Water reliability and cost tradeoffs when project feasibility is limited




    Reliability achieved with US $ 1.24B
    Reliability achieved with US $ 1.83B
    Reliability not achieved




7 A Robust, Adaptive Strategy of No-Regret Investments
    The analysis of portfolios in section 6 reveals that, in many cases, SEDAPAL can use
smaller and less expensive portfolios to achieve water reliability across climate and
demand conditions. Figure 7-1shows ranges of future streamflow and demand conditions
in which each of the six portfolios (shown in Figure 6-7) can achieve water reliability.
The portfolios denoted within each region have identical performance. Note, however,
that each region is a convex hull: it is the smallest convex polygon that can be drawn
around the futures in which a portfolio achieves water reliability. Because the separation
between successful and failed futures overlaps, there are futures within each region for
which the portfolios listed do not achieve reliability.




                                                                                        37
    Figure 7-1: Future conditions in which different portfolios can achieve water
                                     reliability




    In a future with limited project feasibility, SEDAPAL could achieve water reliability
with the 50% budget portfolio if streamflow and demand fall in Region 1. If they are
outside of this region, implementing additional projects through the 75% and 100%
budget portfolios confers no additional benefit. Instead, SEDAPAL will need to pursue
additional options outside of the proposed projects.
    In a future with full project feasibility, SEDAPAL could achieve reliability with the
50% budget portfolio if future climate and demand conditions fall in Regions 1 or 2. If
climate and demand falls in Regions 1, 2 or 3, SEDAPAL could achieve reliability with
the 75% budget portfolio. If they fall in region 4, however, SEDAPAL cannot achieve
reliability, and there is no added benefit from pursuing the 100% portfolio budget.
Instead, SEDAPAL should implement the 75% budget portfolio to maximize water
deliveries and then pursue additional options outside of the proposed projects.
    When framed this way, SEDAPAL would know which portfolio to pursue if it could
predict future feasibility, streamflow, and demand conditions. Yet these are deeply
uncertain. How can SEDAPAL embark on an investment strategy when it cannot predict
the future?
    The answer lies in identifying no-regret projects for near-term implementation and
then crafting an adaptation process for implementing additional investments as conditions
are revealed over time. Figure 7-2shows the portfolios that most efficiently meet water
reliability in regions 1, 2, and 3 of Figure 7-1. These are the 75% Budget, Full Project
Feasibility; 50% Budget, Full Project Feasibility; and 50% Budget Limited Project
Feasibility. Figure 7-2 shows that three projects—Lurin WTP, Atarjea WTP, and
Pomacocha Res/Huachipa WTP—are included in all of the portfolios. SEDAPAL can


                                                                                        38
confidently implement these projects now, regardless of project feasibility, streamflow,
and demand conditions. It also shows that SEDAPAL could defer four projects to beyond
2040, as they are not part of any of these portfolios: Autisha Res/Lurigancho WTP, Pun
Run Res/Chillon WTP, S. Antonio Res/Chillon WTP, and Ventanilla Desal.


   Figure 7-2: Portfolios for 100%, 75%, and 50% budgets with full and limited
                                 project feasibility




    An adaptive decision tree of no-regret options enables SEDAPAL to implement its
proposed projects robustly. Figure 7-3shows this tree. It consists of a sequence of no-
regret investments (squares), conditions that SEDAPAL should monitor (diamonds), and
signposts that SEDAPAL should look for to trigger new no-regret investments
(branches).




                                                                                      39
Figure 7-3: A decision tree for robust, adaptive implementation of the Master Plan




    The root of the tree is the far left green square and represents the three no-regret
projects SEDAPAL can implement in the near term. Next, SEDAPAL should monitor
and assess the feasibility of implementing Cañete Trans/WTP and Chosica WTP/Graton
Tunnel, as these are more difficult to implement but also significantly increase water
reliability. Because SEDAPAL and other stakeholders may be able to influence the
feasibility of these projects, this condition should be monitored and addressed in the mid-
term. The decrease in water reliability without Cañete Trans/WTP and Chosica
WTP/Graton is significant. If these projects turn out to be feasible, SEDAPAL follows
the top branch to the investment node marked “mid-term, full feasibility.” It lists three
additional projects that are common to the full-feasibility portfolios: Cañete Trans/WTP,
Casacancha Res, and Chosica Res/Graton Tunnel. These projects are no-regret and
SEDAPAL could implement them even though additional uncertainties remain. At this
point, SEDAPAL would have implemented the 50% budget, Full Project Feasibility
portfolio.
    In the longer term, SEDAPAL should monitor streamflow and demand and assess
whether these conditions would fall in Region 2, 3, or 4 of Figure 7-1. If it falls in Region
2, then it is likely that no further action would be necessary since the 50% Budget, Full
Project Feasibility portfolio achieves water reliability in nearly all of this region. If it falls

                                                                                               40
in Region 3, then SEDAPAL could achieve reliability with the 75% Budget portfolio.
This would mean implementing four remaining projects: Chancay GW, Chancay
Res/Huaral WTP, Lima Sur Desal, and Jacaybamba Res. If it falls in Region 4, then
SEDAPAL should implement the projects needed in the 75% Budget portfolio. This will
increase deliveries but will not be enough to ensure water reliability. Consequently,
SEDAPAL will need to develop additional options—perhaps efficiency, non-traditional
water supplies, and demand management measures—to achieve water reliability in these
futures. Region 4 represents the remaining vulnerability for SEDAPAL’s Master Plan and
related projects.
    If the more difficult projects are not feasible, following the lower branch of the
decision tree, SEDAPAL should implement three different projects in the medium term:
Chancay GW, Chancay Res/Huaral WTP, and Lima Sur Desal. At this point, SEDAPAL
would have implemented the 50% Budget, Limited Project Feasibility portfolio.
Subsequently, if future streamflow and demand fall in Region 1, then it is likely that no
further action would be necessary since the 50% Budget, Limited Project Feasibility
portfolio achieves water reliability in nearly all of this region. However, this region just
extends to SEDAPAL’s projection of future demand, and many sources suggest demand
may exceed this. Therefore, it is very possible that the future may fall outside of Region
1. In this case, SEDAPAL will need to develop additional options to achieve water
reliability because the 75% and 100% budgets with limited project feasibility do not
confer additional benefit. The uncertainty range outside Region 1 represents the
remaining vulnerability for SEDAPAL’s Master Plan and related projects if Cañete
Trans/WTP and Chosica Res/Graton Tunnel are not possible.
    This sequence of actions is the most robust way for SEDAPAL to implement its
Master Plan and related projects when future demand, streamflow, and project feasibility
are deeply uncertain.



8 Discussion and Conclusions
   SEDAPAL, Lima’s water utility, has developed an aggressive US $2.7 billion Master
Plan to improve long-term water reliability in the face of climate change and growing
demand. This study draws upon state-of-the-art methods for decision making under deep
uncertainty (DMU) to help SEDAPAL implement its Master Plan and related projects
robustly, using an adaptive strategy of no-regret options.


8.1 Key Analytical Findings and Recommendations for SEDAPAL
   This analysis helps answer several pressing questions about SEDAPAL’s Master
Plan. First, is the Master Plan sufficient to ensure reliability in the face of deeply
uncertain future climate change and demand? The analysis shows that the Master Plan
and related investments can ensure reliability in many futures, including to levels of
demand that SEDAPAL forecasts, provided that climate change or other drivers do not
decrease streamflow significantly. However, it cannot ensure reliability in many plausible


                                                                                          41
futures where demand is higher than projected, streamflow declines, or implementation
of critical projects is not possible or delayed.
    On the other hand, are all proposed projects necessary to achieving reliability? The
analysis shows that SEDAPAL can achieve the very same degree of water reliability
more efficiently by implementing only ten of the fourteen projects. This results in a 25%
cost savings. In more slightly favorable demand and streamflow conditions, a set of six
projects costing 50% of the full budget can achieve reliability.
    Many projects are challenging to implement—how should considerations of project
feasibility shape the city’s investment strategy? SEDAPAL identified three projects that
may be more challenging to implement than the others. Our analysis shows that two of
these three projects are critical to ensuring long-term water reliability. Without them,
SEDAPAL may only be able to achieve reliability if future demand is less than projected,
unless climate change very significantly increases streamflow. Therefore, early efforts to
ensure timely implementation of these difficult projects are warranted.
    Ultimately, how should projects be prioritized? Which should be implemented now,
which can be delayed until they are necessary, and what specific indicators would trigger
their implementation? We have developed decision tree for SEDAPAL Master Plan
implementation, as shown in Figure 7-3. It consists of a set of near-term, no-regret
investments that SEDAPAL can embark upon now; signposts of specific project
feasibility, streamflow, and demand conditions SEDAPAL should monitor in the medium
and long term; and sets of deferred projects that SEDAPAL should implement if the
signposts are triggered. Framed in this way, the decision tree describes steps that can help
SEDAPAL implement its Master Plan and related projects robustly:

      In the near term, SEDAPAL can embark upon three no-regret projects at a cost of
       US $794 million: the Atarjea water treatment plant, the Lurin water treatment
       plant, and the combined Pomacocha reservoir/Huachipa II water treatment plant.
       These projects are necessary for ensuring water reliability in the future regardless
       of project feasibility, streamflow, and demand conditions.
      In the mid term, SEDAPAL should take steps to enable the implementation of the
       Cañete groundwater project and the combination Chosica water treatment
       plant/Graton tunnel. These two projects are critical for meeting water reliability in
       many plausible futures but are also more difficult to implement. If they cannot be
       implemented, SEDAPAL may not be able to ensure water reliability at its
       projected levels of demand.
      SEDAPAL should implement the remaining projects adaptively, using the
       decision tree of no-regret, robust projects for guidance.
      Lastly, SEDAPAL should develop strategies that reduce the need for new water
       supplies, given that the Master Plan and related projects cannot ensure reliability
       under all plausible futures. Potential actions include demand management,
       increasing system efficiency and reducing losses, and developing non-traditional
       water sources such as reuse of treated wastewater for non-potable purposes
       (landscape, irrigation, commercial and industrial needs).




                                                                                         42
8.2 A Follow-On Analysis Could Help SEDAPAL Develop an
    Integrated Portfolio With Nearer Term Priorities
    This project analyzes 14 traditional supply-side infrastructure investment projects for
SEDAPAL. It reveals that supply-side investments alone are not enough and that
efficiency, demand management, and non-traditional water supply projects may be
necessary for robustly achieving long-term water reliability. In some cases, such
investments may be more economically efficient than the proposed infrastructure-
intensive projects, may serve different regions of Lima that are otherwise underserved, or
may offer additional flexibility if they have short lead-times and can be implemented
quickly as needed. SEDAPAL recently submitted a collection of such projects to
SUNASS, Lima’s water supply and sanitation regulatory authority.
    A subsequent analysis of investments based on the methodology used in this work
would help SEDAPAL prioritize among those investments as well. This would produce
an integrated and efficient portfolio of traditional and non-traditional water supplies,
efficiency measures, and demand management actions. Among its benefits, an integrated
strategy offers more flexibility and responsiveness in the face of uncertainty.
    This project focuses on water reliability by 2040, the horizon of SEDAPAL’s Master
Plan. Yet SEDAPAL’s water reliability in the nearer term is also uncertain—the city is
growing fast and changing rapidly. Simultaneously, some projects may take many years
to implement; others may take decades. It would be useful to prioritize further the no-
regret projects based on their impact on nearer-term water reliability and their
implementation timeframes. This would help SEDAPAL achieve near-term water
reliability goals and determine with greater precision when it must begin implementing
each project to ensure it will be ready to supply water when it is needed.


8.3 SEDAPAL Could Use DMU Approaches In Other Planning
    Efforts
    The future may bring severe multi-year droughts to Lima such as those experienced
in other parts of the world. SEDAPAL could use DMU methodologies to update its
multi-year drought management plan to complement its Master Plan implementation
strategy, but with a focus on shorter-term actions. Such a drought management plan
would involve a mix of short-term actions (such as water restrictions and using tailored
operating rules for reservoirs and other infrastructure), mid-term actions (such as water
banking and encouraging efficient end-use technologies), and long-term actions such as
those assessed in this study. It would also involve a mix of near-term uncertainties (such
as drought length, severity, and adoption of policies) as well as long-term uncertainties
(such as climate change and demand).
    Water reliability is intimately linked with water quality, as water pollution can limit
the amount of water available for drinking, agriculture, and other uses. Lima’s water
supply is vulnerable to a variety of pollution sources—upstream agricultural runoff,
urban runoff, mining, and the waste streams of many different industries. This analysis
highlights projects and water sources that are critical for water reliability, thus indicating
where water quality is also of highest importance. Using the water quality functionalities

                                                                                            43
built in to WEAP, or coupling water quality models to WEAP, SEDAPAL could expand
this study to consider water quality issues. Specifically, SEDAPAL could use DMU
methods to further understand what activities most threaten water quality and where, and
develop a strategy of investment projects, operation rules, and regulatory policies that
would help reduce pollution and mitigate the effects of pollution. Such a strategy could
form the basis for collaboration with industry, regulators, and stakeholders concerned
with water quality.


8.4 Lessons Learned
    RDM and related DMU methods represent a new way of thinking about how near-
term actions can best manage future risks. Analysts are generally trained in predictive
thinking and the decision makers they inform often expect predictive quantitative
information. DMU methods answer a fundamentally different question. Rather than ask,
“what will happen?” they allows analysts and decision makers to ask, “What should we
do today to most effectively manage the full range of events that might happen?”This
project holds two key lessons for future applications of DMU, which we discuss in turn.

8.4.1 The Value of Methodological Impartiality and Flexibility
    In our experience, analysts (including consultants and researchers from academia)
approach a problem with a particular methodology and set of techniques in mind from the
outset. It is often the one in which they are most skilled, whether it be benefit-cost
analysis, scenario planning, or a particular DMU method. Many requests for project
analyses (e.g., requests for proposals) encourage this implicitly by asking analysts to
articulate a detailed technical approach to a problem based on just a short description and
before meeting stakeholders.
     This way of thinking can be limiting both for the project and for the analysts
undertaking it. It can implicitly and explicitly limit analysts’ opportunity to draw upon
the best methodology or methodologies for the problem, and hamper the evolution of the
methodological approach as the project proceeds. The implicit limitation arises because
little time and few resources are built into the project to experiment with methodologies
and techniques. The explicit limitation arises because progress is often benchmarked
against a scope of work that details a methodological approach that was developed before
the project began. The result is that analysts may not draw upon the methods that are best
suited to a problem.
    This project had few preconceived expectations and restrictions, and we believe this
contributed significantly to our being able to draw upon multiple methodologies and
evolve the approach as the project went on. While we, too, began with the intent of using
a particular approach (Robust Decision Making), we found mid-course that incorporating
thinking from Decision Scaling, Adaptive Pathways, and interactive, adaptive decision
support would serve SEDAPAL better than our original methodological framing alone.
The flexibility and exploratory nature of this project allowed us to adapt to the changing
needs of the project. Moreover, these changing needs became clear from an evolution in
thinking on the parts of both the analytical team and SEDAPAL, as the former better
understood the planning problem and the latter better understood the power of DMU

                                                                                        44
methods. We urge future projects and analyses to embrace this approach still further by
being more agnostic to the specific DMU technique, embedding methodological
exploration and development into the project budget and timeline, and seeking
opportunities for drawing upon multiple methodologies.

8.4.2 The Value of Participatory Analysis and the Stakeholder’s Commitment to
      Innovation
    In many projects, technical teams of external consultants and researchers perform an
analysis for a client or stakeholder (i.e., SEDAPAL). The technical team produces
analysis and findings and the stakeholder receives them. This allocation of roles runs the
risk that the analysis will not truly meet stakeholders’ needs, as the literature on decision
support notes (National Research Council, 2009). The analysis may not answer the
questions that the stakeholder is asking; the stakeholder may not buy into the
methodological process or findings; or the stakeholder may not be able to take
intellectual ownership of methodology, tools, and outcomes.
    SEDAPAL committed to this project and to the process of “deliberation with
analysis” that is recognized as best practices for climate-related decision making(National
Research Council, 2009). First, it committed its technical staff to be a core part of the
analytical team. They brought their expertise on Lima’s water needs and resources,
SEDAPAL’s system, the regulatory and policy context in which they make decisions, and
an understanding of the goals and aims of their Master Plan. The analytical team met
weekly – sometimes daily – by phone. SEDAPAL’s staff validated the data, models, and
findings at each step of the analysis. Their involvement has ensured that the analysis asks
and answers the right questions, that the results are important and practical for
SEDAPAL, and that SEDAPAL seeks to take ownership of the methods and tools
developed in the analysis and employ them in their future planning activities.
    Second, and perhaps even more importantly, SEDAPAL was willing to experiment
with a new approach to long-term planning and embark on a complex analysis that
differed greatly from approaches it used in the past. In embracing innovation, SEDAPAL
also embraced the possibility that the analysis would produce complex or controversial
findings that it would have to explain to stakeholders, including regulators and national
authorities. Because of SEDAPAL’s boldness, we were able to ask and answer difficult
questions about its Master Plan in the pursuit of long-term water reliability for Lima.


8.5 Conclusions
    This project helps SEDAPAL understand its Master Plan more fully. It enables
SEDAPAL to assess climate change threats without first needing to predict the future
climate. It helps SEDAPAL identify projects that particularly important for achieving
water reliability. And, it reveals the strengths and vulnerabilities of its Master Plan
concisely—as a specific set of conditions in which the Master Plan and related projects
can achieve water reliability and in which additional actions may be necessary. It also
helps SEDAPAL implement its Master Plan robustly by identifying near-term, no-regret
projects that it can embark upon now, while pursuing additional actions adaptively as
future conditions evolve.

                                                                                           45
9 References
Anandhi A, Frei A, Pierson DC, Schneiderman EM, Zion MS, Lounsbury D, Matonse
AH. 2011. Examination of change factor methodologies for climate change impact
assessment. Water Resources Research47(3): n/a–n/a. DOI: 10.1029/2010WR009104.
Brown C. 2010. The end of reliability. Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management136(2): 143–145.
Brown C. 2011. Decision-Scaling for Robust Planning and Policy under Climate
Uncertainty. World Resources Report Uncertainty Series. Washington DC.
Brown C, Ghile Y, Laverty M, Li K. 2012. Decision scaling: Linking bottom-up
vulnerability analysis with climate projections in the water sector. Water Resources
Research48(9): n/a–n/a. DOI: 10.1029/2011WR011212.
Brown C, Werick W, Leger W, Fay D. 2011. A Decision-Analytic Approach to
Managing Climate Risks: Application to the Upper Great Lakes. JAWRA Journal of the
American Water Resources Association47(3): 524–534. DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-
1688.2011.00552.x.
Bryant BP, Lempert RJ. 2010. Thinking inside the box: A participatory, computer-
assisted approach to scenario discovery. Technological Forecasting and Social Change.
Elsevier Inc. 77(1): 34–49. DOI: 10.1016/j.techfore.2009.08.002.
Bureau of Reclamation. 2012. Colorado River Basin Water Supply and Demand Study:
Study Report. .
Cervigni R, Liden R, Neumann JE, Strzepek KM. 2015. Enhancing the Climate
Resilience of Africa’s Infrastructure: The Power and Water Sectors. World Bank:
Washington, D.C. DOI: 10.1596/978-1-4648-0466-3.
Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority (CPRA). 2012. Louisiana’s Comprehensive
Master Plan for a Sustainable Coast. Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority of
Louisiana: Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Dessai S, Hulme M. 2007. Assessing the Robustness of Adaptation Decisions to Climate
Change Uncertainties: A Case Study on Water Resources Management in the East of
England. Global Environmental Change17(1): 59–72.
Groves DG, Bloom E, Lempert RJ, Fischbach JR, Nevills J, Goshi B. 2014a. Developing
Key Indicators for Adaptive Water Planning. Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management. American Society of Civil Engineers (10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-
5452.0000471).
Groves DG, Fischbach JR, Bloom E, Knopman D, Keefe R. 2013. Adapting to a
Changing Colorado River. RAND Corporation: Santa Monica, CA.
Groves DG, Fischbach JR, Kalra N, Molina-Perez E, Yates DN, Purkey DR, Fencl A,
Mehta V, Wright B, Pyke G. 2014b. Developing Robust Strategies for Climate Change
and Other Risks: A Water Utility Framework. Denver, CO.




                                                                                       46
Groves DG, Fischbach JR, Knopman D, Johnson DR, Giglio K. 2014c. Strengthening
Coastal Planning: How Coastal Regions Could Benefit from Louisiana’s Planning and
Analysis Framework. Santa Monica, CA.
Groves DG, Knopman D, Lempert RJ, Berry SH, Wainfan L. 2008. Presenting
Uncertainty About Climate Change to Water-Resource Managers. RAND Corporation.
Groves DG, Lempert RJ. 2007. A new analytic method for finding policy-relevant
scenarios. Global Environmental Change17(1): 73–85. DOI:
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.11.006.
Groves DG, Sharon C. 2013. Planning Tool to Support Planning the Future of Coastal
Louisiana. Journal of Coastal Research. The Coastal Education and Research Foundation
67: 147–161. DOI: 10.2112/SI_67_10.
Haasnoot M, Kwakkel JH, Walker WE, ter Maat J. 2013. Dynamic adaptive policy
pathways: A method for crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world. Global
Environmental Change23(2): 485–498.
Huber-Lee A, Swartz C, Sieber J, Goldstein J, Purkey D, Young C, Soderstrom E,
Henderson J, Raucher R. 2006. Decision Support System for Sustainable Water Supply
Planning. Awwa Research Foundation: Denver, CO.
INEI. 2001. Estimaciones y proyecciones de poblacion, 1950-2050, urbana-rural 1970-
2025. .
INEI. 2013. Estado de la Población Peruana 2013. .
IPCC. 2014. Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge
UK and New York NY.
Joyce B, Purkey D, Yates D, Groves DG, Draper A. 2010. Integrated Scenario Analysis
for the 2009 California Water Plan Update, Volume 4. California Department of Water
Resources: Sacramento, CA.
Kalra N, Hallegatte S, Lempert R, Brown C, Fozzard A, Gill S, Shah A. 2014. Agreeing
on robust decisions : new processes for decision making under deep uncertainty, Volume
1. Washington, D.C.
Lempert RJ, Groves DG. 2010. Identifying and evaluating robust adaptive policy
responses to climate change for water management agencies in the American west.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change. Elsevier Inc. 77(6): 960–974. DOI:
10.1016/j.techfore.2010.04.007.
Lempert RJ, Kalra N, Peyraud S, Mao Z, Tan SB, Cira D, Lotsch A. 2013a. Ensuring
Robust Flood Risk Management in Ho Chi Minh City. The World Bank.
Lempert RJ, Popper SW, Bankes SC. 2003. Shaping the Next One Hundred Years: New
Methods for Quantitative, Long-Term Policy Analysis. RAND Corporation, MR-1626-
RPC: Santa Monica, Calif.



                                                                                        47
Lempert RJ, Popper SW, Groves DG, Kalra N, Fischbach JR, Bankes SC, Bryant BP,
Collins MT, Keller K, Hackbarth A, Dixon L, LaTourrette T, Reville RT, Hall JW,
Mijere C, McInerney DJ. 2013b. Making Good Decisions Without Predictions. RAND
Corporation.
McKay MD, Beckman RJ, Conover WJ. 1979. Comparison of Three Methods for
Selecting Values of Input Variables in the Analysis of Output from a Computer Code.
Technometrics. Taylor & Francis 21(2): 239–245. DOI:
10.1080/00401706.1979.10489755.
Mendler de Suarez J, Suarez P, Bachofen C, Fortugno N, Goentzel J, Gonçalves P, Grist
N, Macklin C, Pfeifer K, Schweizer S, Van Aalst M, Virji H. 2012. Games for a New
Climate: Experiencing the Complexity of Future Risks. The Frederick S. Pardee Center
for the Study of the Longer-Range Future, Boston University.
National Research Council. 2009. Informing Decisions in a Changing Climate. Panel on
Strategies and Methods for Climate-Related Decision Support, Committee on the Human
Dimensions of Climate Change, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education: Washington, DC.
Plöger J. 2012. Gated barriadas: Responses to urban insecurity in marginal settlements in
Lima, Peru. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography33(2): 212–225.
Purkey D, Huber-Lee A, David Y, Hanemann M, Herrod JS. 2007. Integrating a Climate
Change Assessment Tool into Stakeholder Driven Water Management Decision-making
Processes in California. Water Resources Management21: 315–329.
Vince G. 2010. Out of the mist. Science330(6005): 750–751. DOI:
10.1126/science.330.6005.750.
Walker WE, Rahman SA, Cave J. 2001. Adaptive policies, policy analysis, and policy-
making. European Journal of Operational Research128: 282–289.
WMO. 2015. World Weather Information Service – Lima. .
Yates D, Galbraith H, Purkey D, Huber-Lee A, Sieber J, West J, Herrod-Julius S, Joyce
B. 2008. Climate warming, water storage, and Chinook salmon in California’s
Sacramento Valley. Climatic Change91(3/4): 335–350. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-008-9427-
8.
Yates D, Purkey D, Sieber J, Huber-Lee A, Galbraith H. 2005a. WEAP21—A Demand-,
Priority-, and Preference-Driven Water Planning Model: Part 2: Aiding Freshwater
Ecosystem Service Evaluation. Water International. Routledge 30(4): 501–512. DOI:
10.1080/02508060508691894.
Yates D, Sieber J, Purkey D, Huber-Lee A. 2005b. WEAP21—A Demand-, Priority-, and
Preference-Driven Water Planning Model: Part 1: Model Characteristics. Water
International. Routledge 30(4): 487–500. DOI: 10.1080/02508060508691893.




                                                                                       48
Appendix A. Creating Demand and Streamflow Futures
    We statistically generated 300 demand and streamflow futures, in addition to a future
representing no change from today (855 Mm3 of demand and historical streamflows). A
future is defined by a specific combination of values, one for each of the uncertainties.
These futures are not predictions, and we do not assign any likelihood to their occurrence.
Rather, we use them to stress test and better understand the behavior of the Master Plan.
Using WEAP, we determined the 90th percentile of monthly met demand of each
individual project and of the portfolios in each of these 300 futures.
    In this analysis, to create the 300 futures we use Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS).
LHS is a randomized experimental design based on the higher dimensional generalization
of a Latin Square. Our experience suggests LHC is more useful for multi-scenario
analyses than other standard sampling methods, such Monte Carlo or full-factorial,
because it provides the most complete exploration of the model's behavior over the input
space for the fewest number of points in sample (Saltelli et al, 2000; Groves et al., 2014).
To generate the futures, LHS
   6. Takes as input the minimum and maximum values for each of the u uncertainties
      and the number n of futures desired,
   7. Divides each uncertainty range into n values at equally spaced intervals, and
   8. Randomly generates n futures such that each of the n values for an uncertainty is
      included in exactly one future, and no future contains more than one value from
      the nth interval.
   To create these futures, we first need to identify appropriate ranges for the demand
and streamflow uncertainties considered. We discuss these in turn.


Generating Demand Futures
    We used four sources of data of population and water use projections for the Lima
Metropolitan Region: two from SEDAPAL (SEDAPAL, 2014),11 one from Peru’s
National Institute of Statistics and Informatics (INEA12), and one from a study by the
German Federal Enterprise for International Cooperation for SEDAPAL. Each source
projected (i) the total population in Lima in 2040 and (ii) demand per capita, which
includes system losses. We multiplied each demand per capita projection by each
population projection, as illustrated in Table A-1. We defined the ranges by multiplying
the minimum and maximum population projections with the minimum and maximum
demand per capita, respectively. From this method, the estimated minimum and
maximum are 730 Mm3 and 1790 Mm3, respectively (red values in Table A-1). For each
of the 300 futures, we assume that the ratio of regional demand to total demand remained




   11
        Personal communication with SEDAPAL, January 2014.
   12
        http://www.inei.gob.pe/



                                                                                          49
constant. We also assume that demand remains constant throughout the year and
therefore divide annual demand into twelve roughly equal monthly demands.13


     Table A-1:Ranges for plausible demand futures (m3/year), Total Lima, 2040

                                                                       Population
                                                 SEDAPAL          5-Year        INEI           GIZ
                                                                  Plan
                                          x       12.5M            13.3M        11.7M          17.3M

 Water       SEDAPAL                     83       1,031M           1,101M       966M           1,425M
 Consumption 5-Year Plan                          1,049M           1,120M       982M           1,450M
                                         84
 (m3/p/year)
             INEI                        63       787M             840M         737M           1,088M
                     GIZ - high         102       1,282M           1,370M       1,201M         1,773M


Generating Streamflow Futures
    In contrast to demand, there is significant variation in intra-annual streamflow due to
seasonal variation in precipitation at the headwaters of each of these basins in the Andes
(Vera et al., 2006). Because of its extensive reservoir storage capacity, however, the
system is largely insensitive to month-to-month changes in streamflow and much more
sensitive to changes in seasonal in streamflow. Therefore, we represent each streamflow
future with two values, one for the dry season (March-November) and one for the wet
season (December-February).
    Our method of estimating future streamflow is to use a delta change factor to adjust
historical monthly flows, consistent with the principles of Decision Scaling (Brown,
2011). Under this method, we apply a range of percent changes to historical precipitation
data to obtain projections of future precipitation. The precipitation data is then used in a
rainfall-runoff model to estimate future streamflow.
    We specify the range of delta factors to exceed that from downscaled climate
projections. We use estimates of downscaled precipitation changes from global climate
models and historical streamflow data from SEDAPAL. Figure 4-1summarizes the
changes in annual and seasonal precipitation projected by 15 climate models in 3
emissions scenarios. We use the minimum and maximum changes as the ranges for an
LHS-generated set of monthly precipitation deltas. That is, each of the 300 futures
contains 12 unique values of monthly change factors. Without a rainfall-runoff model, we
assume a 1:1 relationship between precipitation and runoff and apply these change factors

    13
        In many parts of the world, variations in temperature and precipitation within a year drive intra-
annual variations in demand. Demand increases in hotter or drier periods and decreases in cooler or wetter
periods. Lima has little variation in intra-annual demand because temperature is roughly constant
throughout the year and precipitation is negligible. This is consistent with SEDAPAL’s observations of
historical demand.

                                                                                                        50
directly to the 45-year monthly historical streamflow record. This results in 300 different
sequences of 540 months of streamflow. We use these months of streamflow to emulate
interannual variability at a single point in time, and not as a transient sequence of
streamflow across time. That is, we treat all 540 months of data as samples from a single
future climate regime in 2040, not as a 45-year sequence of streamflow from 2015 to
2060.


Assessing Project And Portfolio Performance With Futures
    We run each project and portfolio in 300 futures to test its performance under
different uncertain demand and streamflow conditions. To evaluate a project or portfolio
in a single future, WEAP calculates the monthly met demand as a percent of total demand
in each of the 540 months. We post process these results to calculate our key metric—the
90th percentile of monthly met demand across the 540 months.
    A key objective of the analysis is to summarize the conditions under which a portfolio
achieves water reliability. While there are three exogenous demand and streamflow
variables in each future, we describe performance in terms of demand and dry season
streamflow because the system as currently envisioned is sensitive to changes in dry
season streamflow but not wet season streamflow. This is because, in the wet season,
SEDAPAL prioritizes filling of reservoirs to meet upcoming dry season demand, and
streamflow in the wet season often exceeds reservoir capacity. Therefore most changes
in wet-season streamflow do not affect water deliveries. In contrast, in the dry season,
changes in streamflow can have immediate and direct impact on water deliveries and met
demand. Changes in how SEDAPAL operates its system could change this sensitivity.




                                                                                         51
