    Report No: AUS8539


    World
    Inclusive Cities Approach Paper
    May 2015

    GSURR

    OTHER

.




.




                                      1
Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory
or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                                      2
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements....................................................................................................................................... 4
Preface .......................................................................................................................................................... 5
Chapter 1: Background: Approaches, Concepts and Experiences ................................................................ 6
Chapter 2: Inclusive Cities: A multi-dimensional approach ........................................................................ 11
Chapter 3: Operationalizing the Inclusive Cities Approach ........................................................................ 20
References .................................................................................................................................................. 39
Annex 1 Exclusion in Urban Areas (Problems) ............................................................................................ 42
Annex 2: Past Approaches and Experience ................................................................................................. 52
Annex 3: Fifty Years of Lessons: An Abridged History ................................................................................ 62
Annex 4: Review of World Bank Projects.................................................................................................... 65
Annex 5: Brazil’s Experience in Making Cities Inclusive .............................................................................. 74
Annex 6: Measuring Inclusion ..................................................................................................................... 79
Annex 7: Agenda of the Inclusive Cities Workshop .................................................................................... 83
Annex 8: Inclusive and Sustainable Cities Event Agenda ............................................................................ 85




                                                                                                                                                                  3
Acknowledgements
The inclusive cities team (Phoram Shah with Ellen Hamilton, Fernando Armendaris and Heejoo Lee)
would like to acknowledge contributions from World Bank experts as well as experts from the field and
academia, who have generously contributed to the Inclusive Cities dialogue.
The team is thankful to authors of the background notes: Dr. Mona Serageldin (Vice President, Institute
for International Urban Development), Diana Mitlin (Principal Researcher, International Institute for
Environment and Development), David Satterthwaite (Senior Fellow, International Institute for
Environment and Development), Xavier de Souza Briggs (Vice President, Ford Foundation), Rolf Pendall
(Director, Metropolitan Housing and Communities Policy Center, The Urban Institute) and Victor Rubin
(Vice President for Research, PolicyLink), Anaclaudia Rossbach (Regional Advisor, Cities Alliance) and
Francesco di Villarosa (Consultant, the World Bank) for their contribution towards notes on the possible
axes of inclusion: access, participation, opportunities and rights.
The team would like to thank all the peer reviewers who rigorously provided their valuable inputs
throughout the process, including Christine Kessides (Practice Manager, WBIUR), Judy Baker (Lead
Urban Economist, GSURR), Celine d’Cruz (Coordinator, Shack Dwellers International), Eugenie Birch
(Professor and Chair of the Penn Urban Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania), and Maninder
Gill (Director, GSURR). Additionally, valuable comments were received from Victor M. Vergara (Lead
Urban Specialist, GSURR), Francesco di Villarosa (Consultant), Anaclaudia Rossbach, (consultant), Ming
Zhang (Practice Manager, GSURR), Maitreyi Das (Global Lead, Global Solutions Group on Social
Inclusion), Maria Beatriz Orlando (Senior Social Development Specialist, GSURR), Emcet Tas (Social
Development Specialist, GSURR) and Peter Ellis (Lead Urban Economist, GSURR). The team is also
thankful to all the people who participated in the lively discussion o in the decision review meeting in
June 2014.
The team would like to extend special thanks to Maria Beatriz Orlando (Senior Social Development
Specialist, GSURR). Her constructive comments on the approach paper were very useful. Her guidance
made it possible to align the approach paper with the Social Inclusion agenda.
The team appreciates the interest and support received from Bank operational teams to share their
projects and participate in the discussion on how to operationalize the multi-dimensional approach to
inclusive cities.
All the presenters and participants, although too numerous to name, who participated in two workshops
(January 2014 and March 2015) contributed greatly to the Inclusive Cities dialogue. The team also
thanks Susan Wong, Margaret Arnold, and other social development colleagues who joined hands in
organizing the second workshop.
The team thanks R. Mukami Kariuki, Global Lead for Global Solutions Group on Low Income
Communities and Urban Poverty for encouraging and working together with the team on the agenda.
Finally, the team would like to thank Sameh Wahba for his constant support to the agenda and his
valuable guidance to the inclusive cities initiative.



                                                                                                           4
Preface
This approach paper is prepared as part of the Inclusive Cities Programmatic Approach, a multi-year
initiative launched by the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice (GSURR) in October 2013. In
line with the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, the
programmatic approach aims to assist the Bank, development partners, and client countries to identify
and design more effective policies and programs for promoting inclusive city development. Various
activities planned under the initiative include: preparation of topical background notes; internal
consultations; knowledge exchange events; dialogue with practitioners, academics, clients, etc.; and
finally, preparation of an approach paper aimed at providing operational guidance to Bank staff.
The approach paper primarily targets an internal audience with an aim to guide Bank staff to initiate
dialogues, promote further analyses and support operations in the direction of a multi-dimensional
approach to inclusive cities. While the paper attempts to provide a frame that guides the Bank’s
approach and shape Bank operations to promote inclusive cities, it is not an attempt to provide new
definitions or an analytical foundation. Rather, it draws from existing strong analytical foundations: the
World Development Reports on Equity and Development (2006), Reshaping Economic Geography
(2009), Gender Equality and Development (2012), Jobs (2013); the Urban and Local Government
Strategy (2009); the flagship report prepared by the former Social Development Global Unit ‘Inclusion
Matters – the foundation for shared prosperity’ (2013); and Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming
Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group Operations (2015). Additionally, four background notes were
commissioned under the Inclusive Cities Programmatic Approach which also influenced the paper: i)
Access to affordable land and housing, infrastructure, basic services; ii) Economic opportunities for all;
iii) Engagement of excluded groups in inclusive cities; and iv) Lessons learnt from Brazil’s experience. The
paper also benefitted from consultations and discussions with Bank staff as well as external
stakeholders, including two workshops organized in January 2014 and March 2015 respectively. The
approach paper concludes with an update on ongoing activities and the proposed next steps.




                                                                                                           5
Chapter 1: Background: Approaches, Concepts and Experiences

1.1      With more than half the world’s population now living in urban areas, cities are on the critical
path for attaining the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity:
High urban densities reduce transaction costs, make public spending on infrastructure and services more
economically viable, and facilitate generation and diffusion of knowledge, all of which are important
factors for growth. Today, cities contribute more than 70-80% of global GDP. Hand in hand with
economic growth and prosperity, urbanization has often helped reduce overall poverty by providing
new opportunities and raising incomes.

1.2      Benefits of urbanization are not equitably distributed: While urbanization has been recognized
as a powerful force in support of economic growth and poverty reduction, it is equally true that poverty
is rapidly urbanizing as more and more people moving to cities. Furthermore, most of the increase in
urban population is taking place in Africa and Asia, regions that are home to some of the poorest
countries in the world (UN 2014). Service provision in urban areas has not kept up with rapid
urbanization. Due to lack of affordable and serviced land in locations that offer easy access to income-
earning opportunities, increasingly the urban poor have to resort to informal settlements with
inadequate services. Lack of access, rights and opportunities for the excluded have exacerbated
incidents of social upheaval in cities. Rising inequality and resulting incidents of crime and violence, call
for higher attention to inclusion in urban areas.

1.3     Forms and manifestations of spatial, social and economic exclusion in urban areas are
multiple: High disparities are manifested in terms of spatial, social and economic exclusion in urban
areas. The spatial dimension of exclusion deals with geographic segregation, the social dimension deals
with discrimination, and the economic dimension deals with lack of access to opportunities (Annex 1:
Exclusion in Urban Areas).

1.3.1 Spatial segregation results from low-income households clustering together in spatially informal
and/or remote areas. Among others, restrictive and exclusionary land use regulations, lengthy and
expensive administrative processes for land development, lack of land regularization and titling
mechanisms, and corrupt practices of land conversion have led to high prices of land and informal
occupation. As a result, in cities of developing countries, the urban poor often settle on land exposed to
natural and man-made hazards such as garbage dumps and polluted sites due to their proximity to
opportunities for economic growth. Additionally, due to non-availability of affordable land and
restrictive building regulations, housing remains out of reach for many and informal settlements form.
Slums and informal settlements are a common sight today with nearly one in every three urban
residents in the developing world – or a total of one billion people - living in slums (UN Habitat 2014).
Infrastructure provision in these marginal locations is highly inadequate. Lack of water, sanitation and
other basic services lead to deterioration of the urban environment and pose public health risks.

1.3.2 Social exclusion and marginalization on the basis of socio-economic status, gender, age, caste,
ethnicity, and other categories often pose particular difficulties in gaining and securing access, rights,

                                                                                                                6
and opportunities in urban areas. For example, women may face discrimination within their household,
within the labor market and in regard to access to services. In some countries, migrants in urban areas
and displaced persons settling in cities may be denied the ability to access public services, while also
sharing many of the same challenges as the urban poor – i.e., informal settlement, poor living
conditions, lack of economic opportunities, and social marginalization. People who are displaced due to
conflicts or disasters may also face additional constraints such as legal status, trauma, loss of assets and
jobs, and social tensions, to name a few. In the case of displacement, even though it is usually a long-
term or even permanent condition in urban areas, issues related to displaced population are rarely
factored into urban planning.

1.3.3 As a result of the lack of opportunities as well as spatial and skills mismatch, most of the
marginalized population often ends up in low-paying or informal jobs that do not provide a dependable
stream of income and are often characterized by precarious working conditions (World Bank 2009b).
Lack of a formal address or identity may preclude access to formal jobs while lack of education and poor
health can also restrict access to higher-paying jobs. Additionally, unaffordable transit fares and
disconnect from the public transportation network further suppresses access to economic
opportunities. Very low incomes and multiple necessary expenditures mean that individuals and
households have a very limited capacity to save or invest, and there is little ability to withstand shocks.
Access to finance is problematic as credit unions and micro-finance initiatives may require regular
monthly payments which is particularly difficult for those employed informally. Exclusion from both
market and state opportunities make the excluded more and more vulnerable.
      Figure 1. Deprivations associated with urban poverty and their immediate external causes




Source: (Mitlin and Satterthwaite 2013)

                                                                                                               7
1.4      Exclusion and rising inequalities come with significant externalities: Growing social distance
between the decision makers and the marginalized population may lead to failure to sufficiently
represent different interests, adversely affecting democratic processes. Policies that are not sensitive to
the needs of the excluded population often fail to adequately provide basic services, which in turn
hampers the chances of closing the social, spatial and economic gap. The lack of participatory processes
in decision making undermines inclusive growth. Lack of opportunities for voice and redress can lead to
social tension and instability, which may also have direct impact on the investment climate and
economic growth opportunities. Without an active approach to empower the communities to advocate
for their interests and provide incentives for the local authorities to increase their responsiveness to the
communities’ needs, inclusive strategies often fall short of promoting embedded and sustainable
integration of marginalized population.

1.5      Lessons from past experiences indicate the need for an integrated approach: Even though the
aforementioned arguments speak of the complexity of lack of inclusion in urban areas, programs and
policies aimed at inclusion often target spatial issues such as housing deficit, supply of land and
provision of services. The evolution and implementation of these approaches highlight many important
lessons, which are described in Annex 2: Past Approaches and Experiences.

1.5.1 The Initial response to proliferating slums in many cities was large scale evictions. Yet, due to
the non-availability of affordable housing options and proximity to economic opportunities, more and
more people moved to slums. Mass public housing projects were undertaken as a response to housing
deficit. However, the upfront cost of providing public housing that meets the demand of an increasing
population scale is prohibitively expensive. Due to this, these houses were often located on cheap land
on the periphery of the city with low quality construction and compromised standards in order to curb
costs. This exacerbated spatial segregation and failed to meet the demand of the urban poor.

1.5.2 As mass social housing was realized to be a cost intensive endeavor, a ‘sites and services’
approach aimed to provide serviced land, considering that people would build on these plots
themselves. In most cases, serviced land was provided in unfavorable locations. Moreover, serviced land
also meant higher land prices, making it difficult for the urban poor to pay the rent. Additionally, it was
often politically challenging for city leaders to justify investment in infrastructure for people who have
not yet arrived, when many current residents lack infrastructure. As a result, the sites and services
programs yielded mixed outcomes. One alternative was incremental housing programs, which provided
access to serviced land and a minimum core unit, requiring the residents to build and expand on their
own according to the set standards. These approaches required fewer initial resources from
government, as they leverage private and community resources. More recently, affordable housing
approaches have been focusing access to different types of solutions to suit the demands of people,
rather than constructing finished low cost housing units. All these approaches aimed at addressing
spatial inclusion are narrowly targeted at peoples’ housing needs and often fail to address inclusion at
scale.


                                                                                                           8
1.5.3 Slum upgrading has been the preferred approach for the last two-three decades. Slum
upgrading projects entail improving the living conditions of slum dwellers in situ. The scope of slum
upgrading programs varies from neighborhood-level projects to city-wide slum upgrading and national
programs. Early slum-upgrading projects tended to be confined to improvement of housing and physical
infrastructure. With time, slum upgrading has started to pay attention to community involvement,
governance, legal status of the households’ title, and environmental safety (Annex 3- abridged history of
slum upgrading). More recently, secure land tenure has been considered as an enabling factor for
housing investment and economic growth. While the results of increased investment in housing due to
security of tenure are not yet confirmed, security of tenure is also seen to be a source of identity, status
and political recognition that can serve as a basis for acquisition of other rights and services.

1.5.4 Increasingly, community participation is being considered as a significant factor in achieving
inclusion, through involvement of the community in development processes, governance, and decision
making. Community driven development approaches that promote co-production of public goods and
services have been a means to mobilize both public agents and private citizens. Engagement of the
community has often included participation during planning and implementation, and in certain
instances the community has taken control over planning and resources handling as well. Most recently,
rights-based approaches to inclusion have attempted to fundamentally change exclusionary and
inequitable practices. In urban contexts, rights-based approaches have been particularly notable for
securing land tenure, access to basic services, and access to trading spaces (World Bank 2014d).

1.5.5 While there has been a wide recognition of participation and protection of rights of the
marginalized communities as important factors to achieve inclusion, the efforts to involve and engage
with the marginalized communities have been scattered and ad-hoc. Similarly, apart from livelihood and
vocational training components attached to the slum upgrading and housing projects, there has not
been evidence of incorporating economic inclusion as an important factor to promote inclusive cities.
Some of the tested approaches to promote economic inclusion such as access to financial markets
through savings and loan facilities, support by housing markets with shelter micro-finance, and support
for enterprise development with micro-credits, are often implemented at national level. These types of
approaches need to be appropriately connected to local urban initiatives like slum upgrading and
infrastructure upgrading as well as interventions targeted at social inclusion in order to be more
impactful when implemented.

1.6     A review1 of the World Bank’s recently closed lending projects for slum upgrading (Annex 4): A
review of World Bank financed projects aimed at slum upgrading was carried out. It revealed that slum


1
  The review was conducted for 19 projects, which were filtered from the pool of housing projects between 2000
and 2014. The filtering process was as follows: 1) Urban Sector Board Projects with approval year between 2000
and 2014 under theme and sector codes 71, 74, 101, 102, FC, YC (Urban services and housing for the poor, Other
urban development, Urban planning and housing policy, City-wide infrastructure and service delivery, Housing
finance, and Housing construction); 2) projects with housing components that were identified under 6 categories –
housing finance, sites and services, housing policy, green building, disaster relief, and slum upgrading; and finally 3)
closed projects with housing components under the slum upgrading category.

                                                                                                                       9
upgrading is dominated by physical improvements, without accompanying investment in improving the
level of social development in the households or in the community as a whole. Even less frequent is a
project element directly aimed at enhancing economic livelihoods. In most cases, social-related
investments are largely for launching awareness-raising campaigns and economic-related investments
are about weaving in a channel to provide microcredits and small grants. The average investment size of
social and economic interventions is quite limited and could be scaled up for leveraging greater impact.

1.7      The spatial, social, and economic dimensions are all intertwined: The aforementioned lessons
from the past policies/programs point to the shortcomings arising from acting on one dimension of
inclusion while ignoring others. The spatial dimension of inclusion cannot be separated from economic
and social dimensions since it is usually socially and economically marginalized groups that inhabit
physically deprived spaces. Efforts to improve the living conditions of the slum dwellers by providing
basic services have had limited impact on social inclusion at the city scale. As highlighted in the WDR
2009, spatially focused interventions for improving slums are unlikely to be enough for social
integration, unless accompanied by institutional and complementary reforms (World Bank 2009a).
Similarly, the World Bank’s Urban and Local Government Strategy (World Bank 2009b) establishes that
narrowly focused neighborhood slum upgrading interventions, while generally effective, have fallen
short of addressing the magnitude and scope of expanding informality and slums. It is clear that without
considering social and economic dimensions, interventions confined only to seaming spatial disparities
have not yielded desired results. The following sections of the paper explore the multi-dimensional
approach to inclusive cities and ways to mainstream the approach in Bank’s operations.




                                                                                                      10
Chapter 2: Inclusive Cities: A multi-dimensional approach

2.1      Putting the pieces of the puzzle together – strengthening approaches to inclusive
cities: Inclusion requires access to affordable necessities, such as housing and services, which often
present a crushing burden to many disadvantaged households. But, inclusion also clearly demands
access to good jobs and opportunities (to build assets and wealth) as well as equal rights and
participation of all, including the most marginalized. The paper, therefore, argues for an integrated
multi-dimensional approach that moves beyond brick-and-mortar interventions and includes all three
dimensions related to inclusive interventions –spatial, social and economic, in a single framework
(Figure 1):
     Spatial Dimension: Access to land, housing and infrastructure
     Social Dimension: Rights and participation
     Economic Dimension: Opportunities for all

2.1.1 The spatial dimension is a cornerstone of inclusion in urban areas. Spatial approaches generally
focus on equal access to housing, infrastructure and basic public services lumped together under the
title of ‘upgrading the quality of the living environment’. Urban land underpins all spatial issues and
access to land is a fundamental factor to foster inclusion. Land tenure, land use planning, and land based
financing are some of the tools that could help in achieving inclusion. Similarly, housing and
infrastructure provision also has a role in ensuring inclusion, in addition to its importance for economic
growth. While services such as water and sanitation are important for ensuring public health, services
such as transport are also important due to their impact on mobility, asset building and the community’s
image.

2.1.2 The social dimension relates to fundamental principles of rights, dignity, equity and security. The
social development flagship report ‘Inclusion Matters – the foundation for shared prosperity’, defines
social inclusion as the process of improving terms for individuals and groups to take part in society
(World Bank 2013a). Prejudice and discrimination embody cultural behavior patterns (ethnic, religious
and customary) that are deeply rooted and hence difficult to overcome. ‘Inclusion Matters’
recommends enhancing social inclusion by improving ability, opportunity and dignity. In an urban
context, this can be done through recognizing and securing collective and individual rights of citizens
(rights to the city, right to housing, right to sanitation), ensuring participation of all in development and
decision making, and enhancing safety and security. The most important factor is to recognize the role
of the marginalized and work together with them in order to achieve inclusion.

2.1.3 The economic dimension of inclusion involves economic opportunities for all. It relates to the
ability of all, including the most marginalized, to contribute to the economy and also to share in the
benefits of economic growth. Underpinning factors are the state of the local economy; skills and access
to education and training; and availability of non-collateralized credit and microfinance. Incorporation of
pro-poor interventions in local economic development strategies will promote economic inclusion.
Recognition and integration of informal economy also boosts inclusion since the real status of the


                                                                                                           11
economy can be assessed and better managed as a result. Additionally, provision of formal practices
protects the marginalized from high prices and low-standards. Skill-building, ensuring access to
education and extending access to finance also open up new opportunities for the excluded in the
economic dimension.

2.1.4 All the three dimensions - spatial, social and economic - are interlinked. As a results of the inter-
linkages between the different dimensions, interventions in a given dimension will inevitably have
consequences on the other ones. For example, provision of affordable transport services will y result in
better access to jobs and opportunities. Extending economic opportunities to the excluded will result in
their increased capacity to access shelter and services. Access to shelter, services and opportunities will
result in increased participation of the excluded in development and decision making. The
multidimensional web of interconnected factors, thus, can become mutually reinforcing. On a negative
path, these factors interact to trap people in a stigmatized space of poverty and marginalization.
Working in the opposite direction, they can lift people out of exclusion. The chart below shows how
spatial, social and economic aspects of inclusion are interlinked and what kind of interventions could be
helpful to achieve these three aspects of inclusion.




                                                                                                         12
                                Figure 2. Multi-Dimensional Approach to Inclusive Cities: interventions aimed at inclusion in each dimension



                                                                                             Access

                                      Affordable Land and Housing                  Basic Services to Urban Poor               Urban Planning and Management


                                          Restoring Public Spaces           Slum Upgrading             Slum Prevention              Security of Tenure


                                                            Land Regularization       Land Use Regulations        Land Based Financing




                                                                                  Spatial Inclusion:
                                                                                    improving access to
                                                                                  affordable land, housing
                                                                                     and services for all
Rights & Participation




                                Crime and Violence Prevention                                                                   Improve Spatial Access to Jobs




                                                                                                                                                                               Opportunities
                                                                                                                                     Improving Institutional Access
                               Rights Based Approaches
                                                                         Social                          Economic
                         Support Urban Poor Organizations              Inclusion:                        Inclusion:
                                                                                                                                       Building Skills, Access to Education
                                                                                                            ensuring
                                                                    improving the terms
                                                                                                     opportunities for all,
                                                                     for individuals and
                           Community Driven Development                                              to contribute to and            Pro-poor Economic Development
                                                                     groups to take part
                                                                                                         share in rising
                                                                          in society
                                                                                                           prosperity
                           Participatory Planning & Governance                                                                          Access to Finance




                                                                                                                                                                              13
2.2       A path towards inclusive cities needs constant and concerted efforts from various
actors: Most international organizations have championed the cause of ‘Inclusion’. Some national
governments have recognized the issue and are actively working on inclusion in urban areas at the
federal level, while some local governments are also seeking to make their cities more inclusive. In some
cases, activism by NGOs and communities has been instrumental in prompting actions at both national
and local levels. Civil society is also essential in creating inclusive cities through their ability to work
directly with communities. The following section discusses the roles of various actors in promoting
inclusion.

2.2.1 International commitment to inclusive development International agencies play a critical role
in generating awareness and encouraging governments to commit to addressing the issue of lack of
inclusion. The World Bank’s twin goals – ending extreme poverty and ending and promoting shared
prosperity – aim to create an inclusive society, not only in terms of economic welfare but also in terms
of the voice and empowerment of all groups. The goals emphasize participation of all groups in society,
including traditionally marginalized groups, such as ethnic minorities and indigenous populations, in
decision-making processes (World Bank 2013c).

With clear goals towards significantly improving the living conditions of 100 million slum dwellers, the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) MDGs have called for action towards inclusive development2.
While the post-2015 agenda and sustainable development goals are under development, it is critical
that inclusive urban development continues to be is incorporated the advancement of the inclusive
agenda.

UN Habitat defines an inclusive city as a city that promotes growth with equity. “It is a place where
everyone, regardless of their economic means, gender, race, ethnicity or religion, is enabled and
empowered to fully participate in the social, economic and political opportunities that cities have to
offer.” (UN Habitat 2004). The Third United Nations conference on housing and sustainable urban
development (Habitat III) in 2016 will address failures of the urbanization process such as widening slum
challenges, deep divisions between rich and poor in cities, and civil unrest3.

The Asian Development Bank has adopted the motto that “Livable Cities are Inclusive Cities,” a
framework that argues that inclusive cities must be economically, environmentally, and socially
sustainable in all urban operations (Steinberg and Lindfield 2011).

DFID supports the Commonwealth Local Government Forum’s Inclusive Cities Network (ICN). This
program’s definition of inclusion encompasses participation in city governance by slum dwellers,
migrants, minority groups, women, and young people. It also supports, along with the Canadian aid
agency, the Safe and Inclusive Cities Initiative, which focuses on urban crime and violence prevention in



2
    http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/environ.shtml
3
    http://unhabitat.org/habitat-iii/

                                                                                                           14
40 cities in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Latin America4. Other bi-lateral agencies including GIZ,
SECO, etc. are actively working on the inclusive urban agenda.

2.2.2 National and sub-national governments play a major role: As countries are urbanizing rapidly
with their cities contributing a major share in national GDP, many governments are increasingly paying
attention to cities. While the focus is on urban economic growth, many national governments have

    BOX 1: National legislation to foster inclusion needs to be complemented by corresponding local
    initiatives: Colombia’s experience highlights the fact that national legislation that enables cities to foster
    social inclusion also allows dynamic local leadership to launch strong initiatives, but that alone may not be
    sufficient to make significant progress on the inclusion agenda. Colombia’s constitution (1991) and its Land
    Management Law (388/1997) provide the legal framework for urban development today, with significant
    amounts of power and instruments given to local governments to regulate land use and development
    through a master plans linked to capital investment programs. Bogotá adopted a city constitution designed
    to support building an inclusive city characterized by dignity and equity; while, Medellín instituted “Medellín
    Solidaria” - a poverty reduction program that included targeting specific poor neighborhoods for
    investments in infrastructure and education among others. As a result of the local initiatives, Bogotá and
    Medellín have both benefited from improved security as well as increasing attractiveness and connectivity
    within the city. However, while Bogotá and Medellín have successfully translated national legislation into
    local action, Cartagena, another city in Colombia, has not used the powers and tools made available by the
    national legislation as effectively. In Cartagena, behind the coastal high end residential communities and
    tourism development, there are dense, lower income settlements. Beyond constructing a section of
    peripheral road to prevent further encroachment on a lagoon, little has been done to alleviate the
    marginalization of the residents. It is evident from Colombia’s example that the national government’s
    efforts need to be complemented and followed through at the local government level with a strong and
    committed local authority (World Bank 2014b).

taken steps to promote inclusive urban development. Countries including South Africa, Brazil (Annex 5:
Brazil’s Experience in Making Cities Inclusive), Chile, and Indonesia have launched national programs to
make cities slum free and advance the inclusion agenda (World Bank Forthcoming 2015a). These
national programs include initiatives such as declaring housing as a human right, subsidizing housing
acquisition, making housing more affordable for buyers, promoting community-driven development,
and embarking on nationwide participatory processes for provision of basic, among others (World Bank
Forthcoming 2015a). While setting the stage for inclusive development at the national level through the
right kind of policies is important, it is equally necessary to translate these policies into local
implementation. In the absence of national policy frameworks, some local interventions went on to
contribute to the national debate on inclusion. For example, the Metrocables project in Medellín,
Colombia reduced spatial segregation with the implementation of gondolas as a public transit system for
people who live in the surrounding hillsides. These physical inclusion measures were accompanied by
soft measures to change user behavior so that the user felt safe and kept the system clean (World Bank
2014b).


4
    http://www.clgf.org.uk/inclusive-cities-network/

                                                                                                                      15
Community based organizations (CBOs) act as strategic partners in driving inclusionary programs:
Communities play an important role in the inclusion agenda. Early programs and interventions aimed at
communities were designed in a manner where communities were the beneficiaries or the recipients.
Since then, there has been a shift in the engagement with the communities and their organization. Now,
there is recognition that communities need to be treated as partners and they need to be included in
planning and implementation. Rather than considering them just as beneficiaries, they need to be put in
the driver’s seat. The shift has proven to be successful in programs that have implemented such an
approach. For example, the success of the Baan Mankong program in Thailand is, to a great extent, due
to the fact that it was a community-driven approach with a strong ownership and involvement of the
community in the process (World Bank 2014b, 2014d). Communities have also been proactive and have

BOX 2: Slum/Shack Dwellers International (SDI) is a good example of a CBO that leads work on inclusion
cities:
SDI is a network of CBOs of the urban poor in 33 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. These federations bring
together residents of informal settlements and those living informally in formal areas enabling them to identify and
realize a range of strategies to address their needs and interests. These national federations link to small
professional agencies (NGOs) that provide SDI affiliates with support services.

The core form of organization within the slum/shack/homeless people’s federations remains savings schemes, local
groups that draw together residents in low-income neighborhoods to save, share their resources and develop
strategies to address their collective needs. Local groups benefit from peer support through community to
community exchanges. In addition to savings groups, another mechanism used by SDI to mobilize, organize and
empower communities is settlement profiling and enumerations. Settlement profiling is an instrument developed
for understanding the socio-economic characteristics of informal settlements. Community mapping and surveying
gathered by communities themselves through settlement profiling forms the basis for building a strong platform at
the neighborhood level, and pilot activities identify and demonstrate improved solutions for housing, basic services
and settlement planning. Where possible, the federations also develop an increasing emphasis on city-wide
strategies for change.

With most federation savers and savings-group managers being women, these savings groups help address the
multiple forms of disadvantage, oppression and exploitation that they face. The immediate focus and localized
orientation to collective savings provides them with a new role supported by their peers. This challenges and helps
overturn discrimination and limited social expectations as women engage with each other.

The core SDI network now involves over 16,000 savings groups with an average membership of 70 per group. A key
mechanism for investing in improved tenure and services has been Urban Poor Funds which are established by SDI
affiliates. Savings activities thus lead to Urban Poor Funds (at national and/or city levels) with blended finance, with
which developmental projects are undertaken (for example building houses or a community-managed public toilet)
by the urban poor communities in partnership with government and other stakeholders.

These local groups and the larger federations to which they belong are engaged in many community-driven
initiatives to upgrade informal and squatter settlements, improving tenure security and offering residents new
development opportunities. They are also engaged in developing new housing that low-income households can
afford, and installing infrastructure and services (including water, sanitation and drainage). Just over 200,100
households have secured formal tenure (either individual or collective) as a result of this work. Across the network
of federations, there are 102 agreements with provincial or city authorities which establish a dialogue with a
potential for a more equal relationships between the authorities and the communities.

Source: (Satterthwaite, D. and D. Mitlin 2014; http://www.sdinet.org/)


                                                                                                                      16
become a part of social and urban movements promoting inclusion, which have been instrumental in
bringing about changes in policies and implementation. For example, there have been movements
related to formal/informal work, land and housing, basic services, and social discrimination (sub-divided
by gender, age, ethnicity and other distinctions) (World Bank 2014d). Some of these movements have
organized the disadvantaged in groups, often building their capacity in terms of mobilization (forming
saving groups), negotiation (with government or other actors) and implementation; (through collective
planning, community contracting, etc.), thus leading to increased community participation and inclusion.

In addition to CBO and community groups, the role of NGOs is particularly important due to their
capacity to build and work with community networks. It is precisely this point that drove Ahmedabad
Municipal Corporation in India to collaborate with an NGO - SEWA (Self Employed Women’s
Association), in implementing the Parivartan slum upgrading program (World Bank 2014b). SEWA and its
Mahila Trust housing microfinance arm are based in Ahmedabad, India and were already active in the
slums where the poorest populations of the city lived. The slum residents were mostly employed in low-
skilled jobs within the informal economy. SEWA was best positioned to organize the slum communities
and guide the dialogue and negotiations with local authorities. As a result, residents were given security
of occupancy of the land for ten years that could be extended for additional periods. SEWA’s ability to
organize CBOs in the slums empowered the communities and strengthened their relationship with local
authorities (World Bank 2014b). As such, civil society and NGOs played a key role in building capacity
within and across communities. Aside from directly addressing the immediate challenges facing the
communities, NGOs and CBOs are also instrumental in creating channels to regularly communicate
communities’ voices to different levels of authorities.

2.2.3 The private sector is increasingly involved in provision of shelter and basic services: The
private sector plays an essential role due to its comparative advantage to help address deficiencies in
services for both economic growth and general well-being. One of the ways of involving the private
sector has been through public-private partnerships (PPPs) for service delivery. PPPs generally bring
efficiency gains and cost benefits by involving private enterprises in implementing, financing and
maintaining infrastructure services for the poor.

In Latin America, Colombia stands out as a country where the overall experience with water PPPs has
been largely positive. Gains in access, service continuity, and operational efficiency were achieved in
many large and middle-size cities, despite having high poverty rates a much deteriorated infrastructure
(Barranquilla, Cartagena, Monteria, and Soledad) (PPIAF 2009). In Côte d’Ivoire, a private water
company has been successfully operating for the past 40 years without any direct government funding.
As a result, the population with access to piped water has doubled over a decade (from 3.5 million
people to about 7 million) and the average tariff went down in real terms (PPIAF 2009). In Chile, the
private sector invested a total of US$1.2 billion in wastewater treatment between 1999 and 2006,
making Chile the only country in the world (including North America and Europe) where full treatment
of urban sewage is being achieved without any government money (PPIAF 2009). PPPs have also been
instrumental in provision of services such as transportation, waste management, etc. However, despite
a belief that greater private sector involvement would improve the scale and quality of delivery of

                                                                                                          17
services, over 80 per cent of water supply still remains in the ownership and management of the state
(OECD 2003). There is a need to create an enabling environment for greater private sector participation.

In summary, it is important to set international goals and national priorities, and it is equally important
to build local partnerships with sub-national governments, communities and the private sector to work
towards enhancing access, opportunities and rights of all, in order to achieve inclusive development in
urban areas.




                                                                                                          18
BOX 3: Key Messages
Focusing on one component of inclusion and ignoring others will not work: Inclusion is a multi-faceted issue
and all the dimensions – physical, social and economic – are interlinked. The lessons learned from past
experiences point to the fact that a fragmented approach that focuses on just one of the components is not
sufficient. Interventions to address inclusion could be targeted at one or more components, as long as it is clear
that such interventions need to be part of a larger program that seeks to address all components in an
integrated manner.

Recognition is the first step: Despite advances in information technology, accurate data on cities is often not
available. Such inaccurate measurement and scarce data usually excludes remote areas that are not usually well
connected. The people who live in those settlements are usually the urban poor and it’s hard for authorit ies to
address issues in their communities because they are “invisible”; they are not reflected in documents used for
planning and implementing services such as the city development plan. As a result, informal settlements are
excluded from planned economic growth and from city’s planning and governance processes. Therefore, it is
necessary to recognize the excluded population by gathering relevant information and accurate data.

Slum upgrading is a ‘curative’ approach – a necessary but not a sufficient condition, slum prevention is
equally important: Slums and squatter/informal settlements are concentrations of poverty and inequality in
urban areas, where all the three dimensions of exclusion are present. Slum upgrading has been the most
preferred approach to address exclusion. While that approach has resulted in improved living conditions for
many, it has mainly focused on physical aspects and it still remains an ‘after the fact’ approach ; it upgrades the
living environment of existing housing stock. However, it is equally important to plan and provide for the rapidly
growing urban population, rather than just upgrading the situation afterwards.

Make room for people in urban areas in a way that they are both able to contribute to and benefit from rising
prosperity: More and more people are moving to cities. By 2030, there will be an additional 2 billion people in
the world’s urban areas. It is important to plan for the anticipated growth in an inclusive manner. An inclusive
city is one that allows low-income people both to benefit from, and contribute to, rising prosperity over their
life courses. It is concerned with both consumption (what low-income people get) and production (what low-
income people make and do). Policies and programs should be designed keeping in mind that the most
marginalized population has an affordable place to live with an adequate living standard and a fair chance to
contribute to the city’s economic growth.

Build capacities at local levels to implement inclusionary programs: It is important to recognize that in most
aspects of addressing exclusion, higher levels of government and international agencies are only as effective as
the local organizations / institutions they support. With decentralization policies effective in many countries,
local governments are increasingly responsible for implementing local development interventions. However,
many local governments suffer from a lack of capacity and a lack of resources. Many past experiences indicate
that it is vital to have strong and committed local authorities that understand the needs of the people and that
have the ability to integrate those needs into local policy making and implementation. Therefore, it is important
the local government has the political backing, devolved powers, necessary tools and sufficient resources at
local level to achieve inclusive local development. Equally important is the need to build the capacity of the
communities that are affected by the interventions both as beneficiaries and increasingly as partners of the
local government.

Harness communities’ potential as strategic partners in driving inclusion: Community participation is
recognized as an essential component. However, increasingly, it is also recognized that a community can be a
strategic partner in implementing interventions. Community’s participation right from the planning and
designing phase to implementation and finally, for maintaining and sustaining the benefits, is viewed as a
success factor for any intervention. The success of community-driven approaches is attributed to the fact that
the community is in the driver’s seat and can plan and prioritize its own needs. These experiences suggest that
the community’s capability to partner with the government to drive inclusive approaches should be explored.

                                                                                                                      19
Chapter 3: Operationalizing the Inclusive Cities Approach

3.1. Supporting, prioritizing and scaling up investment for inclusive cities: While the urban
development portfolio review highlights that the projects aimed at inclusion have been mainly slum
upgrading projects, Bank’s investment in slum upgrading remains relatively small with average
investment of $100millions per year, since FY 2000 (Please see Annex 4). The new multi-dimensional
approach to promote inclusive cities, therefore, argues for ‘doing more’ and ‘doing it differently’. ‘Doing
more’ recognizes the need for boosting financial and technical assistance towards inclusive cities, in line
with Bank’s twin goals that highlights the importance of inclusive development. ‘Doing it differently’
recognizes the need to move away from single-sectoral - ‘brick and mortar’ interventions to a multi-
dimensional approach that encompasses spatial, social and economic aspects.

3.1.1. Enabling environment for investment aimed at inclusion: While implementing interventions
aimed at inclusion, the enabling environment that supports these interventions is also important. This
includes appropriate institutional and policy frameworks that encourage and promote inclusive cities.
Policy frameworks allow governments and institutions to have a vision for what they want to accomplish
in their cities and a plan to make it happen. The framework that would enable inclusive cities may
include, but is not limited to, policies on urban development, slum upgrading and informal settlements,
affordable housing, housing finance, land development/land use, land regularization, land-based
finance, urban planning guidelines, infrastructure delivery, financial inclusion, informal economy, social
inclusion of excluded groups, social protection, involuntary resettlement, etc. The national government
frameworks need to be flexible and they should complement and/or guide the local government
agenda; but should not conflict. There are examples of national policy frameworks that have led to
successful local interventions and there have also been examples of very strong national policy
frameworks that did not materialize in local action. This indicates the fact that national policy
frameworks are important but are not sufficient on their own to prompt local action (see Section 2.2).
An ideal enabling environment will have both national and local interest in inclusion to leverage
available resources.

3.1.2. Multi-sector investments: As discussed earlier, the concept of inclusion encompasses a multi-
dimensional web of interconnected factors. Therefore, it is argued that Bank’s investment lending
towards inclusive cities should also adopt a multi-dimensional approach. Translating the multi-
dimensional approach in Bank operations will imply coordinated multi-sector investments in a
country/city. For example, physical interventions in terms of provision of infrastructure services
accompanied by improved connectivity to areas with jobs could result in inclusion. While interventions
to address inclusion could be targeted at one or more components based on the contextual needs and
demands, it is not argued to make every investment project a multi-sector project. It is important to
understand that single-sector focused investments are necessary but these should be part of an overall
integrated scheme that includes spatial, social and economic aspects of inclusion.

3.1.3. Phalanx of operations: An ideal investment lending operation to promote inclusion will combine
a series of simultaneous and interlocking interventions that together address multiple dimensions of the

                                                                                                          20
approach. It may not necessarily be combined into a single operation, but it could be a series of
operations towards the same goal with different dimensions/entry points. This implies that the Bank
would offer a bundle of services to its client countries/cities that together move towards inclusion. This
will require a long-term multi-year commitment and a ‘program’ rather than a ‘project’ approach to
investment lending operations. At initial stages of preparation and identification, the task team can
diagnose the context to select the dimensions to be addressed in a city/country as well as number of
entry points/interventions. The next step would be to come up with an implementation plan and
sequence these multiple interlocking interventions, based on which, a multi-year and multi-sectoral
operation can be launched.

3.1.4. Use new financing instruments for promoting inclusion: It is recommended to also explore new
financing instruments such as results-based financing for tackling inclusion and reaching out to the
excluded population. While PforR has now been used widely in urban areas, its application has been
limited to sectors such as transportation and solid waste management. Interventions in these sectors
produce measurable results and therefore, it is also easier to deploy results-based financing
mechanisms. PforR could be a very good instrument for launching multiple inter-linked interventions,
since it allows sequencing of various entry points based on results achieved. However, in order for a
PforR instrument to be used for an intervention that promotes inclusion, it is necessary that we have
more clarity on how to measure inclusion (Annex 6: Measuring Inclusion).




                                                                                                         21
                              Table 1. Key Indicative Principles, Strategies, Information and Tools at each stage of Project Cycle
   Project Cycle              Key Principles                   Key Strategies                      Key Information                                     Tools
   Identification        Involve communities,          Identify priority issues            Assessment of                               Settlement profiles
                          community-based                (spatial/social/economic)            spatial/social/economic issues              Slum enumeration
    (Diagnosis)           organizations and other       Identify stakeholders               Data & information                          Information systems
                          relevant stakeholders
                                                                                             Past interventions                          Stakeholder analysis
                                                                                             Stakeholders                                Review of existing policies and
                                                                                             Enabling environment (policies and           institutions
                                                                                              institutions)
 Preparation and         Build broad-based             prioritize various entry points     Identify entry points, including but      Multi-dimensional approach to
     Design               partnerships within and        in accordance with the priority      not limited to, infrastructure, land,      inclusive cities
                          outside World Bank Group       issues                               housing, policy/institutional reforms,    Citizen engagement tools
(Identify, prioritize    Create a phalanx of           Design integrated                    jobs, gender, displaced people, crime
and sequence entry         operations                     interventions: coordinated,         and violence prevention, CDD, citizen
      points)                                             interlocked and multi-sector        engagement, social accountability
                                                          investments aimed at inclusion      measures, capacity building, etc.

 Implementation          Implement interventions as    Conduct periodic monitoring         Identify issues related to                Implementation plan with
                          a bundle of services           and revise the implementation        implementation                             interlocked and multi-sector
 (Implementation         Keep in mind how               plan accordingly                                                                interventions
   &Monitoring)            operations fit within the                                                                                    M & E system for inclusive cities
                           larger phalanx of                                                                                             interventions
                           operations/program



    Completion           Timeframe beyond              Conduct impact evaluation of        Identify and assess various               M & E system for inclusive cities
                          interventions to ensure        the interventions                    parameters in order to measure             interventions
  (Monitoring &           appropriate post              Social accountability measures       inclusion                                 Feedback mechanisms
   Evaluation)            occupation mechanisms           to engage citizens in providing    Identify what worked and what did         Social accountability Tools
                          and M&E                         user feedback                       not




                                                                                                                                                                    22
3.2 Potential entry points for investments aimed at inclusion: As discussed, the multidimensional
nature of inclusion demands for an approach that acts on all the three dimensions of inclusion: spatial,
social and economic.

3.2.1 Spatial inclusion through planning and provision of affordable land, services and housing can
        help reduce inequality:

A.    Affordable Land and Housing: Land is the fundamental building block that enables the urban poor
      to access other services and to build assets. Tenure security and land regularization have been
      attempted by many national and local agencies. There is an increasing recognition to adopt less
      cumbersome and more cost effective procedures for land conversion and land records leading to
      transparent land administration system. There is also a growing recognition of the need to
      consider a ‘continuum of land rights’ with the understanding that what tenure security means will
      differ from place to place.

      Many local authorities seek to regularize land tenure to expand the tax base and unblock the
      urban regeneration potential of the urban areas. The development potential of land creates
      opportunities for a range of creative instruments to foster inclusion. Land based financing could
      be one of the ways to generate revenue that could be utilized to finance urban improvements.
      Cross subsidization and mixing income groups by combining market rate serviced parcels and low
      cost building lots in urban projects have been widely used. More creative financing methods rely
      on infrastructure and land regulations to open up the development potential of well-located sites
      and allocate the proceeds of charges paid by developers to improve infrastructure, housing and
      the urban environment, in lower income communities elsewhere in the city as part of the same
      program.

      The availability of affordable housing in strategic locations is one of many factors that affect the
      ability of the urban poor to access services and economic opportunities in urban areas. Various
      past approaches to provide affordable housing, including mass housing projects, sites and
      services, slum upgrading, etc. have seen varying degree of success (section 1.5).

B.    Access to Basic Services and Infrastructure: Incorporating inclusion as a key principle while
      developing infrastructure plans and service provision could help reduce spatial segregation and
      improve quality of life of all urban residents. Interventions to develop large scale infrastructure as
      well as interventions to upgrade infrastructure locally have improved the living standards of the
      citizens. In addition, planned expansion of infrastructure in anticipation of future growth can also
      help to accommodate the needs of rapidly growing urban population.

      Traditionally, investment in infrastructure has been the entry point for interventions aimed at
      inclusion given that disparity in infrastructure is the main reason for spatial inequalities. However,
      as it has been discussed, addressing inequalities by providing infrastructure, although very much

                                                                                                             23
        necessary, has not been sufficient. While infrastructure, land and housing remain very important
        entry points, the following section discusses other entry points that could be worth considering.

3.2.2 Addressing vulnerabilities and ensuring the participation and rights of the most marginalized
groups can help foster inclusion:

C.      Gender and inclusive urban development: In urban areas, women frequently face particular
        difficulties. They may face discrimination within their household, within the labor market and in
        regard to access to services. Nowhere are the inequalities facing urban woman more evident than
        in informal settlements where women account for over half the population. In these settlements,
        women face the most serious urban challenges: poverty; overcrowding, sexual harassment and
        assault, and lack of access to security of tenure, water and sanitation, transport and sexual and
        reproductive health services5

        The WDR on Gender Equality and Development (2012) suggests that gender equality is smart
        economics; it can enhance economic efficiency and improve other development outcomes in
        three ways: First, removing barriers that prevent women from having the same access as men to
        education, economic opportunities, and productive inputs can generate broad productivity gains.
        Second, improving women’s absolute and relative status feeds many other development
        outcomes, including those for their children. Third, leveling the playing field—where women and
        men have equal chances to become socially and politically active, make decisions, and shape
        policies—is likely to lead over time to more representative, and more inclusive, institutions and
        policy choices and thus to a better development path (World Bank 2012a). Therefore, investing in
        interventions that promote gender equality and ensures equal rights to women will be necessary
        to achieve inclusive development in urban areas.

D.      Inclusion of excluded groups: Residential patterns, social networks, occupational concentration
        and social norms lead to various types of exclusions in urban areas that may affect some groups
        more so than others. For example, gender, age, caste and other characteristics can lead to
        exclusion for some. Lack of income and assets are also critical factors determining or influencing
        exclusion in urban areas. Internationally and internally displaced people also face particular
        difficulties. For example, among the 45.2 million persons, who are displaced worldwide, more
        than half live in urban contexts (World Bank Forthcoming). Most displacement is protracted and
        the displaced become permanent urban residents, however, forced displacement is rarely
        factored into urban planning strategies. Urban strategies and interventions that not only recognize
        excluded groups that are part of the population but also aim towards including them in formal
        urban planning processes would help achieve inclusion in urban areas.




5
    http://unhabitat.org/urban-themes/gender/

                                                                                                        24
E.    Citizen engagement (CE) and community driven development (CDD)6: Citizen engagement is
      critical in the development process because of several reasons: a) it creates an enabling
      environment for the implementation of development projects and inclusive interventions due to
      increased ownership of the community; b) it allows institutions to be more aware of the needs of
      the local community by facilitating channels of communication; c) it keeps corruption in check by
      keeping a transparent process, including on resource use; and d) it allows citizens to provide
      feedback on service delivery which can lead to enhanced quality of services. All of the
      aforementioned reasons for policymakers to promote citizen engagement foster three key
      characteristics needed in an inclusive city: transparency, accountability, and empowerment. The
      2004 World Development Report: Making Services Work for Poor People, highlighted the role of
      the citizens in influencing the accountability relationships that make service delivery pro-poor
      (World Bank 2003).

      The WBG, recognizing the important role of the citizens in improving development results,
      recently launched a framework for citizen engagement which aims to facilitate mainstreaming of
      citizen engagement in WBG-supported policies, programs, projects, advisory services and analytics
      (World Bank 2014a). The framework highlights some of the key approaches to citizen engagement
      in WB operations including consultations; collaboration; collecting, recording, and reporting on
      inputs from citizens; grievance redress mechanisms; citizens-led monitoring; social inclusion and
      empowerment through community-driven development; capacity building for citizen
      engagement; and use of ICT to facilitate citizen engagement. The framework recommends
      incorporating citizen engagement throughout the project cycle. The emphasis is also on engaging
      with citizens through beneficiary feedback mechanisms that will encourage citizens to participate
      in development process and also help integrate citizens’ voice in development programs as a key
      accelerator to achieving results. With this, the Bank has set a goal to include beneficiary feedback
      in all projects by FY18.The World Bank’s operations’ results framework now incorporates
      indicators on citizen engagement with an aim to track progress in this area. The World Bank’s
      Social Accountability Sourcebook7 offers examples of mechanism and tools that can be applied to
      promote bottom-up accountability:




6
  For this discussion CDD refers to participatory approaches, not necessarily to approaches for communities
directly managing financial resources. Refer to the ‘Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban
Areas’ paper).
7
  http://www.worldbank.org/socialaccountability_sourcebook/essd9.swf

                                                                                                               25
               Table 2. Examples of social accountability practices




      Source: World Bank Social Accountability Sourcebook8
      A clear demand-driven approach to citizen engagement is community-driven development9. A
      community’s participation right from the planning/designing phase to implementation and finally,
      to maintaining and sustaining the benefits ensures the participation and ownership. In urban
      contexts, “participatory urban upgrading” gained prominence when the growing needs of the
      urban poor began exceeding the capacity of the local authorities to respond with public housing
      policies and other more conventional ‘top-down’ approaches. As the ‘Participatory and
      Community Driven Development in Urban Areas’ paper elaborates, participatory and community-
      driven development approaches can play a powerful role in addressing acute poverty and
      inequality growing in cities, while also contributing to the process of democratization and
      empowerment. As rightly highlighted in the aforementioned paper, CDD and other participatory
      processes are critical to contributing to inclusive urban development, yet the complexities of
      urban areas present a number of challenges to applying a typical set of CDD processes. Various
      issues that require particular consideration in urban context include: understanding the role of
      communities and local government and the importance of their collaboration; identification and
      targeting of beneficiaries; and, social mobilization in complex urban settings (World Bank
      Forthcoming 2015b).


8
 http://www.worldbank.org/socialaccountability_sourcebook/essd9.swf
9
 While the CDD approach has principally been used by projects operating in rural areas, 40 out of 319 currently
active projects in the CDD database (12.5 %) are under the Urban Sector (World Bank Forthcoming 2015b). It is
important to note that many slum upgrading projects in urban areas also have incorporated community driven
development components, in addition to CDD projects (for further details, please refer to the ‘Participatory and
Community Driven Development in Urban Areas’ paper).

                                                                                                                   26
 F.   Crime and Violence Prevention: Crime and violence are typically more severe in urban areas and
      are compounded by rapid growth. Spatial segregation within cities is one of the root causes for
      the crime that has afflicted many cities in LAC, Africa and other parts of the world. Rising
      inequality in urban areas coupled with exclusion and lack of opportunities for voice and redress
      leads to conflicts. The lack of opportunities for the urban poor and greater demand for voice by
      the socially excluded has exacerbated incidents of social upheaval in urban areas. A recent study
      has shown that 60% of urban dwellers in developing and transitional countries have been victims
      of crime over a five-year period (UN Habitat 2007). In Latin America, where 80% of the population
      is urban, the rapidly expanding metropolitan areas of Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, Mexico City and
      Caracas account for over half of violent crimes in their respective countries (UN Habitat 2007). The
      direct impact of social unrest, crime, violence, and citizen insecurity on governance, economic
      growth, investment climate and business opportunities have brought these issues to the fore. At
      the local level, crime and violence result in stigmatization of neighborhoods or even entire
      sections of the city. Areas with high crime often eventually lose out in terms of investment or
      provision of infrastructure and public services.

      While strengthening the criminal justice, law and order, and policing systems is important, it is
      equally important to respond to the challenge at local level in partnership with the community.
      The local responses to the challenge of crime and violence include effective urban planning,
      design and governance; community-based approaches; targeted interventions for perpetrators
      and victims of crime; and strengthening of social capital through empowering and building
      capacity of individuals and communities to respond to crime in their neighborhoods.

 3.2.3 Ensuring that everyone in urban areas is equally able to share in, and contribute to, economic
 growth boosts inclusion:

G.    Jobs and economic inclusion: Rapid urbanization is changing the composition of employment. As
      a result, the growth of the nonagricultural labor force will vastly exceed the growth of the
      agricultural labor force. This structural change, which in industrial countries took decades, now
      transforms lives in developing countries in a generation. Secondly, with more and more people
      moving to cities in search of better employment and better standard of living, urban areas have
      enormous pressure to create jobs. In most developing countries, urban economies have become
      increasingly informal over the past 10 years as the formal sector consistently fails to provide for
      both young people and adults seeking employment, even in the face of healthy economic growth
      (World Bank 2012b).

      While it is important to address economic exclusion, different cities will have different starting
      points for addressing the issue, based on the level of growth, quality and accessibility of local jobs
      in the city, demographic profile and geography of opportunity. These different starting points
      would demand different type of strategies. For example, the economic challenges faced by a city
      with majority of its population under the age of 25 will be very different than the challenges faced
      by a city with a majority of retiree population. While unemployment and underemployment still

                                                                                                          27
     remain a huge challenges for cities today, there are some tested approaches that benefit the poor
     in terms of their economic inclusion: access to credit and finance, connecting people and jobs,
     building skills, access to education and pro-poor economic development strategies (World Bank
     2014c).

     Figure 3. Some jobs do more for development




     Source: (World Bank 2012b).

H.   Skill-building: Lack of education and skills hinders the prospects for economic security through
     formal jobs for the urban poor and the disadvantaged. Their upward mobility in labor market will
     remain limited unless and until the disadvantaged gain skills and job readiness. Investing in skill-
     building opens up new opportunities for the disadvantaged.

I.   Pro-poor Local Economic Development Strategies: In most cases, the local economic
     development (LED) strategies are focused on pro-growth strategies rather than pro-poor
     interventions that include the disadvantaged and excluded population. In many developing
     country cities, large numbers of low-income families work within the informal economy.
     Employment in informal economy is characterized by insecurity of jobs, inadequate or low
     remuneration, hazardous working conditions, lack of social security and other benefits, etc. In
     India, for example, the economy grew 5 % annually over the past 10 years, yet many people work
     in informal economic sectors with no social security (UN Habitat 2010). Around 370 million
     people, or 9 out of 10 employees, are not affiliated with any formal social security scheme (UN
     Habitat 2010). Similarly, Mexico, which grew an average of 2.5 % per year in the past 10 years,
     extends social security to only 30 % of its workforce (UN Habitat 2010). These informal activities
     are often low-growth activities as a result of a lack of access to proper infrastructure and services
     (i.e., electricity, water, and roads), regular means of financing, information and skills. The
     development of LED strategies should recognize and accommodate the constraints and


                                                                                                        28
     opportunities of the informal economy so as to broaden the appeal of a strategically planned LED
     strategy. It should also encourage wider social benefits for all sectors, formal and informal.

     Another critical factor is also the spatial mismatch between where people live and where the jobs
     are located. The spatial connectivity between jobs, housing, public transportation, recreational
     areas, retail, etc. ensures access and boosts shared prosperity. This requires investment in
     affordable public transport, housing in locations that are connected to areas of employment, etc.

J.   Improved access to credit and finance: Making credit and finance available to urban poor and the
     disadvantaged leads to empowerment, asset building, and wealth creation opportunities for the
     urban poor. Surveys from Mexico, Colombia and Brazil show that between 65 and 85 per cent of
     households living in major cities do not hold any kind of deposit account in a formal-sector
     financial institution (Solo 2008). Faced with such realities, micro-credit and micro-finance projects
     are developed to provide low-income residents and entrepreneurs with the capital they need to
     expand their business and access services. Many of the interventions including, the extension of
     financial markets with savings and loan facilities, support for housing markets with shelter micro-
     finance, and support for enterprise development are targeted at individual households and/or
     individuals, although in the case of micro-finance, groups may be involved to provide social
     collateral (World Bank 2014d). Oftentimes, it is difficult for the urban poor and disadvantaged
     population to provide collateral needed to obtain finances from the market. Investing in making
     financial markets work for poor, therefore, will lead to inclusion.

3.2.4 Cross Cutting Interventions:

K.   Investing in Data: Despite advances in information technology, accurate data on cities is often not
     available. Particularly, there is lack of relevant and useful information on informal settlements and
     low income areas which often exacerbates their social and economic marginalization because they
     are not included in formal city planning processes and economic strategies (World Bank 2014d).
     For example, there are a lot of people who work in informal sectors of the economy, for which
     there is no adequate data available. Therefore, it is necessary to invest in gathering relevant
     information and accurate data. Some data collection tools include household surveys, settlement
     profiling, mapping and enumeration. Recent experiences of involving communities and excluded
     population in collecting, analyzing and validating data have been successful. Recognizing the
     excluded population is the first step towards achieving inclusion. It will enable the authorities to
     take informed decision and design policies with adequate knowledge of all citizens. It will also
     empower the excluded population in a way that they can participate in the city’s governance.

L.   Proactive urban planning: The world’s urban footprint is expected to double or triple by 2030
     with additional 2 billion people arriving to the world’s urban areas (Angel et al. 2011). Therefore, it
     is equally important to plan and provide for the rapidly growing urban population in an inclusive
     manner, rather than just upgrading complex situations afterwards. Policies and programs should
     be designed keeping in mind that the most marginalized population needs affordable places to live

                                                                                                         29
      with adequate living standards and a fair chance to contribute to and benefit from the city’s
      economic growth. Regulatory frameworks for inclusive growth and expansion that cities can
      implement include: innovative and inclusionary zoning, land use management and land tenure
      regularization, and mixed-use development.

    M. Capacity Building: Capacity constraints of local governments limit their ability to manage,
       finance and provide basic services which are essential to reduce poverty and foster shared
       prosperity. At the same time, inclusive governance entails coordination across multiple
       stakeholders which include the citizens. As a result, achieving an inclusive city depends heavily
       on the local capacity.

        The Bank's approach to urban capacity building blends operationally-relevant global knowledge
        and learning with analytical, financial and convening services. The urban core curriculum is
        directly linked to the pillars of the Bank's urban and local government strategy and thus
        complements other global urban initiatives. The World Bank has taken a leadership role in
        collaboration with global, regional and national partners to develop a comprehensive e- learning
        curriculum that reaches a large number of participants all over the world. More importantly,
        these action learning programs have enabled local governments to design and implement
        reforms. The courses offered cover topics such as municipal finance, land use planning, street
        addressing, disaster risk management, urban crime and violence prevention, and slum
        upgrading; all relevant to the inclusive cities agenda. In addition, the learning program features
        massive open online courses (MOOC) on various topics which reach very large numbers of
        participants, making sure that people from all backgrounds are able to access learning
        opportunities. The content of the capacity building program remains flexible to meet needs and
        develop new relevant topics and experiences which are also drawn from related Bank
        operations. All the aforementioned resources can be applied to develop the necessary capacity
        to drive inclusion in urban areas forward.
3.3 Building Partnerships within and outside the World Bank: Internally, articulation of goals and
strategies aimed at inclusion in the Country Assistance Strategies will enable the Bank and the clients to
push the inclusion agenda forward. However, it is also necessary to recognize that multi-dimensional
approach calls for multi-partner interventions. While the Bank can offer what it is good at and has a
comparative advantage (large investments, policy analysis, convening power), other players can provide
complementary parts as part of a concerted strategy. This will allow to build a set of inter-linked and
complementary interventions that together will help to achieve inclusion. Some potential areas for
collaboration are discussed below.


Partners within the Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice: The new structure of the
Global Practice provides great opportunities for collaboration across all sectors. For example, the newly
created Global Programs Unit brought together the former global urban and social units who were
already collaborating on the inclusion agenda prior to the merge. The former global social unit launched
the flagship report ‘Inclusion Matters – The Foundation for Shared Prosperity’, which defines social

                                                                                                        30
inclusion and provides a frame of reference to move towards it. In the report, social inclusion is looked
at in three interrelated domains – markets, services, and spaces – and inclusion is promoted by
enhancing ability, opportunity and dignity of individuals and groups (World Bank 2013a). At about the
same time, the former global urban unit launched the ‘Inclusive Cities’ program which adapts the
concepts and recommendations provided in the social inclusion flagship report to urban areas, and
complements them with physical and economic aspects of inclusion that are equally important to
achieve inclusive cities. Now that they are under a unified unit, both teams will be able to collaborate
more effectively and explore more issues in detail. In addition, the former urban practice of the World
Bank Institute became part of the Global Programs Unit in 2014 which added a lot of knowledge in
terms of capacity building and multiple learning initiatives on slum upgrading and affordable housing.


Partner with other Global Practices within the World Bank: Global Practices that traditionally focus on
physical infrastructure have also demonstrated innovative ways in which the inclusive agenda is woven
into project designs. For example, the transport practice group has made significant headway on
“Inclusive Mobility”, identifying effective methods to mobilize community participation in improving the
accessibility of road infrastructure. The ICT practice group works on enhancing accountability and
feedback mechanisms using information technology, as well as optimizing the use of ICT for service
delivery. Another example is the Governance Global Practice and the Global Program on Social
Accountability. The Governance Global Practice works on governance and institutional aspects of
delivering public services. Collaborating with Governance GP on their interventions focused on
institutional strengthening, transparency and accountability in public service delivery could enhance our
collective ability to work with our clients on these issues.


Partner with IFC and the private sector: The inclusive cities agenda entails mobilizing the private sector
to collaborate with the public sector and communities in order to enhance economic opportunities and
service delivery. For example, the Inclusive Business Models Group that is part of the IFC works with
private companies to deliver services to geographically isolated communities. In some cases, it is going
to be challenging to convince government officials that investments towards economic and social
interventions need to be considered when compared to clear infrastructure gaps. It is therefore
important to partner with the IFC and the private sector in order to offer assistance to the governments
in implementing effective and efficient interventions. As it has been mentioned before, there are cases
of private companies taking care of service delivery which resulted in very satisfactory outcomes.


Partner with other international organizations: The World Bank should continue to build on the history
of cooperation with UN-Habitat in the areas of slum upgrading, urban poverty, and housing. Currently,
the international process towards establishing the Sustainable Development Goals as well as the road
towards HABITAT III in 2016 are both quite suitable international platforms for collaboration and
promotion of the inclusion agenda. In addition, the Bank should also partner with organizations working
on the topic, including but not limited to, other IFIs, UCLG, ICLEI, Cities Alliance, bi-lateral donors etc., to
advance the agenda.


                                                                                                              31
Partner with organizations representing and working with the urban poor: Many capable and well
instituted organizations already exist around the world that work with the urban poor and other
marginalized groups in different capacities. These include organizations such as Slum Dwellers
International (SDI), Asian Coalition for Housing Rights (ACHR), and they are working on activities such as
informal settlement profiling, community savings, community organization, tenure regularization, etc.
These entities can be strategically engaged by leveraging their strongholds, such as embedded
relationship and convening power of the communities at stake and collection of data on the ground. By
partnering with organizations representing the marginalized, the World Bank and the client cities will be
able to determine what the actual needs are and identify areas in which communities can take the lead.


3.4 Taking stock and way forward: The inclusive cities agenda is inherently multi-sectoral. Cities are
places where all the sectors come together and inclusion is also something that can be looked at from
many different perspectives. In order to move this multi-dimensional agenda forward, it will be
important to continue and scale-up on-going and planned activities geared towards convening experts
and people from different backgrounds, generating and sharing knowledge, and coming up with
practical ways to incorporate inclusive interventions into World Bank operations. The section below
includes information on the existing work as well as planned activities for the future.

3.4.1. Analytical pieces and guidance notes: A very crucial aspect of the Inclusive Cities Programmatic
Approach is the production of analytical pieces that make the case for the inclusion agenda. Guidance
notes will also be prepared to help TTLs engage in conversation with their government counterparts and
also to facilitate the introduction of inclusive interventions in WB operations. The following section
provides information on analytical work already underway.

Selected on-going analytical work
Slum upgrading, involuntary resettlement, land and housing - Lagos, Nigeria: Under the Inclusive Cities
Programmatic Approach, the Global Programs Unit is partnering with the Africa region for an analytical
activity: ‘Slum upgrading, involuntary resettlement, land and housing: Lessons learned from the
experience in Lagos and other mega-cities’. The analytical activity will document the lessons learned
from Lagos Metropolitan Development and Governance Project (LMDGP). The LMDGP (P071340), closed
in FY14, aimed to increase sustainable access to basic urban services in Lagos through investments in
critical infrastructure, enhanced public governance and capacity building, and increased policy and
project coordination.
The specific objectives of this activity are to 1) extract lessons learned from the Lagos Metropolitan
Development and Governance Project (LMDGP) in a systematic manner with a focus on slum upgrading
and involuntary resettlement policies and practices, 2) provide in-depth analysis of the modalities of
urban housing and land sector engagements in a mega-city like Lagos with inefficient land markets, and
3) make recommendations towards the structure and engagement process in such settings. In addition,
the analytical piece will include a review of lessons learnt from relevant international experiences (from
countries including, Brazil, Philippines, Indonesia, Vietnam, Colombia, and India) related to slum

                                                                                                        32
upgrading and involuntary resettlement in the context of urban development interventions, and urban
land and housing policies and practices. . The report is expected to be delivered by April 30, 2015.


Housing Diagnostic in the Greater Baku Region (Azerbaijan): The inclusive cities program is supporting
Phase II of the development of a housing diagnostic in the Greater Baku Region (Azerbaijan). This activity
is being developed in partnership with the newly created Housing Department of the Ministry of
Economy. It builds on Phase I, which involved collection of primary data through a household survey.
The survey was representative of the Greater Baku Region but had a particular focus on vulnerable
groups such as internally displaced people (IDPs) and refugees. The data revealed large disparities in
housing tenure, access to services and housing quality among the population. The worst housing
conditions were found in these vulnerable groups.
Phase II of the housing diagnostic will include a qualitative assessment of the housing sector in order to
identify existing bottlenecks in the provision of affordable housing to vulnerable and low-income groups
and will outline a set of policy recommendations. The assessment will look at existing legal frameworks
for land and housing including land ownership/licensing issues and IDP resettlement/housing projects.
The draft report is expected to be ready by June 2015 and the final delivery will be in early FY 16.


Citizen Engagement: As part of the Bank’s Citizen Engagement framework, President Jim Kim committed
to incorporate beneficiary feedback and participatory practices in all World Bank projects by FY18
(World Bank 2014a). In line with the corporate vision, the inclusive cities team is rolling out an analytical
piece to be delivered in FY15 that will identify various ways to engage with citizens in order to promote
and achieve inclusive development in cities. The product will include a repository of tools for citizen
engagement as well as guidance for staff on how to use the different tools to mainstream citizen
engagement in urban operations.
The activity will be scaled up to include more analytical insights as well as operational guidance. Building
on initial analysis, during FY 2016 the team will work on producing an operational guidance note for TTLs
that would provide practical advice for using Citizen Engagement tools and mechanisms in urban
operations. Since incorporating citizen engagement in WB project has been a corporate mandate, this
will be an important component of analytical activities planned during the next FY.


Social entrepreneurship in Thailand: Empowering NGOs working with women: The inclusive cities team
is supporting a small activity in Thailand on gender inclusion and social entrepreneurship. Thailand has
experienced tremendous economic growth which has brought upon several positive outcomes,
however, it has also caused many international donors to stop providing funding to Thai NGOs, including
those that provide services for women. Many individual countries are choosing not to donate funds to
Thai organizations unless it’s under a multi-donor framework and this has inevitable hurt the
organizations that rely on funding for the implementation of their activities. In light of the current
situation, social entrepreneurship offers an alternative. Social entrepreneurship is not new to Thailand,
however, it is unclear how NGOs are leveraging this sector in order to continue striving for their
objectives in spite of limited funding. The project will therefore contribute in the following ways:

                                                                                                          33
1.    Explore social entrepreneurship in Thailand: The team will look into the social entrepreneurship
      sector in Thailand. This will include understanding how easy it is for organizations to adopt social
      entrepreneurship-related activities, which federal institutions/resources can be access for this,
      who are some important players in the sector, etc. The research will be conducted thinking about
      how NGOs could either adopt, improve, or scale up some of the practices in the sector.
2.    Strengthening the network of the organizations that work with women: Based on research, there
      are a large number of organizations that are working with women in Thailand. As part of this
      project, the team will organize a workshop in FY16 in order to 1) disseminate the findings about
      the social entrepreneurship sector; and 2) create a networking opportunity for these organization
      to learn about each other’s work and leverage efforts to enhance results.
The delivery date for this project is FY16.


Global dialogue on national upgrading and affordable housing policies and programs: The World
Bank, in partnership with Cities Alliance, UN-Habitat, GIZ, and the IDB; launched an initiative to
document, analyze, and disseminate the lessons from national policies and programs in 15 countries
across the world (World Bank Forthcoming 2015a). The initiative focuses on capturing slum upgrading
and prevention experiences and determine what worked, what did not, and why. More specifically, the
work focuses on questions around five key themes including context and policy evolution; policy
breakthrough and design of slum policy/programs; decision-making; implementation; and results and
lessons learned. The publication mentions that there are usually two approaches to slum upgrading: 1)
The national government can scale up local governments’ efforts to replicate the work in cities across
the country. An example of this is Colombia; the federal government scaled up programs implemented
in Bogotá and Medellín to address the housing deficit at the national level. 2) A different approach is to
implement a policy framework at the national level and influence local governments. A highlighted case
in the book which implemented the latter approach is South Africa. The federal government launched
the Upgrading of Informal Settlements Program (UISP) in 2004 to strategize the needed upgrading that
resulted from the years of Apartheid.
The publication will contribute to the knowledge base of the inclusive cities program and it will help
guide TTLs designing and implementing slum upgrading-related projects. Delivery is expected at the end
of FY15.


Potential analytical activities for the next FY: Monitoring and evaluation system: A monitoring and
evaluation system will be set in place in order to keep track of the progress made by inclusive cities-
related projects. This will allow the team to provide advice to the TTLs in charge of project
implementation. The increasing focus on results, particularly with new Results Based Financing
instruments, it is very important to design a system that monitors results while inclusive interventions
are being implemented. The monitoring and evaluation system will also allow to draw lessons and
examples from different projects to start collecting best practices and inform projects at
inception/planning stage.


                                                                                                           34
New analytical activities will be introduced based on demands received from regional units. A few
suggested issues/topics are: affordable housing, land tenure regularization, service provision in low
income communities, gender inclusion in urban areas, livelihoods, etc.


3.4.2 Operationalizing Inclusive Cities Approach
In order to make the inclusive cities framework operationally relevant, the team will support proposed
new operations in cities where inclusion in a strategic objective and where the new operation would
complement other on-going or potential projects. Opportunities include:
1.    AFR: Dar Metropolitan Development Project Team: DMDP project team has closely participated in
      events organized as part of Inclusive Cities Programmatic Approach. The design of the operation is
      being shaped by the process.
2.    AFR: In Kenya, there are several on-going and proposed urban operations. The Kenya team is
      working to bring in crime and violence prevention components in these operations in different
      ways including e-learning courses, south-south knowledge exchange, etc. was brought together
      with the team working on e-learning course on crime and violence prevention to help the task
      team design operations that are aimed at inclusion through crime and violence prevention.
3.    ECA: Housing Diagnostic in Greater Baku Region: This analytical activity is being developed to
      support better inclusion of displaced people living in greater Baku and it may lead to a Bank
      operation in the region.
Throughout the design and implementation of the regional pilots, the team will be distilling important
lessons and observations to create a knowledge base for future interventions. Eventually, teams across
the Bank should have enough information and insights to introduce inclusion components into their own
projects. Successfully addressing the aspects associated with a lack of inclusion in an operational
manner is critical for the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals.
The team will continue the dialogue with interested regional teams to incorporate the multi-
dimensional approach to inclusive cities in operations during the next FY. The team will also explore how
results based instruments could be used for operationalizing the inclusive cities approach in urban
projects.


3.4.3 Knowledge dissemination and learning
E-learning Course on Slum Upgrading: Complementary to the book on slum upgrading programs and
policies, an e-learning course is being developed by the urban team that will go further into the topic.
The course is designed for urban practitioners who need to acquire basic knowledge and skills in order
to manage slum upgrading projects. This includes national and sub-national government officials, city
managers, CSOs, the private sector and academia. In response to growing demand for capacity
development in these areas, the Global Programs Unit will also partner with training centers of
excellence to contextualize the content and custom-deliver the course through a variety of mechanisms,
ranging from face-to-face to distance learning platforms.



                                                                                                        35
BBLs, workshops, consultations: Knowledge events will be organized whenever there is demand for a
particular topic or whenever there is a clear knowledge gap. The format of the events will vary
according to the desired outcomes and the team will draw from the pool of formats used at the forum
2014 and GSURR forum 2015.
Laying the foundation for inclusive cities – relevant events: Two workshops were organized as part of
the launch of the new inclusive cities agenda. The first one, held in January of 2014, included internal
and external participants and speakers that addressed inclusive interventions in the different
dimensions; social, economic, and spatial. During this event, four background papers were also
presented which laid the foundation for the inclusive cities approach by discussing access, opportunities
and rights for all. This was an important event because it introduced how the World Bank was starting to
shift its strategy regarding inclusion in urban areas.
Another important follow-up event was a workshop organized in March of 2015. This was the first event
organized by the newly created Global Programs Unit with the former social and urban global teams
together. The event had internal and external attendees and it provided a platform for both former
individual teams to present products on different topics of inclusion in urban areas: internally displaced
people, involuntary resettlement, slum upgrading, and a new incremental-housing toolkit. In addition to
the presentations, the event featured the following: i) a master class on slum upgrading which focused
on a Vietnam slum upgrading project to strengthen staff’s skills and share lessons learnt from a
successful but challenging project, and ii) a BBL to go further into the incremental housing toolkit that is
being developed by a World Bank team. The event allowed to integrate previously separate projects and
initiatives under a consolidated inclusive and sustainable cities platform.
 Events during the GSURR Forum 2015: Building on the momentum from the inclusive and sustainable
cities workshop, multiple events were organized as part of GSURR’s biggest learning event, the Forum
2015:
1.    Master class on slum upgrading: Given the success of the master class on the Vietnam slum
      upgrading project, the team organized one master classes on slum upgrading. In Istanbul, the class
      focused on a Kenya slum upgrading project and in Bangkok, the class focused on CODI experience
      on community driven upgrading.
2.    Inclusive Interventions in Operations: Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Development Project: Turning
      the inclusive cities approach into an operational tool is essential for the success of the inclusive
      cities agenda. Prior to piloting the approach in three regional projects, the team organized a
      session that featured the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Development Project which was just
      approved by the board in March 2015. The DMDP was taken as a case study to explore how the
      multi-dimensional approach to inclusive cities can be useful for a real-time urban operation.
3.    Financing the Inclusive Cities Agenda: Expanding RBF to improve access to urban services in low
      income communities: The session looked at how results based financing can be used for
      interventions aimed at providing services to low income communities. The session was jointly
      organized by the Inclusive Cities team, the Low Income Communities and Urban Poverty GSG; and
      the City Management, Governance and Financing GSG.



                                                                                                         36
3.4.4   Moving Forward: Aligning with the GSG on Low Income Communities and Urban Poverty
The proposed next step are aimed at advancing the inclusive cities agenda by working in parallel on
analytical activities, dialogues and knowledge sharing, operationalization of the approach and building
new partnerships for the agenda. The newly re-organized Global Practice (GP) offers a huge opportunity
to advance the multi-dimensional Inclusive Cities agenda and the GSGs and KSBs are both suitable
platforms for dialogue and knowledge sharing around the topic of inclusive cities.
Global Solutions Group on Low-income Communities and Urban Poverty (GSG): The Global Solutions
Group on low-income communities and urban poverty led by R. Mukami Kariuki, the Global Lead, is
already actively working with the inclusive cities to align and advance the inclusion agenda with the
GSG. There is already collaboration on many fronts including organizing dissemination events related to
the topic and asking Mukami to give us her input on the inclusive cities approach paper.
The global solutions group has the mandate to create a CoP on low-income communities and urban
poverty. The Inclusive Cities team also has the objective of creating a CoP so both teams will collaborate
on this in order to avoid duplication of work. The Inclusive Cities team plans on working closely with the
global solutions group to roll-out other activities and leverage as much expertise as possible.
Inclusive Cities Knowledge Silo Breaker (KSB): The team has submitted a proposal for a KSB (pending
review by the Management Team). The KSB has the purpose of facilitating dialogue and collaboration
around the inclusive cities agenda among experts from all over the Bank. The main activities under the
KSB will be related to knowledge creation and sharing (e-discussion, database of experts, analytical
activities and their dissemination, etc.); capacity building (e-learning courses, webinars, peer-to-peer
learning, etc.); and, innovation and incubation (encouraging new ideas and innovative operations
through competitions). Some ideas for the third pillar include thinking about how to introduce
interventions such as street-based upgrading and community mapping more widely in existing World
Bank projects; launching a social media campaign around a specific issue to raise awareness; or
organizing an event to highlight the importance of inclusion. The proposed Inclusive Cities KSB offers a
perfect opportunity to build forward and backward linkages with the business lines of the GPSURR as
well as multiple GSGs including low income communities and urban poverty, social inclusion, CDD and
services delivery.
Community of Practice (CoP): During the GSURR Forum 2015, the inclusive cities team and the low-
income communities GSG hosted brainstorming sessions at each of the locations in order to get a sense
of the kind of CoP that potential members would like to have. The teams will continue crowdsourcing
ideas for the CoP in order to make sure that the community meets the needs of the different
stakeholders.
As it has been mentioned before, the inclusive cities agenda is multi-sectoral and therefore, it is
expected to have members in the CoP from various team within GSURR but also from across the Bank.
The CoP will serve as a place where the inclusive cities agenda will evolve due to ongoing discussion,
knowledge generated and shared among the group members. Eventually, the CoP will be opened up to
external participants in order to bring a fresh perspective on issues related to inclusion. The CoP will
communicate mainly on a C4D platform which will be used to host different virtual discussions, promote


                                                                                                        37
products, announce upcoming events, and share materials among other activities. A major influx of
external participants will come from a previous Inclusive Cities community on a Ning platform which was
established by the former urban practice of WBI, now part of the Global Programs Unit.




                                                                                                    38
References

Angel, S., J. Parent, D.L. Civoc, and A.M. Blei. 2011. Making Room for a Planet of Cities. Lincoln Land
Institute of Public Policy. Cambridge, MA.

Chetty R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., and Saez E. (2014). Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography
of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.

Cities Alliance (2003). Annual Report 2003. Washington, DC USA Available at
http://www.citiesalliance.org/sites/citiesalliance.org/files/Anual_Reports/03-annual-report.pdf

Cities Alliance (2011). The Case for Incremental Housing. Washington, DC USA. Available at
https://www.citiesalliance.org/sites/citiesalliance.org/files/Case-for-Incremental-Housing.pdf

Durand-Lasserve A. and H. Selod (2007). The formalization of urban land tenure in developing countries.
Paper prepared for the World Bank 2007 Urban Research Symposium, May 14-16 Washington, DC.
Available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/Resources/336387-
1269364687916/6892589-1269394475210/durand_lasserve.pdf

Ferre, Celine, Francisco Ferreira, and Peter Lanjouw (2010). “Is There a Metropolitan Bias? The Inverse
Relationship between Poverty and City Size in Selected Developing Countries.” Policy research working
papers, 5508. World Bank: Washington, DC.

Fischer J. (1995). Local Land Tenure and Natural Resources Management Systems in Guinea. Research
Findings and Policy Options. USAID-Guinea, Land Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Garfinkel, Irwin, Lee Rainwater, and Timothy M. Smeeding (2006). “A re‐examination of welfare states
and inequality in rich nations: How in‐kind transfers and indirect taxes change the story.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 25.4: 897-919.

Global IDP (2002). Internally Displaced People: A global survey (second edition). London, Earthscan.

Henderson, J. Vernon (2007). The Effect of Residential Land Market Regulations on Urban Welfare.
Prepared for Urban Research Symposium 2007 on Urban Land Use and Land Markets. Available at:
http://site resources.worldbank.org/ INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/Resources/336387-
1269364687916/6892589-1269394475210/henderson.pdf

Mabala, R. (2006). "From HIV prevention to HIV protection; Addressing the vulnerability of girls and
young women in urban areas." Environment and Urbanization 18(2): 407-432.

Mitlin, D. and D. Satterthwaite (2013). Urban Poverty in the Global South: Scale and Nature. London and
New York, Routledge.

OECD. 2003. Improving Water Management: Recent OECD Experience. Paris, Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development.

Osterman, Paul, and Beth Shulman (2011). Good Jobs America: Making Work Better for Everyone. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.


                                                                                                          39
PPIAF. 2009. Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in
Developing Countries. World Bank: Washington, DC.

Satterthwaite, D. and D. Mitlin (2014). Reducing Urban Poverty in the Global South. London and New
York, Routledge.

Shapiro, T., T. Meschede and S. Osoro (2013). “The Roots of the Widening Racial Wealth Gap: Explaining
the Black-White Economic Divide.” Research and Policy Brief, Institute on Assets and Social Policy,
Brandeis University

Solo, T. M. (2008). ""Financial exclusion in Latin America or the social costs of not banking the urban
poor. Environment and Urbanization 20(1): 47-66.

Steinberg, F. and Lindfield, M. 2011. Inclusive Cities. Asian Development Bank: Mandaluyong City,
Philippines.

U.S. Census. 2013a. March Current Population Survey. Historical Income Tables: Income Inequality, table
H-1 All Races. Machine-readable data accessed by the authors November 25, 2013 from
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/household/2012/H01AR_2012.xls.

U.S. Census. 2013b. March Current Population Survey. Historical Income Tables: Income Inequality, table
H-3 All Races. Machine-readable data accessed by the authors November 25, 2013 from
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/household/2012/H03AR_2012.xls .

UN-Habitat (2004). The Global Campaign on Urban Governance.Un-Habitat: Nairobi, Kenya.

UN-Habitat (2007) Enhancing Urban Safety and Security: Global Report on Human Settlements 2007,
Earthscan, London, www.unhabitat.org/grhs/2007

UN-Habitat (2010). State of the world’s cities 2010/2011: Bridging the urban divide. UN Habitat: Nairobi,
Kenya.

UN-Habitat (2014) Background Paper: World Habitat Day 2014, Voices from the Slums. UN-Habitat:
Nairobi, Kenya

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2014). World
Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352).

Weru, Jane (2014). 'Too Pressed To Wait: A Retouch on Women and Sanitation', unpublished.

World Bank. 2003. World Development Report 2004 : Making Services Work for Poor People. World
Bank. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5986 License: CC BY 3.0
IGO.

World Bank. 2005. World Development Report 2006 : Equity and Development. Washington, DC. ©
World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5988 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

World Bank. 2009a. World Development Report 2009 : Reshaping Economic Geography. World Bank. ©
World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5991 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.


                                                                                                          40
World Bank. 2009b. Systems of cities : harnessing urbanization for growth and poverty alleviation.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2009/11/11418942/systems-cities-harnessing-
urbanization-growth-poverty-alleviation

World Bank. 2011. World Bank East Asia and Pacific economic update 2010. Vol. 1: Securing the Present,
Shaping the Future. World Bank: Washington, DC

World Bank. 2012a. World Development Report 2012 : Gender Equality and Development. World Bank.
© World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/4391 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”

World Bank. 2012b. World Development Report 2013 : Jobs. Washington, DC. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/11843 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

World Bank. 2013a. Inclusion Matters : The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC. © World
Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16195 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

World Bank. 2013b. Planning, Connecting, and Financing Cities--Now : Priorities for City Leaders.
Washington, DC: World Bank. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/12238 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

World Bank. 2013c. The World Bank Group Goals End Extreme Poverty and Promote Shared Prosperity.
Presentation. World Bank: Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2013d. Ask Why. Weaving Paths to Social Inclusion. World Bank: Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2014a. Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group
Operations. Washington, DC. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21113 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

World Bank. 2014b. Inclusive Cities and Access to Land, Housing and Services in Developing Countries.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2014c. Inclusive Economic Growth in America’s Cities: What's the Playbook and the Score?.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2014d.On the engagement of excluded groups in inclusive cities, highlighting good practices
and key challenges in the global South. Washington, DC: World Bank

World Bank. 2014e. Inclusive Cities Background Notes. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. Forthcoming 2015a. "National Upgrading Policies and Programs". Washington, DC: World
Bank

World Bank. Forthcoming 2015b. Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas:
Lessons from World Bank Case Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank

World Bank. Forthcoming. Forced Displacement and the Urban Sector. Washington, DC: World Bank



                                                                                                        41
Annex 1 Exclusion in Urban Areas (Problems)

Exclusion, in urban areas, is multidimensional and is manifested along a continuum. This chapter
discusses various dimensions of exclusion and how each dimension affects the urban areas. The
dimensions of exclusion could be categorized into spatial, social and economic dimensions. The spatial
dimension of exclusion deals with geographic segregation, social dimension deals with discrimination
and economic dimension deals with lack of access to opportunities. All these dimensions are
intertwined. The following chart helps us understand the deprivations associated with exclusion in urban
areas.




Source: (Mitlin and Satterthwaite 2013)


2.1 Spatial Exclusion
Spatial exclusion indicates intra-urban inequalities between various districts/neighborhoods in terms of
access to land and housing, infrastructure, basic services, and public amenities. Some areas feature
significant infrastructure, well-kept parks, gardens and up-market residential areas. In contrast, other
areas are characterized by severe deprivation, inadequate housing, deficient services, poor recreation



                                                                                                      42
and cultural facilities, urban decay, and scarce capital expenditures. These reflect the differences
between legal/formal neighborhoods and illegal/informal settlements.

2.1.1 Land lies at the core of social exclusion beyond its purely spatial aspect
The high price and rapid appreciation of urban land, which has far outstripped increases in incomes
worldwide, and the focus of local authorities on land development potential under its most lucrative use
rather than its most urgent social need, are eroding the inclusionary impact of land. As a result, in most
developing country cities, serviced land is under supplied and very expensive. The underlying reasons for
the high prices and constrained supply are multiple: restrictive land use regulations, lengthy and
expensive administrative processes for land development and conversion, corruptive practices, etc.

Exclusionary zoning regulations that set minimum lot sizes, building height restrictions, and open space
allocations, can restrict the number of new housing units that are constructed in a community. They can
also effectively set minimum housing consumption levels which are non-binding for high income people,
but exceed what lower income people can afford, thus excluding lower income people. Most commonly,
these exclusionary zoning regulations result in stratification of population by income groups,
concentrated in certain geographic locations. A uniform height restriction in a metropolitan area tends
to lower heights in the center of the city where land use would usually be most intense and raise them
at the city edge. Mumbai’s edge is much further out (by 17 km) than would be the case without a
uniform height restriction (Henderson, 2007). As a result, the city center is occupied by the rich people
while the poor are pushed to the edge leading to spatial segregation. Moreover, standards and
regulations related to land conversion and land use permissions are very costly, involving lengthy
administrative procedures, inspections and approvals. These regulations are often the means of
corruptive practices.

Since 1979, Syria has enacted laws to expropriate privately held, unbuilt land; first around Damascus,
and then in other cities to provide sites for social housing. The terms of the compulsory purchase were
considered as quasi-confiscatory by property owners who rushed to subdivide and sell plots on the
informal market giving rise to a belt of informal settlements around Damascus and a string of
settlements to the south and west of Homs and Aleppo. A similar process is observed in growing cities in
East and West Africa. Tribal council and property owners hasten to subdivide and dispose of land by sale
or right of use ahead of annexation to the city’s jurisdiction. Within the urban boundary they would be
subject to the controls in master plans, zoning ordinances and other development regulations. Urban
land is the most rapidly appreciating commodity in Middle Eastern cities, doubling in price every two to
three years since the mid-1970s. Yet the tradition of property taxation based on rental income valuation
makes it almost impossible to equitably tax vacant land and curb rampant speculation that has squeezed
out of the informal land market, the non-remittance receiving households among the middle classes
whose only option is to rent premises in informal settlements.

Land tenure designates the rights individuals and communities have with regard to land, namely the
right to occupy, to use, to develop, to inherit, and to transfer land. Land tenure thus deals with land use
and land ownership. While some users may have access to the entire ‘bundle of rights’ with full use and
transfer rights, other users may be limited in their use of land resources (Fischer, 1995). The exact

                                                                                                         43
nature and content of these rights, the extent to which people have confidence that they will be
honored, and their various degrees of recognition by public authorities and the concerned communities,
have a direct impact on how land is used (Durand-Lasserve and Selod, 2007). Lack of tenure or insecurity
of tenure due to illegal occupation where land rights are not honored by the public authority leads to
constant fear of forced evictions. From the viewpoint of social inclusion, unregistered titles carry risks
for land owners and tenants. Ownership can be challenged by third parties at any time. Settlers are
vulnerable to threats and exactions by corrupt local officials. While outright eviction is usually avoided
for political considerations, settlers can be harassed and charged exactions for construction, additions
and connections to utilities. The rate of appreciation of unregistered land is high, but still lower than
registered property. Inability to register real estate has a depreciating effect on the value of the main
asset of limited income families. Areas where the bulk of the properties are unregistered acquire a
reputation for being areas where titles are difficult and expensive to issue; a reputation that deters
private investment in the area.

Jordan’s unaffordable minimum lot size has encouraged a sharp increase in joint ownership of land
parcels which has become the predominant form of tenure in informal settlements. As a compromise,
the state allowed titling of shares in a parcel, a process that has long been legally recognized in Egypt
and where it has fueled informal land subdivision. Recent efforts have been made to untangle the
situations created by joint ownership of land and overlays of real estate rights which impede the
rehabilitation and renovation of older districts and the conservation of historic centers.

Informal land development occurs because available land options are either unaffordable or too
isolated. In Latin American cities, urban poor organize land invasions; in South and East Asia, the poor
settle on marginal, hazardous sites and along the edges of water bodies (as in Manila); in Africa they
illegally subdivide tribal lands and settle the very poor opportunistically in vacant and unbuildable
spaces. In most developing country cities, urban poor settle on land exposed to natural hazards and
areas affected by man-made risks such as garbage dumps and sites affected by industrial pollution.
When they have no other option they settle on land they create themselves by dumping unconsolidated
garbage in water bodies as in Guayaquil, Cartagena and Cotonou or in the water bodies in shacks built
on stilts as in Dhaka and Manila.

2.1.2 There is a huge mismatch in demand and provision of services
While the dynamics of land market accounts for the marginal locations where the urban poor live,
infrastructure provision in these marginal locations is highly inadequate. The poorer inhabitants of the
steep upper reaches of favelas and barrios still carry water to their houses, as do the residents in the
outlying areas and upper floors of middle class buildings in informal settlements in many cities in the
Middle East due to water scarcity and low water pressure. The statistics on access to services do not
reflect the reality of the conditions in these areas. In most marginalized areas, the services are not
available and where they are available the coverage and quality of these services are very low.

The disparity in service provision is most evident between slum and non-slum areas. In Mumbai (India),
for instance, 50 percent of slums have no access to primary schools. In Chittagong (Bangladesh), the
number of kindergarten schools for relatively wealthy households is on the increase, while children in

                                                                                                            44
distant slums have almost no access to education. Slum-dwellers also face disproportionate risk to
natural hazards, particularly flooding, largely due to where they can afford to live within cities. Lack of
affordable public transportation leaves them out of the formal job market and they increasingly resort
to informal low-paying jobs. The poor quality and inadequacy of water, sanitation and related services
increases the chance of disease and illness, raising a public health risk for the whole city.

While low cost sanitation options may be viewed by local authorities as acceptable solutions, they are
not feasible at the higher densities of lower income areas in larger cities and contribute to the pollution
of the environment. Soils, aquifers and water bodies are contaminated due to overloaded, ill-maintained
treatment facilities and illegal dumping of sludge in water courses by cesspit pumping truck operators.
The social importance of water borne sewerage is such that households purchase toilets well ahead of
the sewerage network reaching their neighborhood. Everywhere from Fez to Caracas, toilets, bathrooms
and kitchens (no matter how modest and badly installed due to lack of resources) are prioritized by
limited income families for both their functional use and social significance.

Among many other reasons, lack of flexibility in planning for physical infrastructure, housing and
amenities in the context of dynamic and rapidly growing cities in developing countries leads to mismatch
in demand and provision of services (World Bank 2013b). The local governments suffer from insufficient
capacity and inadequate local revenue to address the infrastructure needs of people. As a result, the
marginalized population has to resort to buying services from private providers and they end up paying
very high price for services.

Four decades of focus on infrastructure upgrading and the provision of urban services in underserviced
areas and un-serviced urban extensions have improved living conditions temporarily or more
permanently in some areas of most major cities and some secondary towns. Nevertheless, they have
had little impact on social inclusion at the city scale. In most cities, spatial segregation has increased and
aggravated perceptions of social exclusion.

2.1.3   One in seven of the world’s urban population lives in poor quality and overcrowded
        housing
Sustained high demand for housing due to the high rate of household formation has created pervasive
housing shortages for the urban poor and the middle classes. The severity of the shortages and the rapid
appreciation of urban land have led to the emergence of land speculators capitalizing on the inertia or
collusion of local authorities to take control of large tracts of land. The building regulations make
housing more expensive, through costly permitting procedures. These serve to raise construction costs
for new housing, making the community less attractive to any in-migrants.

All countries continue to fund social housing programs for political reasons even as they seek more
functional alternatives to deliver affordable housing. In countries where the housing shortage is acute
such as Egypt, Tunisia, Brazil and Colombia, public housing units are in high demand and are being
preempted by middle income employees and salaried workers. Many countries allow occupants to
acquire ownership of their dwellings after regularly paying rent for a specified time, usually 10 or 15
years. Projects built on the urban periphery suffer from spatial remoteness and in most countries are


                                                                                                              45
allocated to re-housing families displaced by public works and natural and manmade hazards. This
common practice leads to spatial segregation of families whose social and livelihood networks have
already been disrupted by relocation.

The experience of Middle Eastern housing agencies in Egypt, Syria and Morocco exemplify the problems
which have plagued social housing programs since the late 1970s when the price of urban land started
escalating rapidly in the Middle East and in the rapidly growing sub-Saharan Africa’s RDP housing
program, or computed as a residual after infrastructure and construction costs, or set at the level
necessary to secure large tracts, low land values entail peripheral locations and spatial segregation
leading to social homogenization and marginalization.

Despite calls for increasing attention to rental accommodations as an option to reach poorer population
strata, the rental market in most countries has been absent or too distorted. It is the informal
settlements that provide a rental market accessible to the urban poor, but this unregulated market is
not devoid of selectivity, excessive charges and harassments.

The proliferation of informal settlement is characterized by a mix of middle and lower income residents
and a built environment with an accumulation of code violations. Environmental differences between
informal settlements, older slums, and opportunistically located bidonvilles within and on the periphery
of the cities are reflected in the socio-economic characteristics of settlers and the degree of exclusion
experienced by residents. Slums and informal settlements are characterized by overcrowding, hazardous
sites, temporary shelter material and inadequate service provision.

In Egypt, the scale and rate of growth of informal settlements financed by remittances since the 1970s
has overwhelmed the capacity of city and governorate authorities to control development in peri-urban
and outlying areas. The government response to chaotic urban expansion since 1966 has been periodic
decrees legalizing the de facto situation on the ground and stipulating stringent sanctions on future
violators. These pronouncements and the delineation of urban perimeters for cities, towns and villages
do not deter informal developers and settlers who only have to await the next blanket legalization
regularizing their situation and delineating a new urban perimeter further out.

Policy and program responses to slums and informal settlements over the past few decades have
included mass public housing projects, affordable housing, basic service provision, ‘sites and services’,
slum upgrading programs, and a few proactive initiatives to prevent slums through land use policies. Of
all, slum upgrading programs are the most prevalent.

Formal titling, access to infrastructure and housing should go hand in hand. Despite the security of
occupancy, it is clear that lack of a recognized right to land tenure affects investment in housing.
Conversely, formal titling without upgrading infrastructure and improving the living environment has
had minor impacts. Therefore, access to land, infrastructure and basic services, and housing are
important factors to address spatial inequalities.




                                                                                                       46
2.1.4   In most developing countries public spaces are not well-kept and in many cases
        insecure
In many ways, public space shapes the image of a neighborhood (more so than buildings) and yet
receives little attention compared to infrastructure and housing. In most cities in the developing
countries, public spaces outside elite areas are not well maintained and in many cases insecure. In
informal settlements they are hostile and often controlled by gangs, particularly in outlying settlements
where roadways are long and narrow with few transversal links. Inhabitants avoid spending time in
these spaces beyond their function as circulation paths. Women and youth who are vulnerable to
harassment and violence dread them and hasten to reach home. In favelas and barrios, women are
often forced to pay exactions merely to walk and climb the steps up the slope to their houses. They
constantly face the risk of urban violence, including vandalism of their homes if they do not pay the
exactions demanded. Public spaces are also hostile when they are too large and neglected. Mothers do
not want their children to play in such spaces despite the small sizes of their houses, fearing for their
security.

2.2 Social Exclusion
Urban areas offer huge opportunities for excluded groups. Many residents undertake new activities and
frequently create new identities. For example, caste is famously diluted in cities. However, residential
patterns, social networks, occupational concentration and social norms operate differently in urban areas
leading to other types of exclusion. Social exclusion on the basis on age, gender, race, caste, religion,
ethnicity, or disability impacts an individual’s participation and voice in the governance and development
of the city.

2.2.1 Who is excluded in urban areas?
The scale and depth of urban poverty in Africa and much of Asia and Latin America is greatly under-
estimated because of inappropriate definitions and measurements. Understanding the causes of such
inaccurate measurement provides insight in those groups who are typically excluded and marginalized; in
part they are marginalized because they are “invisible” to those authorities tasked with supporting them.

Women frequently face particularly difficulties. They may face discrimination within their household,
within the labor market and in regard to access to services. Women-headed households may be over-
represented within households with below poverty line incomes. Ethnicity, caste and other social
categories may pose particular difficulties due to social attitudes. This takes numerous forms; for example,
the Ga in Accra faced risks due, in part, to the difficulties of continuing with traditional livelihoods as the
city expands into the areas in which they live. Other difficulties are faced by groups who migrate into
urban centers, especially in nations where migrants are excluded from public services.

Age can be an indicator of vulnerability with both the (very) young and the elderly. One of the difficulties
facing many elderly urban dwellers in the global South as their strength and physical capacity diminishes
is the lack of pension provision. Young people may face particular difficulties. Two thirds of sub-Saharan
Africa’s population is under the age of 25. Young people have high expectations of urban life: for example,
“Dar es Salaam is known by youth as Bongoland, the city of bongo (brains) where the smart ones go and
‘make it’”. But in practice, especially in urban Africa, there are few opportunities that are provided and

                                                                                                            47
most youth are unable to access the kinds of jobs that they aspire to. Both formal and informal
neighborhoods lack provision for children (play areas), and for adolescents (youth clubs and recreational
facilities). Where facilities do exist, these are likely to be for sports. Girl children can be doubly
disadvantaged by gender discrimination. Both the young population and the elderly are often not
represented in the governance structures. They do not have any opportunities to participate in decision
making or voice their concerns.

Lack of income and assets are critical factors determining or influencing exclusion in urban areas. This is
manifested through difficulties faced by those with low incomes who find it difficult to pay for adequate
goods and services, including food, and also through a residential location within informal settlements
characterized by a lack of public services. Around one in seven of the world’s population lives in poor
quality and usually overcrowded housing in urban areas. Most of these lack provision for safe sufficient
water, sanitation and many other needs. They include very large numbers of urban dwellers who are
malnourished and suffer premature death or disease burdens that are preventable. Those who are street-
dwellers or homeless also face acute needs that are rarely addressed. In Delhi, for example, it is estimated
that there are over 100,000 homeless people, but the government runs only 14 night shelters with a
maximum capacity of 2,937 people. However in addition to those without housing and with a general lack
of income and assets, there are other groups that are particularly vulnerable in urban areas.

Internationally and internally displaced people also face particular difficulties. Among 45.2 million
displaced persons worldwide, more than half live in urban contexts. While most displacement is
protracted and the displaced become permanent urban residents, forced displacement is rarely factored
into urban planning, disaster-risk and poverty-reduction strategies; since it is commonly seen as a
humanitarian domain. The displaced face many of the same challenges as the urban poor; informal
settlement, poor living conditions, lack of economic opportunities, social marginalization. In Colombia,
nearly 10 per cent of the country population is living in the condition of displacement; and despite
government support programs, 98 per cent have an income below the poverty line. In addition, displaced
people also face additional constraints; loss of assets, trauma, lack of skill set, loss income source/job,
household separation, impermanence, legal status (loss of identify documents/lack of legal rights to
work), contested rights to land and housing, social isolation, social tensions, government policies. In some
cases, the displaced people may be socially isolated and living apart from families and/or broader
communities with the additional problems that a lack of social networks brings.

Similarly, refugee settlements may not be recognized as being urban centers, but over time many become
permanent settlements rather than temporary accommodation. Problems may be exacerbated because
of a refusal to recognize the likelihood of permanency and maintenance of a perpetual state of exception.
In the short (and sometimes longer) term basic infrastructure and health facilities can be lacking with
appalling consequences. The Global IDP Project, for example, reported under-5 mortality rates of 240 per
thousand live births in a refugee camp in northern Bahr al Ghazal, Sudan (Global IDP, 2002). Livelihood
strategies may also be curtailed in absence of a permanent residence.

Those with particular health problems are also a group facing exclusion. In many cases, health problems
are primarily shaped by low-quality housing, unhealthy living conditions, and limited access to healthcare

                                                                                                         48
services. Much of the exclusion for those with health problems is related to a lack of income and/or assets.
Poor health is recognized to be one of the major factors leading to chronic poverty as families that are
just coping are unable to recover following the primary income earner falling sick or being injured. It is
accepted that in most nations, levels of HIV infection are usually higher in urban areas than rural areas
and with large urban areas having the highest HIV prevalence. Within low-income urban dwellers,
adolescent girls and young women are disproportionately affected because they are least able to avoid
the risks and protect themselves. These populations need particular support in terms of access to
medication and basic services, and they are frequently unable to secure these (Mabala 2006).

2.2.2 Exclusion impacts democratic processes adversely
There are a wide set of concerns about the broader consequences of exclusion, particularly in respect of
its impact on democracy. Greater social distance of decision makers from low-income population may
result in increasing inability of government to act in the interest of all. Policies that do not favor low-
income population are likely to mean basic services, including health and education, are not provided to
low-income population, which would in turn, increase inequalities. There are concerns that increasing
inequality may be associated with less democracy. Government policies that lack space for participation
of low-income population may be counter-productive. Lack of participation and dialogue with low-
income population hampers inclusive development.

2.2.3 Exclusion and crime are closely linked.
Governance challenges in urban areas contribute to some groups feeling left out, and having few
opportunities for voice and redress. The polarization and stark spatial segregation within cities is one of
the root causes for the crime that has afflicted many cities in LAC, Africa and other parts of the world.
For example, Honduras is about 52% urbanized and about 54% of urban population is poor. Urban poor
are deprived of not only basic infrastructure but also have limited economic and educational
opportunities, without limited prospect for the future. This has been a key factor underlying the crime
and violence problem in Honduras. In recent years, crime and violence issue has become a central
development issue in Honduras. It is no longer only a social issue but it also hampers economic growth,
with a direct effect on investment climate and business opportunities. Over time, violence can become
institutionalized, making it difficult to dismantle. Land mafia, drug lords and other extortionists then
step into the role of what should have been core state function (World Bank 2013d).

2.3 Economic Exclusion
Economic exclusion implies an inability of the excluded to enter formal labor markets, obtain capital for
business development, or the education necessary to be considered for employment.

2.3.1 Poverty is urbanizing and inequality is rising
Although urban areas account for lower rates of extreme poverty as compared to their rural
counterparts, poverty is expected to urbanize rapidly. With more and more people moving to urban
areas, the share of the total number of poor who live in urban areas is expected to grow. Urban poverty
has been falling more slowly than rural poverty – in part because urbanization is the key driver behind
rural poverty reduction, but also because some of those who migrate to urban areas remain poor (Ferre
2010). This is evident from increasing intra-urban inequalities. In Latin America, the most significant

                                                                                                         49
increases in Gini coefficients have occurred in Colombia, where measures of income inequality climbed
by 24 percent in Bogotá between 1991 and 2005, 10 per cent in Calí, and 4 percent in Medellín between
1991 and 1998. In East Asia, inequality has most notably increased in China (World Bank 2011). In urban
Vietnam, income inequalities increased by 17 percent between 1993 and 2002 within a context of rapid
economic growth.

Increased inequality in the distribution of earnings is not only a developing world phenomenon; it is also
present in most of the cities in the US. Whereas the top 5 percent of earners took home 17.2 percent of
the income in 1967 in the US, they accounted for 22.3 percent in 2012 (U.S. Census 2013a). The average
incomes of those in the top 5 percent grew—after adjusting for inflation—by 70 percent, to over
$318,000, while those in the lowest 20 percent grew only 19 percent, to less than $11,500 (U.S. Census
2013b). Since 2000, moreover, the real average income at the bottom of the distribution has dropped 15
percent, whereas the real average income for the top five percent has dropped by only 4 percent. These
levels distinguish the U.S. as the most unequal income distribution in the industrialized world (Garfinkel,
Rainwater, and Smeeding 2006). And an estimated one in four U.S. workers earns poverty-level wages
(Osterman and Shulman 2011).

The wealth gap in the US has increased even more than the income gap. For example, “tracing the same
households over 25 years, the total wealth gap between white and African-American families nearly
triples, increasing from $85,000 in 1984 to $236,500 in 2009.” (Shapiro, Meschede, and Osoro, 2013)
The gap between the wealth of blacks and Hispanics, on the one hand, and whites on the other is among
the most threatening portents for the future.

2.3.2 Urban poor’s entry to formal labor market is restricted
The reason for the huge gap in income and wealth among the minorities and the rich population is due
to the fact that marginalized population suffers from lack of access to formal labor markets. Lack of a
formal address or identity comes in the way of the urban poor in accessing the formal job market. Social
discrimination based on gender, age, ethnicity, etc. could also leave the urban poor out of job market.
Lack of education and poor health can also restrict the ability of poor urban residents to access well-paid
jobs. Due to inability to obtain necessary education and skills, the urban poor face a huge mismatch in
their skills and the job opportunities. For example, while 45% of all jobs in 2018 in the US will require at
least an associate’s degree, only 27% of African-American workers, 26% of US born Latinos and 14% of
Latino immigrants have this level of education.

Another reason could be unaffordable transportation costs, or certain residential areas may simply be
disconnected from the transportation network. Due to high prices of land and housing, urban poor are
forced to live in areas that are not well connected to central city areas where generally jobs are. In some
cities, much of this income segregation trend is also driven by the enclaving of the highest income
households, not the spatial segregation of the lowest income households. Most of the urban poor, as a
result of the spatial and skills mismatch, end up in low-paying informal jobs that do not provide
dependable stream of income and are often characterized by precarious working conditions (World
Bank 2009b). Highly risky working conditions raise the risk of illness or injury, which in turn poses a risk



                                                                                                         50
such as erosion of assets of the urban poor. Inadequate and unstable income, risky working
environment and very low economic mobility limit asset building or saving capacity of the urban poor.

In most developing countries urban economies have become increasingly informal over the past 10
years, as the formal sector consistently fails to provide for both young people and adults seeking
employment, even in the face of healthy economic growth. In India, for example, whose economy grew
5 percent annually over the past 10 years, some 370 million people, or 9 out of 10 employees, are not
affiliated with any formal social security scheme. Mexico, which grew an average of 2.5 percent per year
in the past 10 years, extends social security to only 30 percent of its workforce (UN Habitat 2010).

There are marked differences between metro regions in the inter-generational economic mobility: the
spatial variation in intergenerational mobility is found to correlate with residential segregation, income
inequality, school quality, social capital, and family structure (Chetty et al. 2014). Areas with less
residential segregation, less income inequality, but better and greater quality in school education, social
capital and family structure facilitate upward mobility.

In most cases, economic inclusion efforts are ineffective, uncoordinated and often just a small add-on to
a full economic development strategy. While it is important to address economic exclusion, different
cities will have different starting points for addressing the issue (level of growth, quality of local jobs and
access, demographic profile, geography of opportunity). These different starting points would demand
different type of strategies. For example, the economic challenges faced by a city with majority of its
population under the age of 25 will be very different than the challenges faced by a city with majority of
retiree population.




                                                                                                            51
Annex 2: Past Approaches and Experience

Approach       Name and Description of Example                                 Issues Addressed                                     Major Concerns/Lessons Learned
Spatial
Public housing 1. Reconstruction and Development Program (RDP)                 Housing for low income population: Through the        Spatial and racial segregation: The houses were built
                  Housing Policy, South Africa (1994)10: RDP – an              program, the government aimed to provide housing within sterile and unimproved public space at the
                  integrated socio-economic policy framework –                 for all, aimed at mobilizing resources and efforts of edge of the urbanized areas. The program
                  declared housing as a human right, giving way to             communities, the private sector, and the State. Over contributed little to racial integration and overcoming
                  policies and housing codes that aim to build                 two million small free standing houses have been      the legacy of apartheid since the location of these
                  300,000 houses per year before housing deficit is            built by private contractors.                         houses is in peripheries which contribute to spatial
                  eliminated.                                                                                                        segregation.
                                                                                                                                     Focus on quantity compromising quality: Having a
                                                                                                                                     quantitative goal of has led to implementation with
                                                                                                                                     poor quality.
Sites and        2.   Operación Sitio Housing Program, Chile (1964-            Serviced plots for low income population: These       Spatial isolation: In most cases serviced land was
Services              1970)11: “self-build” solution to quickly address        initiatives provide access to serviced land, rather   provided in unfavorable locations, inconvenient for
                      increasing housing demand by providing serviced          than completed housing, to low income people who access to urban services and work opportunities, and
                      land plot rather than a completed house. The             are supported to build their own housing. Providing sometimes without infrastructure nor public services.
                      program was an effort to formalize access to land        serviced land was a quicker method to address         Reduced affordability: The serviced land increased in
                      by providing access to loans for purchasing single       housing deficit and a way to mobilize community, price, making it difficult for the urban poor to pay
                      family urban lots that are equipped with basic           encouraging close collaboration between the people their rent and hence became unaffordable for the
                      urban services and community facilities.                 and the administrators.                               low-income population.
                 3.   Million Houses Programme of Sri Lanka 12 (1984-                                                                Quality of housing: The minimum housing standards
                      1989): The Sri Lankan government was rethinking                                                                were not always met when people constructed their
                      itself as an enabler to help the poor to provide                                                               own housing.
                      their own housing (through aid to self-help
                      construction and affordable loans) rather than
                      being a direct provider. The program focused on
                      providing solutions that were applicable to a wide
                      range of needs and allowing flexibility in housing.
Affordable       4.   Brazil Minha Casa Minha Vida program (2009): Housing for all income brackets: The program                     High cost of land and infrastructure: Delivering truly
Housing               The program aims to build 1 million new homes attempts to fill the housing deficit, by facilitating           affordable property is rendered challenging due to
                      before 2016 via federally-funded subsidies and tax housing credit to the poor at low fixed interest rate      the high cost of land and infrastructure. And because
                      incentives to encourage private contractors’        well below open market rate.                              the project does not set guidelines about the
                      production or renovation of housing units to be                                                               location, affordable housing is built in the
                      sold to eligible buyers. Program also facilitates                                                             peripheries.

10 http://www.nelsonmandela.org/omalley/index.php/site/q/03lv02039/04lv02103/05lv02120/06lv02126.htm
11 https://isaconf.confex.com/isaconf/forum2012/webprogram/Paper21171.html
12
   Cities Alliance (2011). The Case for Incremental Housing. Washington, DC USA.
                                                                                                                                                                                       52
                 housing credit to the poor at low fixed interest
                 rate below market rate. Eligibility to purchase is
                 determined according to income levels, with
                 priorities given to more vulnerable groups.
            5.   Chile affordable housing program: Chile’s           Housing for low income population: Initially flawed Spatial isolation and segregation: Seeking to expand
                 program provided subsidies to lower income          policies were corrected to allow mixed income       affordability by containing costs required walk up
                 families and engaged the private sector in the      housing and zoning changes for denser development typologies, smaller units and large parcels at low land
                 production of affordable housing. Recognizing the along transport corridors.                            prices. The earlier projects produced physically and
                 problems of spatial segregation and remoteness,                                                         socially homogenous suburban neighborhoods at two
                 Chile redirected its housing policies in 2010 to                                                        to three hours commuting distance from
                 increase the proportion of housing subsidies                                                            employment areas. In the meantime, Chile’s
                 available to vulnerable groups in areas closer to                                                       economic growth lifted many residents to middle and
                 the city center and within the city center. New                                                         upper middle class status. They left the project areas
                 public housing projects are developed to                                                                for more accessible neighborhoods with better
                 accommodate mixed income groups while zoning                                                            housing and public services.
                 changes allow higher densities along major
                 transportation corridors to attract mixed use
                 developments.
Slum        6.   Chile neighborhood “recovery” program: In 2006, Social integration of vulnerable areas and              Lack of neighborhood consolidation: Despite being
Upgrading        under the administration of the Ministry of         connectivity: In addition to funding upgraded       socio-economically homogenous housing complexes
                 Housing and Urbanism (MINVU) and implemented infrastructure and public services, the program            and located in the same urban context, the
                 by state and local authorities, neighborhood        provides for the improvement of connections to the apartment buildings are consistently poorly
                 recovery program was launched. As part of its       city to overcome the isolation of barrios.          evaluated by the residents expressing dissatisfaction
                 comprehensive set of urban and housing policies, Community- Municipality Partnership: Residents         in the community. The population’s favoring towards
                 the program intervenes in vulnerable areas to       prioritize improvements, which is formalized        private space at the expense of public space also has
                 prevent their further deterioration and social      through contracts with the municipality.            devalued public spaces, contributing to lack of social
                 segregation. Having managed to overcome initial                                                         cohesion and hindering revitalized neighborhood
                 resistance by residents, the program received an                                                        social life.
                 increase in funding and has expanded. In 2013, it
                 is active in 168 districts and affects 324,000
                 residents.
            7.   Tunisia slum upgrading through ARRU (1981):         Improved living conditions: Slums have been         Increase in property values: The cost of private land
                 The Urban Upgrading and Rehabilitation Agency virtually eliminated down to 1%, and the private          has gone up and this has made conventional home
                 (ARRU- Agence de Réhabilitation et de Rénovation sector primarily leads housing production.             ownership in housing produced by the formal private
                 Urbaine) has coordinated slum upgrading                                                                 sector for low income households largely
                 initiatives through collaboration with Housing                                                          unaffordable. Furthermore, publicly owned land that
                 Bank, the Solidarity Bank, the Municipal Finance                                                        is suitable for housing development around larger
                 Authority, the National Solidarity Fund, various                                                        cities has been depleted.
                 municipalities, and NGOs and CBOs.
            8.   The Brazilian slum upgrading program – PAC:         Slum upgrading as an investment NOT expenditure: Integrated Approach: Physical interventions are
                 From the legal recognition of the right to the city                                                     necessary but not sufficient condition for improving

                                                                                                                                                                            53
                         by the City Statute and the validation on the     This was a major breakthrough since slum upgrading living conditions of urban poor. In addition to housing
                         National Housing Policy and based on the          was now seen as a fundamental axis for economic and infrastructure, they need support in terms of
                         knowledge accumulated through small scale         and social development in the country. Slum             health, education, social assistance, transport,
                                                                           upgrading was recognized an investment and not
                         interventions in progressive cities during the 80’s                                                       productive inclusion, etc. The physical works under
                         and 90’s, slum upgrading officially became a high social expenditure.                                     PAC generated 9,800 jobs and 60% of them went to
                         priority investment area in Brazil in 2007. A     Live where you are: Under the program, one of the workers from the local community. In addition,
                         program was announced in 2007, with an average    key ideas was to allow the slum dwellers to live        improvement in infrastructure benefits small scale
                                                                           where they are and occupy land they already
                         investment of US$ 4.3 billion/year (total 30 billion                                                      businesses. Positive synergies emerge when two axes
                         US$ investment) that aimed to reach 1.8 million   occupy, near facilities and workplaces.                 of social work component – social capital
                         families. Slum upgrading was considered as part   Social work integrated with physical upgrading:         strengthening and income/work generation – are
                         of an economic growth package that included a     Social work component is institutionalized in the       integrated.
                         series of investments for leveraging the overall  national policy under PAC. The component focuses
                         infrastructure of the country.                    on social, economic, environmental sustainability.It
                                                                           aims at regionally focused development and
                                                                           functional integration to the city fabric. It aims to
                                                                           integrate rather than substitute local social policies.
Slum                9. Hanoi, Vietnam: Hanoi allowed the densification Forward looking slum prevention policy: New areas Houses are still built without official permission:
Prevention              of former village areas by modernizing road        for development were opened up, allowing greater homes and other developments are still carried out
                        networks just outside the city. This approach      connection to the city. Construction of homes           by quasi-legal construction industry. And with such
                        opened new land for formal developers while        abided by the regulations of the more formal            stability triggering greater migration into the city, the
                        improving connections among peri-urban areas. housing.                                                     growth pressure further encourages construction
                                                                                                                                   meeting on the care minimum standards.
                    10. PMIB Bogotá, Colombia13: The program               Integrated land use and infrastructure
                        succeeded by coordinating land use with            development: PMIB expanded infrastructure with
                        infrastructure development through the Programa roads, rainwater traps, and sanitary networks and
                        de Mejoramiento Integral de Barrios (PMIB). PMIB added communal facilities. Delivering access to
                        aimed at legalizing homes and neighborhoods,       services allowed formalization of the settlements
                        and improving living conditions in the poorest     and thus prevented growth of slums.
                        areas in the city that lacked secure tenure.
                    11. Novostroiki, Kyrgyzstan: Semi-informal             Preserved order in the in housing the influx of         Deficiency of basic infrastructure, especially those
                        settlements were built in the periphery of the two migrants. Land was allocated along street rights of related to social services: Many do not have access
                        largest cities, as solutions by the government to way, which were kept free of settlers by strong          to water, electricity, or public services such as waste
                        accommodate the waves of rural migrants.           enforcement                                             collection. Furthermore, randomly organized
                        Citizens were allocated land plots free-of-charge                                                          settlement patterns in the outskirts complicate
                        to construct housing.                                                                                      providing basic infrastructure and integrating with
                                                                                                                                   the rest of the city. Government intervention of
                                                                                                                                   providing housing loses the indigenous know-how in
                                                                                                                                   building traditional homes.



13
     http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSDNET/Resources/Urbanization-Planning-Connecting-Financing-2013.pdf (page 35-36)
                                                                                                                                                                                         54
Infrastructure      12. India Mumbai Sewage Disposal Project14 (1996- Improved health and environmental conditions:                       Service needs to be provided in complementary
and Basic               2005): The project primarily targeted large             The SSP component alleviated the living conditions        manner: Providing sanitation services to slums is not
Services                specialized sewerage works, while the Slum              by improving sanitation facilities, as the population     effective without providing water and electricity. In
                        Sanitation Program (SSP) component under the living near the city’s open sewers benefited from                    order to ensure sustained maintenance, there is a
                        project targeted about 1 million slum dwellers          removal of domestic sewage and industrial waste in        need to think of potable water supply, sanitary
                        (approximately 20 percent of Mumbai’s slum              the water courses.                                        excreta disposal, and hygiene education as a package,
                        population) living on municipal land, by                                                                          on which the health improvements depend.
                        constructing community toilet blocks, which were
                        handed over to community groups to use and
                        maintain.
                    13. South Africa Municipal Infrastructure Grant             Social and economic objectives to complement              Lack of capacity at municipal level: The project
                        (MIG) Project (1994): The MIG project aims to           infrastructure improvement: Integrating divided           demanded a significant level of work and capacity
                        ensure that all communities have access to at           urban areas, promoting social equity, enhancing           from the municipal government to manage the grant.
                        least the basic level of services. The fund covers economic opportunity, generating employment and                Without this capacity, the program remained hugely
                        the capital cost of basic infrastructure for the        training local entrepreneurs and workers including        underspent. Curtailment of the monitoring role of
                        poor. It was designed for wide geographic               women and youth.                                          provincial and national governments in 2005 brought
                        coverage and speedy delivery of upgrading and           Community-Government Partnership: The program             to light the limited managerial capacity of
                        bulk infrastructure. The allocation is first split into is structured to require close coordination among         municipalities and prompted the adoption of the
                        each type of infrastructure, which is then each         community, municipal/provincial/national level            Local Government Turnaround Strategy in 2009 and
                        divided among municipalities according to their authorities.                                                      the creation of the Municipal Infrastructure Support
                        deficiency level.                                                                                                 Agency (MISA).
                    14. Venezuela Mission Barrio Adentro (2003): In             Spillover impact to provide various social services:
                        2003, Venezuela launched social programs                Today there are 26 social mission programs working
                        referred to as “missions” to improve the living         to increase the availability of services to the
                        conditions of poor Venezuelans in domains of            vulnerable segments of the population. From the
                        health, education, food security, housing, and job successes of providing access to health services -
                        training. The program provided free health              these mission programs include education, basic
                        services to the most marginalized communities           food security, legal identification, land titles, human
                        inside their own neighborhoods. The Mission             rights to indigenous and vulnerable communities,
                        aimed to provide access to free and high-quality job training, etc.
                        health care, including preventive care and services
                        for those with disabilities.
Land use            15. ZEIS, Brazil (1983): Special Zones of Social Interest Low-income population benefiting from land value            Close supervision and active community
regulations             (ZEIS) are employed to determine land use, land appreciation with protection from gentrification:                 engagement necessary: without close supervision by
                        parceling and building rules in areas already           The strategy aims to allow poor families to reap the      the residents’ association and/or the public agency,
                        occupied by informal settlements. Residents in a benefits of land value appreciation and to build up              informal transfer of rights are promoted and the
                        ZEIS are organized into CBOs and approve the land their assets through regulations that prevent                   sense of permanent is diminished. It is seen that local
                        planning and management regulations to be               gentrification.                                           residents less involved with activities of the residents’
                        integrated into municipal laws.


14
     World Bank, June 2004. Mumbai Sewerage Disposal Project, Implementation Completion Report.
                                                                                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                                        association have less appreciation for the unique
                                                                                                                        legal status and security of tenure.
                                                                                                                        Challenges of integrating into the rest of municipal
                                                                                                                        system: the bureaucracy of creating a specially
                                                                                                                        mandated council to oversee the policy and
                                                                                                                        implementation has been a struggle.
Land based   16. Improve Your Neighborhood Program, Cuenca, Inclusion of the low-income households to                   Ability of the property owners to contribute their
financing        Ecuador (2000): The program aims to capture        participate and benefit: The municipality provides portion of the cost: The success has been possible
                 remittances and generate benefits for the city and subsidies to poor families, retirees and women-     with the municipality allowing reschedule of
                 property owners, by servicing consolidated         headed households to enable them to participate in repayment by the property owners for their share of
                 neighborhoods of high density. It relies on the    the program.                                        the cost, in the case of hardship and economic
                 development potential of the land to finance       Revenue for the municipality: The municipality does distress.
                 infrastructure improvement. Upon the residents not incur outlays as the management fee and the
                 request to implement certain improvements, the additional receipts raised through the property tax
                 city provides public works package funds and       not only cover its costs but actually contribute to
                 private firms are hired to construct the work. The generating revenues.
                 cost is allocated among property owners based on
                 lot frontage. The municipality supervises
                 implementation and gets a management fee of
                 12%. Property owners pay 40% of their share of
                 the cost charged up front with the remainder
                 payable over five years.
Social
Community    17. Orangi Pilot Project, Pakistan (1980): The Orangi   The low-cost house building program continuous          Collaborating with existing leadership: In order to
driven           Pilot Project (OPP) was rethinking urban            research and redesign program: the program              avoid provoking hostility of the existing leadership at
approaches       development through community driven                conducts research to best design loans and              project sites, they were also given assigned roles –
                 approach to identify and select infrastructure      improvements. The implementation phase carries          mainly to function at the larger neighborhood level.
                 investments. OPP mobilized contributions (time      out personnel training to utilize newer technologies.
                 and cash) from low-income settlement on the         Community-based project generates social
                 periphery of Karachi to implement various           development: OPP programs mitigated increasing
                 programs ranging from low-cost sanitation, low-     social conflict by mobilizing community residents
                 cost housing (launched 1986), basic health and      and democratizing local representation through
                 family-planning programs, fostering small family    voicing more clearly people’s demands on what
                 enterprises, etc.                                   used to be self-appointed and exploitative leaders.
             18. Baan Mankong, Thailand (2002): Community            Empowered slum communities and networks:                Identification and selection of the investment needs
                 Organization Development Institute (CODI) was       Playing a key role at the center of the process of      by the community is crucial: Even with the largely
                 established to continue and extend the work of      developing a long-term and comprehensive solution       community-driven process, the outside assistance
                 the Urban Community Development Office              to land and housing problems, the poor                  can still heavily influence key decisions to be made by
                 (UCDO), who provided loans to organized low-        communities are naturally increase their capacity to    the community. Hence balancing the engagement of
                 income urban communities. Under the name of         interact with municipalities, professionals, and        outside professional help needs careful management.
                 ‘Baan Mankong’ or ‘secure housing’ program,         NGOs.

                                                                                                                                                                                 56
                        problems of poor-quality housing and threat of              Systemic solution to low-income housing:              Risk of elite capture: Within the communities, there
                        eviction are being addressed. Once the plans are            Institutionalizing the welfare process from an ad-hoc are gradations of relatively rich and very poor. In
                        finalized by the community, CODI channels                   process has integrate the poor community housing order to ensure that everyone in the community is
                        government-financed infrastructure subsidies and            needs into the larger city’s development.             able to voice their concerns fairly, the community
                        housing loans directly to the communities who                                                                     engagement process also needs supervision.
                        plan, implement, and manage the budget
                        themselves.
                                                                    Local groups are the primary doers: The community
                    19. Asian Coalition for Community Action (ACCA), 19
                                                                    groups of residents carry out and contribute
                        Asian countries (2008): The Coalition is launched
                                                                    significantly to citywide surveying, saving,
                        by the Asian Coalition for Housing Rights (ACHR),
                                                                    partnership-building, as well as developing and
                        with the goal of integrate community groups as
                                                                    implementing small upgrading projects.
                        the primary doers in slum upgrading. ACCA relies
                        on large-scale change process led by people.Playing the central role leads to ‘unlocking’ the
                                                                    power of people: Even with modest amount of
                                                                    resources, communities planning and using the
                                                                    funds, and negotiating with other actors lead to
                                                                    strengthening of their capacity.
              20. National Community Empowerment Program            In order to sustain social funds, some communities                            Participatory development in urban areas is more
                  (PNPM) in Urban Areas, Indonesia15 (1999): The have created economic activities: As the funds can                               challenging but offers more opportunities than in
                  largest CDD program in the world covers all urban be used in numerous types of activities, the                                  rural areas: The PNPM offers a chance to evaluation
                  wards and rural villages in Indonesia. Targeting  communities slowly build up the knowledge and                                 CDD impact in urban versus rural context. Findings
                  the urban poor, participatory planning elements capacity to utilize the fund for different purposes. In                         reveal that participatory development is more
                  are enhanced as part of the objectives to provide the cases that economic activities are created, the                           difficult in cities due to the less time that is available
                  basic services and socio-economic development profits from the activity go to the poorest.                                      for the urban population to participate. However, the
                  programs. Urban wards are provided grants to co-                                                                                urban community tends to have more capacity to
                  finance the community development plans that                                                                                    contribute as they are more forthcoming, open, and
                  they identified. The grant can support                                                                                          diverse.
                  infrastructure but also income generating
                  activities and social programs to benefit the
                  poorest.
Participation 21. Participative Budget in Porto Alegre, Brazil      Participative democracy is exercised: City was                                Different priorities among citizens: Priorities from
of the            (1989): The system was introduced in Porto        divided into sections based on various criteria                               the citizens of poor regions versus those from more
marginalized      Alegre with initiatives led by the federation of  including geographical and social descriptions. This                          affluent areas differed significantly. These
                  local neighborhood associations, against the      organization enabled citizens and entities linked to                          discrepancies are not easy to resolve.
                  financial and administrative unbalance of         specific issues to voice their concerns on the issues                         Passivity in the citizens: The political culture and
                  municipal spending. Residential neighborhoods identified, which included city organization and                                  citizen participation affects much of the turnout and
                  either directly express their choices on local    urban development, transport and circulation,                                 true level of citizen engagement. In the case of Porto
                  priorities for municipal investment or elect      health and social care, education, culture, leisure                           Alegre, passivity was a barrier as were the lack of
                  delegates to make these choices. Formal           and financial development and tax planning.


15
     World Bank. Forthcoming 2015b. Participatory and Community Driven Development in Urban Areas: Lessons from World Bank Case Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank
                                                                                                                                                                                                         57
                 budgetary responsibility remains with elected                                                                 previous experience in the citizens in debating
                 representatives who respond to the identified                                                                 important and technical issues.
                 priorities.
             22. Mumbai Railway Upgrading Resettlement, India Promoting particular group’s leadership: Women
                 (1999): Nearly 32,000 households lived in shacks were particularly encouraged to take the lead in
                 next to the tracks at high risk and without water various functions, including managing savings and
                 and sanitation, and the railway upgrading project credits, developing skills to interact with local
                 required removal of informal settlements that        authorities, and getting involved in house and
                 were within touching distance of the trains.         settlement design.
                 Discussions within the Railway Slum Dwellers’        Employing citizens for upgrading: The construction
                 Federation (RSDF) – to which most households         work of upgrading presented opportunities to hire
                 along the railway tracks belonged – had actually both unskilled and skilled community members.
                 shown that most families wanted to move if they Generation of systematic data: The participatory
                 could get a home with secure tenure in an            process allowed collection of data and creation of
                 appropriate location. The National Slum Dwellers detailed cadastral maps showing encroachments at
                 Federation of India provided organizational          each location along the rail system. Having
                 resource (to support the railway slum dwellers       developed this information was a source of power
                 federation) to match the state contribution of       and credibility to work with State entities as well as
                 land and finance. A relocation program was           external aid and development organizations.
                 developed as part of a scheme to improve the rail
                 network.
Rights based 23. Brazil City Statute (2001): The City Statute of      Not only rights to land and housing but also to          Objectives hard to implement: spatial organization
approach         Brazil provides the conceptual and regulatory        broader list of rights: the legal order for collective   and social inclusion have been difficult to implement
                 framework where legal order to regulate the          rights on land use and development has put forward       due to the still lacking support in the legal-
                 process of urban land use and development            the principle of wide participation, decentralization    institutional and legal-administrative order in force.
                 declares rights to urban planning, social right to of decision-making, strengthening relation between         Nominally recognized rights have not been properly
                 housing, right to capture surplus value and the      actors to overcome social and environmental              enforced as the process, instruments, and
                 right to regularization of informal settlements.     problems.                                                mechanisms to govern the order are lacking.
             24. Right to housing and sanitation, Kenya16 (2010): Rights based approach to stem proliferation of               Appropriate and complementary legislations need
                 Constitution of Kenya 2010 states that all people slums: The 2010 National Policy on Human Rights             to be in place: while the new constitution allows
                 have the right to accessible and adequate housing called for measures to upgrade slums and also               claims on the violation of the right to adequate
                 and to reasonable standards of sanitation; and       provide measures to stem their growth.                   housing, accessible and affordable legal advice and
                 describes forced eviction as frequently resulting in Legal framework for internally displaced persons         efficient administration of justice is essential.
                 violation of other human rights.                     (IDPs): The Policy also adopts the stance that           Moreover, in the case of Kenya, the State did not
                                                                      protection and assistance of IDPs need to be             always make information available to individuals.
                                                                      developed into a legal framework.                        Without obligation to provide information on the
                                                                                                                               justification for an adverse decision on an individual’s
                                                                                                                               right to housing, the people who were being affected
                                                                                                                               did not have ways to challenge the decisions.


16
     Weru, Jane (2014). 'Too Pressed To Wait: A Retouch on Women and Sanitation', unpublished.
                                                                                                                                                                                    58
                    25. Cebu ensuring livelihood security, the Philippines Participatory governance mechanism championed: Change in the city government poses a threat to
                        (1992): Threatened with expulsion from the city Through the advocacy work, the vendors association continuity: Strong and consistent advocacy work has
                        center, vendors’ associations in Cebu City formed together with the NGOs engaged in a constructive been required by the NGOs in order to withstand the
                        a common platform to ensure livelihood security. negotiation with the city government.                    whims of changes in the political administration.
                        The city authorities legalized trading in some
                        areas of the city upon the vendors’ compliance
                        with certain guidelines regarding vending hours,
                        number, size and type of structures or stalls, and
                        sanitation. The authorities shifted to an agreed
                        policy that demolitions of vendor stalls would only
                        be considered following complaints from other
                        users.
Crime and           26. Barrio Ciudad, Honduras (2005-2013)17, Inner City Communities are re-invigorated and re-integrated Political cycle disrupts continuity of efforts by the
Violence                Basic Services for the Poor, Jamaica (2006-2013): into the broader society: As part of the effort to      municipalities and neighborhoods: Because it is
Prevention              These World Bank projects utilized simple physical foster security, community capacity enhancement to important to maintain social cohesion and trust in the
                        solutions such as better lighting in public spaces prevent crime and violence was also implemented. participating communities to prevent crime and
                        around slums to reduce crime and violence. The Education and employment programs and other                violence, significant importance is given to the
                        projects identified factors enabling criminal       vocational training helped the residents’ activity in continuity of financial resources as well as strategic
                        activities and violence: certain physical           the economy.                                          partnership. When election cycles interrupt resource
                        characteristics of the communities as well as the Small-scale infrastructure adjustments enhanced management and community organizations, risks of
                        limited human and social capital development. In sense of security: New construction to address the disrupting social cohesion and trust building increase.
                        order to tackle these factors, Crime Prevention     physical characteristics such as barricading fences Lack of previous experience can hamper effectively
                        through Environmental Design (CPTED) approach and narrow unpaved roads not only provided better participation: Most communities as well as local
                        was utilized by engaging the community through access and connection of networks, but also                agencies do not have enough prior experience.
                        the process.                                        increased sense of safety.
Economic
Access to           27. Internally Displaced Persons Project, Albania                   Financial credits were accompanied by skill training Lacking specialized economic activity that is
credit and              (1995-1999): The World Bank project aimed at                    and technology: Urban credit clientele consisted of embedded in the community: The microcredit is
finance                 promoting microenterprises, with a component                    entrepreneurs, unemployed, employed (salaried), effective in building generic entrepreneurship skills
                        on Small-Scale Credit and Microenterprise                       and pensioners. Loans were used for small trade,     and foundations; however, the microcredits were not
                        Support that tested sustainable methods of                      services, and production. The activities financed    effective in building a local economic program that
                        providing small credit to potential micro-                      ranged from kiosks and street venders to beauty      can be nurtured by the community for the longer
                        entrepreneurs.                                                  shops, car washes, and furniture makers. Technical term.
                                                                                        and business advice, know-how, and new methods
                                                                                        of supply and marketing were provided as well.
Cash Transfer 28. Oportunidades, Mexico (1997): Reaching 5                              Not only improvements in individuals households, In urban areas, cash transfer programs need to
                  million households, this cash transfer program                        but collective benefits for the society: At the      ensure that there is enough supply for the demand:
                  aims to improve child nutrition, health, and                          household level, the monitoring of the               Oportunidades shoed relatively small impact in urban


17
     World Bank, Bairro Ciudad, Honduras and Inner City Basic Services for the Poor, Project Documents


                                                                                                                                                                                              59
                         education to reduce poverty and develop human Oportunidades impact finds Increased food                      areas compared to the rural areas. One of the
                         capital. As a conditional cash transfer program, it consumption and long-term consumption.                   reasons behind this was the boosted demand that
                         requires health checkups for all in the household                                                            could not be met with the lagging supply of schools
                         with conditions regarding completion of certain                                                              and clinics.
                         levels of education.                                                                                         One general risk in cash transfer is the short term
                                                                                                                                      consumption of the cash and the lack of investment
                                                                                                                                      for large and longer term returns: A general risk in
                                                                                                                                      cash transfer programs is that the poorer recipients
                                                                                                                                      are typically expected to consumer more of the cash
                                                                                                                                      relative to wealthier individuals. This leads to ending
                                                                                                                                      of the poverty cycle more difficult.
Connecting to 29. Job Access Reverse Commute Program, United                         Locally tailored trips to serve the low income   Scale is necessary: Still, massive transit expansion
jobs              States (2000):The program aims to help                             population traveling to jobs                     and land use policies are needed to concentrate job
                  communities design locally tailored public transit-                                                                 growth near existing transit corridors.
                  human services transportation plans to meet the
                  needs of low-income population who must travel
                  long distance with odd hours and complicated
                  work trip routs.
              30. Medellin Metrocables, Colombia (2004): The          Integrating the poor to other parts of the city for Poor connection to city-wide institutions and
                  municipal government introduced measures to         jobs: The economic implications of connecting low markets: without anchoring effect s of connecting
                  reduce spatial segregation, including a cable-      income areas to other parts of the city are multiple. institutionally, the physical connection has limits the
                  propelled transit system (gondola) that was         The cable cars contribute to connecting the poor in impact restricted to small businesses that has low
                  integrated into conventional public transport       isolated areas to other parts of the city for jobs by sustainability or prospects for expansion.
                  system of the city.                                 reducing travel time.
                                                                      Economic activities transpiring around the cable
                                                                      cars: Small economic activities are spurred with
                                                                      increased restaurants, bars, etc., while the cable
                                                                      cars also attract tourists to enjoy the city’s best
                                                                      views.
Building skills 31. Bel Group on building skills, Vietnam18 (2013):   Street vendors build capacity and access credit: The
                    Commitment to research into understanding the partnership focused strongly on building skills of the
                    informal networks, institutions, routines and     street vendors; capacity building offered tailored
                    stakeholders led the private company Bel Group training for street vendors, accessing credit and
                    to devise an approach to build and reinforce      market, and integrating into formal sector. In its first
                    community while also disseminating its product. year, 60 street vendors graduated with results of
                    The company recognized informal sector and        increasing their revenue by 15% or more 3 months
                    street vendors as a route for inclusive business. after the completion of the training.
                    With more street vendors than formal shops in
                    many emerging countries, the company went


18
     http://sunbusinessnetwork.org/casestudy/bel-group-developing-innovating-models-in-vietnam/
                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                      about creating a community and building a
                      sustainable inclusive business.
Local             32. Sustainable Communities Initiative on Economic                 Economic and workforce development places                        Earlier Initiative focusing on housing,
economic              Resilience, United States (2014~): Communities                 priority on investing in partnerships, long-term                 transportation, and environment was not enough:
development           funded under Sustainable Communities Initiative                development and reinvestment: Communities                        Evaluation of the efforts to increase economic
strategies            (which began first in 2009) are incorporating                  receiving funds are creating master plans to identify            resilience through the Initiative is too early to assess.
                      “economic resilience” after the first five years of            and capitalize on regional assets.                               In the meantime, it was learned from the first five
                      Initiative. The new focus on integration economic                                                                               years of the Sustainable Communities Initiative that
                      resilience now encompasses more equitable                                                                                       physical intervention alone needed to be
                      access to jobs, reducing consumer costs on                                                                                      accompanied by economic development, schools,
                      housing, transport, and energy.                                                                                                 public safety and other issues.

Note: The main source of these past experience is four background notes commissioned as part of Inclusive Cities Programmatic Approach. Most of these past approaches and experiences have been discussed in detail in
background notes. The sources/references for past experiences that are not mentioned in background notes, have been mentioned.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    61
Annex 3: Fifty Years of Lessons: An Abridged History*

The 1950s and 1960s: Planned cities collide with unplanned growth; the poor see cities as
opportunities, but find slums and official indifference.
Two parallel worlds emerged – formal and informal – and clashed around the dilemma of housing.
Governments bulldozed slums and built expensive housing projects. The poor built for themselves and
began to organise for change. In a few places like Peru, Indonesia, and Brazil, slum dwellers mobilised
political power to seek improvements to their communities, creating the first examples of slum
upgrading.

Lessons:

What did not work and should be avoided:
 Slum demolition, forced evictions, mass relocations;
 High-rise public housing blocks, public rental housing;
 Government-provided housing.
What did work:
 Indonesia’s home-grown upgrading took root;
 Peru’s organised squatter invasions and Brazil’s favela movement gained political recognition;
 Housing theories emerged.
The 1970s: Slums reach the political agenda; alternatives to public housing are tested. Some
international development agencies merge official policy and informal practice. Learning by doing
characterises agency and NGO efforts.
Slum communities, with the support of NGOs, developed better ways of building for themselves. Some
international agencies applied pressure to alter policies. The Tondo Foreshore project, a very large
upgrading programme with a land development component in the Philippines, was financed conditioned
on the government’s agreement to stop slum eradication and forced resettlement.

Lessons:
 Upgrading slums is a viable, low-cost, and effective way to help the urban poor solve their shelter
     needs;
 Land and services provision are also viable and necessary to meet demand;
 Centralised implementation is imperfect, and local agencies are weak;
 Land regularisation issues are a stumbling block.
A half century of experience has demonstrated many ways to successfully upgrade slum communities.
Each community has unique conditions, needs, priorities, and potential, so no single model for
upgrading fits all. On the contrary, each offers new lessons, and the thousands of upgraded communities
serve as the foundation for understanding how to scale up. Three role players in strategic upgrading –
slum dwellers with their NGO intermediaries, governments, and international development agencies –
influenced practice, just as each decade’s circumstances shaped outcomes.




                                                                                                      62
The 1980s: First pilots yield success; integrated projects develop; first large-scale upgrading begins.
Land tenure revealed as a major issue. Local NGOs take on the task of upgrading. Decentralisation
takes hold.
Indonesia’s Kampung Improvement Programme demonstrated a citywide approach, while El Salvador
and Madras (Chennai, India) Sites and Services focused on slum mitigation by supplying land and
services. Sri Lanka launched its Million Houses Programme, with the government providing support to
people building and improving their own houses. Early theories (e.g., titled land for mortgages)
frequently proved too cumbersome, costly, and unnecessary, and were dropped. Slum dwellers and
NGOs pointed to the need to include communities in project decisions and add broader development
objectives. International agencies increased – but then decreased – support for upgrading. A few
countries, such as Ghana, Tunisia, Senegal, and Morocco, asked aid agencies to continue their support
for slum upgrading.

Lessons:
 Upgrading is a process. Everything need not be done at once: start with the basic infrastructure and
    services – little will happen as long as water is unsafe, open sewers threaten public health, or
    children have no safe places to play;
 Slum communities have more at stake and should have decision-making roles because they:
        o Know their community and issues;
        o Have to live with the results;
        o Can, want, and have a right to participate; and
        o Can and will pay for affordable improvements of their choosing.
 Upgrading is worthwhile, producing:
        o Equity, which benefits both poor and other citizens alike by improving health, security,
            productivity, and so forth;
        o Legal rights: right of the poor to basic services and citizenship; and
        o Political gains: social stability and responsiveness from politicians.
The 1990s: Civil society and NGOs are stronger; community involvement increases; and secure
tenure is more widely recognised as key. Necessity of upgrading is widely accepted, and slum
prevention is on the agenda.
International agencies and governments moved to large-scale upgrading. Programmes in Jordan,
Morocco, and Tunisia began to assume a national scope, but land and local government issues persisted
in slowing progress. The City Summit in Istanbul produced the Habitat Agenda, but failed to establish a
global target. But in September 2000, the ‘Cities without Slums’ action plan was incorporated into the
Millennium Declaration, establishing both a global target and the framework for a global slum upgrading
agenda.

Conclusion: the stakes are getting higher
In the last 50 years the estimated global population living in slums rose from 35 million to almost 924
million. At the same time many countries saw dramatic improvements in governance. Local
governments became more powerful and responsive in providing services and better able to hear their
citizens, and NGOs organised to work more effectively with governments. Slum communities developed




                                                                                                        63
politically and became willing and able to pay for services. And in an increasing number of countries
politicians are responding to the increasing voting power of poor communities.

Yet . . .
Slums are growing faster than the response, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa and South and Southeast
Asia. Urban poverty is increasing, while urban environmental degradation is creating severe public
health hazards. Security and safety have emerged as high priorities for slum dwellers and cities, as crime
and violence escalate. Political will for nationwide slum upgrading strategies is becoming a central
development issue.

Source: Cities Alliance Annual Report 2003




                                                                                                        64
Annex 4: Review of World Bank Projects

A series of portfolio reviews were used to finally arrive at a set of projects that were then closely
analyzed to qualitatively examine typical components of slum upgrading projects. The first set of
portfolio review that was used include “Thirty Years of World Bank Shelter Lending” by R. Buckley and J.
Kalarickal, which itself spans from 1972 to 2005. Another portfolio review was done in 2014 by
extending the portfolio review done from 1972-2005 to include the period up to 2013. The extended
portfolio review up to 2013 highlights a resurgence of slum upgrading operations in the last decade after
a decline in the 1980s and 1990s. The total lending for slum upgrading activities from 1972-2013 totaled
US$2.5 billion, which is accounting for about 13% of the overall housing lending portfolio. This also
reflects very low investment in slum upgrading projects with average annual investment of around $100
million.

          Chart Showing Amounts Invested in Housing Project Components from 2000-2013


                         Cumulated Amount (million US$)
                                   Slum
                                 Upgrading,
                                   1429                           Disaster Relief,
                                                                       1876

                          Sites and
                         Services, 10

                                                                       Green Building,
                                                                            100
                       Housing Policy,
                           1724

                                                                 Housing
                                                              Finance, 2116

As part of the inclusive cities paper, a further review of project was undertaken. The review takes a
closer look at the set of closed projects from 2000 to 2014 that include slum upgrading components.
These closed projects were reviewed by examining the breakdown of the subcomponents under slum
upgrading according to their type of impact (physical, social, or economic). The subset comprises 19
projects, which are analyzed by subcomponents under their slum upgrading component. Across the 19
projects there are 85 subcomponents; each subcomponent was categorized as one of the below six
types of intervention:

   [P] Physical: delivering or improving basic services, namely water sources, sanitation, roads, waste
    collection, and electricity.
   [S] Social: promoting social inclusion such as improving cohesion, empowering community, raising
    awareness about health, involving education and communication campaigns, etc.




                                                                                                           65
   [E] Economic: promoting economic opportunities– for example providing microcredit for economic
    activities, training in microfinance management, creating professional microfinance organizations,
    etc.
   [P/S] Physical/Social: delivering physical infrastructure with social functions – for example
    construction of schools, cultural and religious centers, public parks, etc.
   [P/E] Physical/Economic: delivering infrastructure in support of economic development,
    microfinance for housing improvement, etc.
   [O] Other: promoting institutional capacities, preparing plans, project management, policy reform,
    project administration, etc.

           Distribution of Sub-component                      Distribution of Sub-component
                 Categories, by Count                           Categories, by Investment

                                                                        O
                                                                   P/E 12%
                                   P
                O                                                  7%
                                  35%
               40%
                                                                P/S
                                                                15%
                                                                   E                  P
                                S                                                    64%
                             E 8%                                 1% S
                     P/E
                     4% P/S 2%                                       1%
                         11%


The pie charts above, representing the distribution of subcomponents under slum upgrading, show that
with the exception of project subcomponent that supports project management (Other), those focusing
on physical improvement or delivery of essential services dominated the count and the investment
proportions. This hints that slum upgrading agenda have been thus far dominated by physical
infrastructure improvement, often without investing in social or economic aspects of the development.
Summary table provide description of each subcomponent and the investment amount allocated in the
19 projects.

Most projects include subcomponents of physical upgrading and project management (Other). The
projects of interest for this review are the projects including subcomponents on social and economic. On
the social front, subcomponents were mainly allocation of investment for launching public awareness
campaigns. On economic subcomponents, the two instances are providing support to local SMEs, which
was dropped during the course of project implementation, providing microcredit for economic activities,
and providing small grants to create marketplace facility.




                                                                                                     66
                                                                                                   Components
  ID    Project Name Year ICR IEG    Total             P                    P/S                    P/E                  S                 E                      O
                                     Cost
                                     (m$)       Description     %     Description     %      Description    %     Description   %   Description   %      Description        %
                                           Districts sewerage,
                                                                                                                                                      Institutional
                                           landfill,
                                                                                                                                                      development
          Zhejiang                         wastewater
                                                                  Cultural heritage                                                                   (tourism
            Urban                          services,
                    2004                                          sites :                                                                             development,
P066955 Environment      S MS        528.3 roads and bridges 80                       14                                                                                    6
                    2011                                          museum, leisure                                                                     community
           Project                         infrastructure,
                                                                  space, temple                                                                       participation,
           (China)                         clean-up of a lake,
                                                                                                                                                      heritage
                                           housing in historic
                                                                                                                                                      conservation)
                                           center
                                           Wastewater, solid
          Shanghai                                                                                                                                    Institutional
                                           waste,
            Urban                                                                                                                                     strengthening,
                    2003                   infrastructure,
P070191 Environment      S MS        485.5                     99                                                                                     staff training        1
                    2010                   resettlements,
           Project                                                                                                                                    (plan, policy,
                                           water resources
           (China)                                                                                                                                    procedure)
                                           protection
                                                                                           Tertiary
          DA NANG                                                                          Infrastructure,
                                           Drainage,                                                                                                  Capacity Building
            Priority                                                                       Resettlement,
                       2008    IEG         wastewater,                                                                                                Project,
P086508 Infrastructure      MS       204.2                      81                         Housing;          18                                                             1
                       2013     NF         urban roads and                                                                                            Implementation
         Investment                                                                        Micro-finance for
                                           bridges                                                                                                    Support
          (Vietnam)                                                                        housing
                                                                                           improvement

                                                                                                                                                      Land-tenure:
                                                                                                                                                      methodologies,
                                             Neighborhood:                                                                                             procedures;
                                             water supply,                                                                                            Engineering,
                                             sanitation,                                                                                              Management
         Kabul Urban                         solid waste, access                                                                                      Support for the
        Reconstructio 2005                   roads, hill-side                                                                                         Borrower’s Urban
P083919                    MS MS     33.8                        71                                                                                                       29
          n Project   2011                   steps,                                                                                                   Agencies;
        (Afghanistan)                        drainage,                                                                                                Capacity Building
                                             street lighting ,                                                                                        for Kabul
                                             roads, traffic                                                                                           Municipality;
                                             management                                                                                               Preparation of
                                                                                                                                                      plans, future urban
                                                                                                                                                      project


                                                                                                                                                                       67
                                                                                                  Components
  ID    Project Name Year ICR IEG    Total            P                      P/S                  P/E                     S                 E                     O
                                     Cost
                                     (m$)       Description    %       Description     %     Description   %      Description   %     Description   %      Description        %

           Urban                                                                                                                                        Technical
                                             Design,
        Upgrading and                                                                                                                                   assistance and
                      2004                   implementation
P073433   Housing          U   U     39.5                      96                                                                                       implementation        4
                      2009                   upgrading program
           Reform                                                                                                                                       for housing sector
                                             in 5 cities
            (Iran)                                                                                                                                      reforms

                                                                    3 cities: access to
                                                                    basic services,
                                                                    finance social                                                                      Capacity building
                                                                    infrastructure for                                                                  for governmental
         Local Urban
                                                                    local eco.                                                                          institutions
        Infrastructure
                       2008    IEG                                  development                                                                         and private sector,
P095949 Development         MS       21.6                                               87                                                                                  13
                       2013     NF                                  (central                                                                            support to
              SIL
                                                                    warehouses,                                                                         implementation,
            (Niger)
                                                                    markets,                                                                            monitoring and
                                                                    classrooms,                                                                         evaluation
                                                                    health center,
                                                                    area for prayer)



                                                                 Basic municipal
                                                                 infrastructure in
                                                                 7 cities:                                                                              Capacity building,
                                                                 water supply,                                                                          training,
                                                                 roads, footpaths,                                                                      one city
         Community                                               drainage, power,                              HIV/AIDS                                 development
                                           Basic municipal
        Based Urban 2002                                         sanitation, solid                             awareness                                strategy,
P069901                  MS MS       137.5 infrastructure     58                      28                                        0.2                                        14
        Development 2011                                         waste, street                                 campaign on                              knowledge sharing
                                           in 8 cities
          (Nigeria)                                              lighting,                                     project sites                            networks,
                                                                 slaughterhouses,                                                                       implementation
                                                                 markets,                                                                               support, project
                                                                 recreational                                                                           preparation
                                                                 facilities, schools,
                                                                 and clinics



                                                                                                                                                                         68
                                                                                                  Components
  ID    Project Name Year ICR IEG    Total             P                       P/S                P/E                       S                 E                    O
                                     Cost
                                     (m$)       Description      %      Description     %    Description   %      Description      %    Description   %      Description        %
                                                                     Infrastructure,
                                                                     drainage with                             Consultations
                                                                     highest priority                          around specific
                                                                     civil works                               infrastructure,
           Lagos
                                                                     investments,                              communication to
        Metropolitan                                                                                                                                      Public governance,
                     2007 M IEG                                      Solid waste,                              stake-holders on
P071340 Development                  136.9                                              89                                          9                     capacity building, 2
                     2013 U NF                                       roads;                                    conflict resolution,
        & Governance                                                                                                                                      training
                                                                     HIV/AIDS                                  mediation centers,
          (Nigeria)
                                                                     campaign,                                 office of public
                                                                     schools, health                           defender, leader's
                                                                     centers,                                  training
                                                                     street lighting
                                                                                                                                                        Capacity building
                                                                                                                                                        focus on
                                             Community-based
                                                                                                                                                        infrastructure
                                             infrastructures
             Local                                                                                                                                      and maintenance
                                             upgrading in low                                                  Support to            Support to
        Infrastructure                                                                                                                                  (municipalities,
                       2006                  income                                                            HIV/AIDS              of local SMEs
P082812 Development         MS MS    26.3                      91                                                                  3                  1 ministry,             5
                       2011                  settlements,                                                      prevention            (Dropped
              SIL                                                                                                                                       communities);
                                             preparation of                                                    programs              during the
           (Gabon)                                                                                                                                      support to the
                                             neighborhood                                                                            project)
                                                                                                                                                        reform of public
                                             development plans
                                                                                                                                                        infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                        management
                                                                                                                                                        Institutional
                                                                     Infrastructure in
                                                                                                                                                        capacity building,
                                                                    3 cities:
                                                                                                                                                        project
                                                                    roads, bus station,
                                             Neighborhood                                                                                               management,
                                                                    youth center,
            Urban                            upgrading; Pilot                                                                                           training (city,
                                                                    erosion
        Infrastructure                       the establishment                                                                                          district, and sector
                                                                    protection,
            & City     2006    IEG           of a development                                                                                           staff),
P060005                     HS       19.4                        10 administration      71                                                                                   19
        Management 2009         NF           zone (33ha) for low                                                                                        socio-economic
                                                                    buildings,
             APL                             income dwellers                                                                                            impact
                                                                    schools,
          (Rwanda)                           (define and test                                                                                           assessment,
                                                                    water source in a
                                             new practices)                                                                                             pilot “street
                                                                    rural area,
                                                                                                                                                        addressing”
                                                                    health center,
                                                                                                                                                        operation in one
                                                                    multi-purpose hall
                                                                                                                                                        neighborhood.

                                                                                                                                                                           69
                                                                                                   Components
  ID   Project Name Year ICR IEG    Total              P                    P/S                    P/E                   S                  E                     O
                                    Cost
                                    (m$)        Description    %       Description    %       Description    %     Description   %    Description   %      Description        %
                                                                                                                                                        capacity
                                                                                                                                                        Strengthening of
                                                                                                                                                        Prime Minister
                                                                    Dar es Salaam,
                                                                                                                                                        Office,
                                                                    unplanned areas:
                                                                                                                                                        Support for Local
                                                                    community-driven
                                                                                                                                                        Government
                                                                    infrastructure
            Local                                                                                                                                       Capital
                                                                    upgrading
        Government 2005                                                                                                                                 Development
P070736                  MS MS      139                             program,         12                                                                                    88
        Support SIL 2012                                                                                                                                Grant System,
                                                                    Local Revenue
         (Tanzania)                                                                                                                                     Local needs
                                                                    Enhancement,
                                                                                                                                                        determined
                                                                    O&M
                                                                                                                                                        through a
                                                                    Enhancement
                                                                                                                                                        participatory
                                                                    Program
                                                                                                                                                        planning&
                                                                                                                                                        budgetary
                                                                                                                                                        processes
                                                                                                                                                        Institutional
                                                                                                                                                        Strengthening,
                                                                                                                                                        (central agencies,
                                                                                                                                                        Ministry, Local
                                            Drainage, solid
            Urban                                                                                                                                       Governments),
                                            waste, roads,
        Environmental 2004    IEG                                   Sanitation with                                                                     Malaria vector
P082373                    MS       67.6    water supply,      73                     13                                                                                   14
         Sanitation 2 2012     NF                                   hygiene education                                                                   control and
                                            sanitation,
           (Ghana)                                                                                                                                      HIV/AIDS
                                            street lightning
                                                                                                                                                        prevention,
                                                                                                                                                        House numbering,
                                                                                                                                                        Communications
                                                                                                                                                        strategy
                                                                                           Provision of basic
                                                                                           urban                                                       Institutional and
                                                                                           infrastructure                                              capacity building,
           Urban                                                                                                                     Microcredit
                                                                                           in main cities,                                             auditing,
        Development 2002    IEG                                                                                                      for mainly
P069095                   S         147                                                    construction       66                                    14 monitoring,            20
          Project    2012    NF                                                                                                      economic
                                                                                           in support of                                               operating costs
        (Mauritania)                                                                                                                 activities
                                                                                           economic dev.,                                              of implementing
                                                                                           resettlement                                                agencies
                                                                                           grants

                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                                              Components
  ID    Project Name Year ICR IEG    Total              P                  P/S                P/E                    S                  E                     O
                                     Cost
                                     (m$)        Description   %     Description    %    Description   %      Description     %   Description   %      Description        %

                                                                  Solid waste                                                                       Policy and
             Brasilia                                             pickers,                                                                          Institutional
        Environmental                                             community                                                                         Development,
                        2006                 Water Resources
P089440 -ly Sustainable      U   U   115.9                     28 participation,    61                                                              Project               11
                        2011                 Protection
             Project                                              civil works and                                                                   management,
             (Brazil)                                             participatory                                                                     monitoring,
                                                                  activities                                                                        evaluation

                                                                                                                                                    Municipal policies
                                                                                                                                                    (planning, env),
                                                                                                                                                    Capacity
                                                                                                                                                    Strengthening,
                                                                                                                                                    information
                                                                                                                                                    system for
         Integrated                          Municipal                                                                                              institutional and
          Municipal                          Infrastructure,                                                                                        public control,
                      2005
P082328 Project-Betim      S MS      95.6    Urban             90                                                                                   basic infra        10
                      2009
         Municipality                        Environmental                                                                                          cadastre, water
           (Brazil)*                         Rehabilitation                                                                                         resources quality
                                                                                                                                                    monitoring,
                                                                                                                                                    environmental
                                                                                                                                                    Education
                                                                                                                                                    Program,
                                                                                                                                                    creation of a
                                                                                                                                                    project mgmt unit
                                           Beberibe River
                                           Basin: parks, roads
                                                                                                           Development of
                                           and accesses,
                                                                                                           social outreach
                                           drainage, sewage;
        Recife Urban                                                                                       and community                            Project
                                           water and
         Upgrading 2003                                                                                    participation                            management,
P049265                   MS MS      116.4 sanitation,         83                                                             4                                           13
           Project   2011                                                                                  activities,                              implementation
                                           household
          (Brazil)*                                                                                        environmental                            and coordination
                                           connections,
                                                                                                           education to the
                                           secondary roads,
                                                                                                           communities
                                           drainage, public
                                           lightning

                                                                                                                                                                     71
                                                                                                    Components
  ID    Project Name Year ICR IEG      Total             P                   P/S                    P/E                     S                     E                    O
                                       Cost
                                       (m$)       Description     %    Description    %        Description    %      Description    %      Description   %      Description        %
                                               Neighborhood
                                                                                                                                                             Capacity building
                                               Upgrading:
                                                                                                                                                             (municipalities and
                                               land titling,
                                                                                                                                                             neighborhood
                                               water & sanitation
                                                                                                                                                             organizations) for
                                               connections,
         (CRL) Barrio-                                                                                            Urban Crime                                participatory
                         2006    IEG           drainage, access
P088319 Ciudad Project        MS       16.6                       65                                              and Violence      31                       planning and        4
                         2013     NF           roads, recreation
         (Honduras)                                                                                               Prevention                                 execution of urban
                                               centers, parks,
                                                                                                                                                             upgrading,
                                               community
                                                                                                                                                             for commercial
                                               facilities, street
                                                                                                                                                             borrowing and
                                               lighting, and risk
                                                                                                                                                             debt management
                                               mitigation
                                                                    Tourism Capacity                                                                         Strategic Planning,
                                                                    Building,                                                                                Municipal Capacity
          Vilcanota                            Solid waste,         Infrastructure                                                                           Building,
                                                                                                                                          Demand-
            Valley                             engineering,         Development:                                                                             municipal and
                                                                                                                                          driven
        Rehabilitation                         environmental        road, rail bypass,                                                                       regional GIS;
                       2005 M                                                                                                             development
P082625       &                   U    8.86    impact            21 bridges, visitor   28                                                                 10 Project             41
                       2011 U                                                                                                             marketplace
        Management                             assessments,         services in the                                                                          Management
                                                                                                                                          facility (i.e.,
           Project                             urban                touristic valley,                                                                        support
                                                                                                                                          small grants)
           (Peru)*                             infrastructure       historic                                                                                 supervision,
                                                                    preservation,                                                                            monitoring and
                                                                    cultural education                                                                       project auditing
                                                                                                                 Public safety
                                                                                            Micro-Financial
                                                                                                                 enhancement,
                                                                                            services: small
                                                                                                                 capacity building
                                                                                            and medium-
                                                                                                                 assistance in areas
                                                                                            sized businesses,
          Inner City                                                                                             related to crime
                                                                                            incremental
        Basic Services                                                                                           and violence
                       2006   IEG                                                           housing                                                          Project
P091299 for the Poor        S          34.11                                                                  63 prevention:         16                                            21
                       2013    NF                                                           improvements,                                                    management
            Project                                                                                              youth education
                                                                                            training of
          (Jamaica)                                                                                              and recreation
                                                                                            financial
                                                                                                                 programs, social
                                                                                            institutions;
                                                                                                                 marketing, public
                                                                                            Land tenure
                                                                                                                 awareness
                                                                                            regularization
                                                                                                                 campaigns



                                                                                                                                                                              72
Note:
P=Physical Components; P/S=Physical/Social Components; P/E=Physical/Economic Components; S=Social Component; E=Economic Component; O=Overall Component (Capacity Building, Project Management, etc)
ID = Project ID; ICR = Performance rating ICR Outcomes; IEG = Performance rating IEG Outcomes, IEGNF= IEG not found;
HS = Highly Satisfactory, S = Satisfactory, MS = Moderately Satisfactory, MU = Moderately Unsatisfactory, U = Unsatisfactory
* RECIFE URBAN UPGRADING PROJECT (Brazil): (E) Removed from the project: feasability study on micro-credit program for housing improvement and small business development
* Integrated Municipal Project-Betim Municipality (Brazil): (S) Not financed by the Project: Resettlement (meetings for project's presentation, prioritization of unemployed adult members of families to be resettled for
hiring in works financed by the project, follow-up of families after resettlement), Support for physical improvements in poor communities, Strengthen municipal social policies and programs
* Vilcanota Valley Rehabilitation & Management Project (Peru): (E) Eliminated from the project: training of local tourism service provide




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             73
Annex 5: Brazil’s Experience in Making Cities Inclusive

While there have been a few examples of tackling the issue of inclusion in urban areas, Brazil’s urban development
policies and programs have been exemplary in many ways. With majority of its population living in urban areas,
Brazilian cities gained significant autonomy after 1988. The country is experiencing a stable economic growth since
1990s. With an active civil society, social justice and poverty dominated the political discourse in the country.

Over past two decades, the government policies targeted all the three axes of inclusion – social, economic and spatial.
The Government announced its flagship cash transfer program Bolsa-familia. The right to the city was recognized in the
City Statute. The economic policies towards inclusion included business microcredit from banks (Law 11.110/2005),
support and incentives for micro entrepreneurs (Law 123/2006), policy for real increase on minimum wages – 70% in 10
years (Law 12.382/2011 – link to GDP growth) and apprenticeship law (Decree 5.598/2005). The government also
announced a slum upgrading program (PAC – Growth Acceleration Program) and an ambitious housing subsidy program
(Minha Casa Minha Vida – MCMV). These policies and programs aim to achieve inclusion.

In the last decade, Brazil’s housing policy experienced a major re-organization (figure). The innovations were not limited
to introduction of new programs, but have also introduced institutional reforms to strengthen management and
planning as well as important changes in the legal framework of the sector: from the City Statute of 2001 and the
reforms of the Housing Finance System (legal recognition of possible new schemes of collateral and guarantees for
banks and home buyers), the introduction of a national system of social housing, a new model of direct government
subsidies and transfers, and finally advances on land regularization issues.

Approval of City Statute: The Constitution of Brazil (1988) introduced housing as a social right among education, health,
work, social protection and safety, and on its urban policy chapter specifies the municipal governments as responsible
for implementing urban development policies in order to fulfill the social functions of the city and guarantee its citizens’
welfare. This urban chapter is a result of a major mobilization in the country led by social movements campaigning for
an ‘urban reform’. It brings important innovations, paving the way for the debate on the right to the city and the
subsequent approval of the City Statute (2001). The Law 10,257 of 2001, known as the City Statute, is meant to promote
socio-economic inclusion by maximizing the ‘social function’ of urban property and an equal distribution of the benefits
and burden from urbanization. The City Statute has been greeted internationally as a milestone in the struggle towards
an equitable and inclusive urban development.

At a more general level, the City Statute: (i) enumerates several rights (to urban land, housing, sanitation, infrastructure,
public services, employment and leisure); (ii) indicates the guidelines for guaranteeing them (e.g. through democratic
administration and participation in councils consultations, conferences and popular initiatives; cooperation between
governments, the private sector and other segments of society; etc.); (iii) defines the attributions of the federal
government level (producing general legal frameworks, as urban policy is the responsibility of municipalities); (iv)
defines planning tools and procedures (e.g. master plans – regulating also their application – environmental zoning,
parceling land use and occupation, budgeting, sectoral plans etc.). At a more specific level, the City Statute regulates the
fiscal, legal and policy tools aiming at guaranteeing the social function of urban property and the universal right to the
city. Three major advances must be highlighted: (i) the requirement of a Master Plan for cities with more than 20,000
inhabitants, as the major instrument for urban development policies; (ii) the recognition of the social function of the
property; and (iii) the right of property conceived for urban dwellers, living in unclaimed urban areas (limited to the size
of 250 sm) longer than 5 years.

                                                                                                                          74
                       Approval of the City Statute: i) right of informal dwellers to remain in the land they already occupy ii)
     2001              instruments for municipalities to enable the regularization process and to reserve vacant land in the
                       city for low income housing.


     2003               National Ministry of Housing


                       Council of Cities created and the National Housing Policy: a deliberative body with representatives
     2004              from civil society and government (private sector, social movements, professionals, etc.). For:
                       propose and approve new policies and plans.


     2005               National Social Housing System (SNHIS) and the National Social Housing Fund (FNHIS):



     2006               National Housing Plan and public debate launched
-----------------------------------------------Historic Benchmark for slum upgrading policies in Brazil and globally---------------------------

                       Slum Upgrading Program (PAC – Growth Acceleration Program): establishing slum upgrading as
     2007              priority investment area for the country, Reach: 1.8 million families. Allocation: US$ 30 billion in slum
                       upgrading, sanitation and housing construction projects

                       The National Housing Plan (PlanHab): long term planning for housing, typology of subsidies and
    2008
                       targets, intensive civil society participation. Slum upgrading was considered as a fundamental axis for
                       economic and social development in the country.


    2009               MCMV (Minha Casa Minha Vida) program: stimulus package for new housing with a clear income
                       segmentation, connecting up front subsidies and credit. Target: 3 million houses, until 2014



    2010
                       PAC and the MCMV Phase 2 Launched


    2011                MCMV Phase 2 Operational


From the fundamental rights that the City Statute establishes – the right to the city and to land – other rights were
derived and operationalized in these programs, such as the right to decent housing, to restoration of livelihoods in
involuntary resettlement, to socio-economic sustainable development through a social work component, etc. Another
notable tool developed under the aegis of the City Statue is ZEIS (Special Zone of Social Interest). ZEIS enables
designation of certain areas within a city for social housing purposes. The ZEIS is also employed to determine land use,
land parceling and building rules in areas already occupied by informal settlements. ZEIS must be defined in the
Municipal Master Plan or in other related specific municipal laws. ZEIS and other instruments offered by the City Statute
have been widely incorporated in Master Plans in Brazil, although with mixed results and a generally low degree of
effectiveness. While there are implementation challenges, the City Statute clearly paved the way for more inclusive
urban policies and programs. As a matter of fact, it provides the conceptual and regulatory framework where slum
upgrading programs (PAC) and social housing programs (MCMV) were developed successively.



                                                                                                                                                  75
Slum Upgrading Program (PAC – Growth Acceleration Program): The government of Brazil announced the world’s
largest slum upgrading program in 2007, with an average investment of US$ 4.3 billion/year (total 30 billion US$
investment) that aimed to reach 1.8 million families. In a very innovative approach, slum upgrading was considered as
part of an economic growth package that included a series of investments for leveraging the overall infrastructure of the
country. This was a major breakthrough since with the introduction of the program, slum upgrading was seen as a
fundamental axis for economic and social development in the country. Slum upgrading was now recognized an
investment and not social expenditure. Under the program, one of the key ideas was to keep population on the land
they already occupy, near facilities and workplaces. The guidelines for PAC are: (i) promote integration to the urban
fabric by means of investment in infrastructure (ii) achieving ‘decent’ housing through house improvements, or
resettlement/purchase of existing houses when relocation is necessary due to construction needs or risks (iii) integrating
land titling regularization to housing interventions (iv) raising the environmental awareness of the target population
through sanitary and environmental education plus interventions for environmental recovery when needed, and (v)
fostering social inclusion by means of the social work program component.

 The Brazilian experience in slums upgrading shows a clear evolutionary trajectory, from a uni-dimensional approach
focused on individual urban components to a multidimensional approach where different urban components are
integrated, and where socio-economic and institutional dimensions also gradually gain more centrality.

Social Work Component under PAC: Physical interventions are necessary but not sufficient condition for improving
living conditions of urban poor. In addition to housing and infrastructure, they need support in terms of health,
education, social assistance, transport, productive inclusion, etc. Keeping this in mind, social work component is
institutionalized in the national policy under PAC. Specific resources (at least 2.5% of the total investment is mandatory)
are allocated to the social work component. The component focuses on social, economic, environmental sustainability.It
aims at regionally focused development and functional integration to the city fabric. It aims to integrate rather than
substitute local social policies. It has identified three axes: (i) community organization and participation; (ii) sanitary and
environmental education; and, (iii) income and work generation.

Instruments for Productive Inclusion: Productive inclusion is one of the axes of the social work component – ‘Income
and Work Generation’ aims at generating jobs. The physical works under PAC generated 9,800 jobs and 60% of them
went to workers from the local community. In addition, improvement in infrastructure benefits small scale businesses.
Positive synergies emerge when two axes of social work component – social capital strengthening and income/work
generation – are integrated.

While PAC remains a “curative” intervention aiming to improve the living conditions of existing slum dwellers, the
subsidy program of Government of Brazil - MCMV, was designed to provide affordable housing and prevent new slums.

Minha Casa Minha Vida (MCMV): MCMV was launched as a response to the international financial crisis (2008), as a
way to quickly create employment and stimulate the economy and at the same time meet the huge housing needs of
the country, clearly defined by the National Housing Plan. The program was launched in two phases, first phase in 2009
with a final target of 1 million houses, and income brackets set up in minimum wages, and a second phase in 2011 with
an expanded target of 2.4 million houses and a new income segmentation: families earning monthly up to (i) US$ 800,
(ii) US$ 1,640 and (iii) US$ 2,500. Since its creation in 2009 until now, the program evolved to several modalities,




                                                                                                                            76
between government, community and market driven, as shown below:
                                                         Market
                                                        houses –        Rural housing
  Integrated to    Low income         Low income        emerging        (assotiation/c
    a full slum     families –         families –      middle class       ommunity           Small
    upgrading      municipality       community                            driven))       municipalities
                                                       up to US$
   project - for      driven             driven        5,000 (up            up to
  resettlement       process            process           front              US$          up to US$ 800
       cases       up to US$ 800     up to US$ 800      subsidies       15,000/annua
                                                       limited to         l income
                                                       US$ 1,640)


The most predominant modalities in the urban areas as provision for new houses (as mentioned before the modality
complementary to slum upgrading is merely “curative”) are (i) local government driven (lowest income bracket), what is
also called for “open demand”, since it can be used for resettlement but also must be used for general cadasters of
housing demand in the cities; and (ii) the market houses. As for the period 2009 to June 2013, disbursement under the
MCMV represented approximatelly US$ 49 billion, from what 31% were subsidies – US$ 15 billion. The program
delivered 1.3 million houses.

In terms of impact on the economy, a joint study carried out between Ministry of Cities and the National Confederation
of Services estimates an average of US$ 7 billion new business annually within the building material and services
industry, and generation of 921,000 direct and indirect jobs annually in the period 2009 – 13 (BRAZIL, 2013). Another
study by Fundação Getúlio Vargas (FGV) demonstrated that formal jobs in the civil construction doubled since 2003,
achieving the benchmark of 3 million employees in 2012 (Castelo, 2012).

According to the Ministry of Cities, the urban housing deficit was of 6 million households in 2012. Based on census data
and considering demographic projections, there is an annual requirement of 1.5 million new houses to satisfy future
housing needs. This means a total of 23.8 million homes needed for the period 2013-23, which will require an
investment of about R$ 218 billion/year, equivalent of 4.8% of the Brazilian GDP in 2012 (BRAZIL, 2013: 12). While the
challenge is big, Brazil has already paved the way for inclusive urban development.




                                                                                                                       77
                             SLUM UPGRADING
                  INVESTMENTS not social expenditures:
                                     +
        LARGE SCALE LOW INCOME HOUSING SUBSIDY PROGRAM
                                     +
                         Inclusive urban planning
                                     +
         reduction of poverty = expansion of CONSUMER MARKET
                                     +
complementary social and economic development programs and policies
                                     =
      A NEW ECONOMIC DYNAMIC EMERGES ON BRAZILIAN SLUMS:
flourishing of formal and informal BUSINESS + improved SOCIAL indicators
                                   =
                           INCLUSIVE CITIES




                                                                           78
Annex 6: Measuring Inclusion
It is important to measure inclusion/exclusion to achieve inclusion. You can hardly plan for an inclusive city if there are
no data on who is excluded from infrastructure and services in that city and where they live. There are other advantages
of measuring inclusion, such as cross-comparison, benchmarking and planning/prioritizing interventions in deprived
areas. Measuring inclusion could also provide a clear picture about what kind of interventions are needed for a
particular area. Inclusion indicators help keeping track of progress. Generally, measuring inclusion involves collecting
baseline data on agreed indicators of inclusion, regular updating of data to track progress and its use for planning
interventions. At the city level, inclusion is easier to define than to measure. While there is a general agreement on the
key factors that contribute to its economic dimension, there are wide variations regarding the relative significance of
many aspects of its social, spatial and environmental dimensions, which encompass cultural differences in practices and
behavior.
 Box 5: São Paulo’s experience in measuring inclusion

 One of the most ambitious studies to address the multiple dimensions of exclusion was undertaken by the city of São Paulo
 with a research team at Pontifical Catholic University of São Paulo. The study analyzed the determinants of exclusion in the
 city’s districts at the sub-district level. The team identified seven main thematic dimensions of exclusion for which sets of
 measurable indicators were defined to provide an objective assessment of the level of exclusion:

    Self-sufficiency
    Quality of life
    Equality
    Human development
    Lack of conditions to participate in civil society
    Living in a situation of social limitations and abandonment
    Living under daily subsistence condition

 The range of values obtained for each indicator were indexed on a -1/0/+1 scale to provide a measure of the level of exclusion
 relative to the city mean or to a recognized reference standard adopted by the city. Some economists and statisticians voiced
 technical reservations about the methodology of creating composite indicators by summing sets of indexed values. These
 reservations notwithstanding, the study team’s mapping of the different indicators at the district and zone l evel was impressive
 and effective at visually demonstrating the degree of deprivation for each indicator of exclusion within the city’s boundary.
 Furthermore, comparative assessments through overlays made a significant contribution to understanding the inter-linkages
 among the different components of exclusion. The mapping highlighted the spatial dimension of urban exclusion while
 underscoring the importance of interpreting physical indicators included in the quality of life index and socio-economic
 indicators included in the Human Development Index with socio-cultural indicators of deprivation, marginalization and
 discrimination reflecting the particularities of the place. At the city level, it is the interaction among the different factors that
 determines the level of inclusion in the city

 In analyzing the spatial distribution of the different indicators, it is interesting to note that the composite index of exclusion
 developed by the team did not match the index of quality of life. It was also clear that the two indicators which best reflected
 the exclusion/inclusion index were income and education, key instruments in enabling upward mobility.

 This study inspired other municipalities in Brazil to look into urban exclusion applying simplified versions of the São Paulo
 methodology. The work undertaken by Santo Andre, considered one of the best managed municipalities in Brazil, led to the
 creation in 2001 of a new Secretariat for social inclusion within the organizational structure of the municipality separate from
 the Secretariat for Housing and Urban Development.




                                                                                                                                         79
Proposed Metrics of Inclusion: What is needed is not only indicators that are realistic for urban contexts but also forms
of data collection that could bring out who (the excluded people), what (measured aspects), where (unit of
administration), how (data collected in partnership with informal dwellers and/or their organization), and when (with a
provision of regular updates). In this section, we discuss the basic principles and guidelines to develop the metrics of
inclusion. The set of principles on which the proposed metrics are based is as follows:

    1.  It should capture both, the process of achieving inclusion and its results
    2.  Measure quality and quantity of service provision
    3.  Affordability is a huge concern, in terms of service provision
    4.  Indicators should be simple, easy to measure
    5.  Process of data collection should not be time consuming
    6.  Processes of data collection should not be very expensive
    7.  Alternative ways of data collection should be explored, for instance, self-reporting by informal dwellers or
        partnering with urban poor organization
As per the three main axes of inclusion as presented in the newly defined framework for Inclusive Cities, the proposed
indicators within each axes are based on the discussion throughout the paper and the background notes on various
dimensions of inclusion (access, rights, participation and opportunities).

1. Access to Affordable Land, Housing and Services
    1.1. Access to basic services (water, sanitation, sewerage, solid waste, transportation, basic healthcare, education,
         daycare, pre-school, etc.)
    1.2. Type of Services (source of water, type of sanitation – individual toilet, pay to use, etc.)
    1.3. Quality of Services (hours of operation and reliability, water quality, etc.)
    1.4. Time spent to access services
    1.5. Money spent to access services (affordability: % of monthly income)
    1.6. Type of housing
    1.7. Slums/informal settlement (% population)
    1.8. Residential segregation
    1.9. Housing/land availability
    1.10.Ownership status of housing/land
    1.11.Favorable urban planning laws and regulations
    1.12. Government support provided for access to housing/land
    1.13.Arrangements for partnerships with communities (Urban Poor Organizations, CBOs, NGOs) in service provision
         (planning, design, implementation, maintenance, etc.)
    1.14.Government budget for programs aimed at services and housing to urban poor

2. Rights and Participation
    2.1.    Composition of the household (age-sex structure, education, etc.)
    2.2.    Duration of Stay
    2.3.    Reason for dislocation from earlier location
    2.4.    Access to public spaces for leisure – parks, recreation centers, theaters, etc.
    2.5.    Democratic Processes
           2.5.1.Access to public information



                                                                                                                         80
       2.5.2.Transparent and democratic procedures for the selection and election of leaders; respect for the
             established term limits and elections, turn-over of leaders, equal participation of members in decision-
             making
   2.6. Participation: ability to represent needs, interest and ideas
       2.6.1.channels of communication
       2.6.2.public visibility
       2.6.3.political representation
       2.6.4.mechanisms to participate in city governance
   2.7. Safety and Security
       2.7.1.Personal safety
       2.7.2.Public safety (public spaces, gangs and crime)
   2.8. Protection of Rights
       2.8.1.Impartial and independent judicial system
       2.8.2.Selective application of laws
   2.9. Government support
       2.9.1.Programs to address special needs of the excluded population
       2.9.2.Programs to assist migrants and homeless population
   2.10.Urban Poor Organizations and Community Based Organizations
       2.10.1. Number and type of UPOs and CBOs
       2.10.2. Representation of various communities within UPO/CBOs
       2.10.3. Support UPO/CBO receive from the public and private sector
       2.10.4. Existing spaces for dialogue between the public sector and local CBOs/NGOs

3. Opportunities for All
   3.1. Economic Vitality
       3.1.1.Below poverty line population
       3.1.2.Rate of Poverty
       3.1.3.Gini Coefficient for Income Inequalities
       3.1.4.Job Growth
       3.1.5.Employment, unemployment and labor market participation (by age and gender)
       3.1.6.Income/expenditure (expenditure on food, shelter, services, other non-food items, etc.)
       3.1.7.Earning members in the household
       3.1.8.Unemployed members in the household
       3.1.9.Occupation/Industrial Structure
   3.2. Economic Readiness
       3.2.1.Educational Attainment
       3.2.2.Measures of health and well-being
       3.2.3.Access to credit
   3.3. Spatial access to jobs
       3.3.1.Access to public transportation
       3.3.2.Estimated transportation cost (in proportion of income)
   3.4. Government Support
       3.4.1.Pro-poor programs/targets identified in local economic development strategeis
       3.4.2.Access to programs (government or private) to build skills

                                                                                                                        81
          3.4.3.Government programs for jobs targeted at low-income and excluded population
          3.4.4.Other government programs to boost economy targeted at the excluded population (promoting small and
                 medium enterprises that are headed by excluded population by providing subsidies to establish SMEs, etc.)
Finally, it is equally important to identify users of the inclusion metrics and the usefulness of the metrics.
Aggregation/disaggregation level, accuracy, relevance, and use of the metrics will determine the specific indicators to be
included in the metrics.




                                                                                                                       82
Annex 7: Agenda of the Inclusive Cities Workshop
                                                     Program

                                       INCLUSIVE CITIES WORKSHOP

   Tuesday, January 14, 2014 | 9:00AM – 4:30PM | MC 2-800 | World Bank
8:45-9:00     SIGN-IN | COFFEE & TEA

9:00-9:10     OPENING REMARKS
              Sameh Wahba, Acting Director, Urban and Disaster Risk Management Department

9:10-10:30    I. ACCESS TO LAND, HOUSING AND SERVICES
              Chair: Christine Kessides, Manager, WBI Urban
              Presenters:
                     Mona Serageldin, Vice President, Institute for International Urban Development
                        Inclusive Cities and Access to Land, Housing and Services in Developing
                        Countries
                     Luis Bettencourt, Professor, Santa Fe Institute; Celine D’Cruz, Coordinator, Slum
                      Dwellers International
                          A New Global Data Collection Process for Understanding Human Development
                          in Slums
                     Judy Baker, Lead Economist, EASIN
                         Indonesia: Using CDD to Enhance Participation, and Inclusion? An evaluation
                         of the PNPM Urban Program
              Discussant: Roland White, Lead Urban Specialist, AFTU1

10:30-10:45   COFFEE BREAK

10:45-12:05   II. ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
              Chair: Stefano Negri, Practice Manager, FCDDR
              Presenters:
                     Rolf Pendall, Center Director, Metropolitan Housing and Communities Policy
                      Center, Urban Institute; and Victor Rubin, Vice President for Research, PolicyLink
                          Economic Opportunity in Cities
                     Jean Marc Guesne, Manager, Inclusive Business, Bel Group
                         Bel Inclusive Business Model: Informal sector / street vendors platform
                     Joanna Peace De Berry, Senior Social Development Specialist, ECSSO
                         Economic Opportunities for the Urban Excluded: Internally displaced persons
                         in Azerbaijan
              Discussant: Leonardo Iacovone, Senior Economist, FIEEI


                                                                                                           83
12:05-1:05   LUNCH BREAK

1:05-2:25    III. RIGHT TO THE CITY AND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT
             Chair: Anna Wellenstein, Sector Manager, LCSDU
             Presenters:
                    Francesco di Villarosa, Urban and Social Development Expert, Salvador, Brazil
                         Social Dimensions in Slum Upgrading: Innovative Approaches from Brazil
                    Anaclaudia Rossbach, Housing Expert and Advisor to the National Housing Secretary,
                     Ministry of Cities, Brazil
                        Urban Development Programs in Brazil: PAC Urbanizacao and Minha Casa Minha
                        Vida
                    Yoonhee Kim, Senior Urban Economist, LCSDU
                        Barrio Ciudad Project
             Discussant: Andre Herzog, Senior Urban Specialist, WBIUR

2:25-2:40    COFFEE BREAK

2:40-4:00    IV. PARTICIPATION AND ENGAGEMENT OF EXCLUDED GROUPS
             Chair: Maninder Gill, Director, Strategy and Operations, WBCMG
             Presenters:
                    Diana Mitlin, Principal Researcher, Human Settlements Program, International
                     Institute for Environment and Development
                         Engaging Excluded Groups in Urban Areas
                    Maitreyi Das, Lead Social Development Specialist, SDV
                        Inclusion Matters: The foundation for shared prosperity
                    Jaafar Sadok Friaa, Lead Urban Specialist, MNSSU
                         Citizen Engagement and Marginalized Groups Inclusion While Modernizing
                         Municipal Solid Waste Systems: An Innovative Approach from Morocco
             Discussant: Celine D’Cruz, Coordinator, Slum and Shack Dwellers International

4:00-4:30    V. SYNTHESIS AND CLOSING REMARKS
             Synthesis:
             Ellen Hamilton, Lead Urban Specialist, UDRUR
             Maninder Gill, Director, Strategy and Operations, WBCMG
             Mona Serageldin, Vice President, Institute for International Urban Development




                                                                                                          84
Annex 8: Inclusive and Sustainable Cities Event Agenda




              http://globalpractices.worldbank.org/sur/Lists/Calendar/DispForm.aspx?ID=74




                                                                                            85
86
