1.	     Lao PDR has seen strong economic growth during the past decade with
an average growth rate of 7.8 percent per annum. Much of this has been driven
by the growing external appetite for Lao PDR’s natural resources, which have
not generated broad-based job creation and income growth for a significant
proportion of the Lao population. Manufacturing – and especially garment
manufacturing – has the potential to generate jobs for the large unskilled
segment of the Lao labor force. The garment sector did indeed provide substantial
job creation in the 1990s, especially for women, but more recent trends suggest
a relative contraction of the manufacturing sector since 2007/08, both in
terms of employment and weaker wage growth. This contraction is mirrored in
Lao PDR’s manufacturing trade outcomes over the past decade, pointing to a
decline in competitiveness on the international stage. While exports can be an
avenue to growth and job creation, the success of policies aiming to sustainably
improve employment outcomes will depend on the realities of Lao export
competitiveness and global market demand.
2   Summary - The Labor Impact of Lao Export Growth



    2.	    Based on a series of complementary methodological approaches and
    datasets implicitly linking trade to jobs, this report paints a mixed picture of
    Lao PDR’s recent export performance and how this has translated into job
    creation and improved job quality across the economy. The findings of these
    various analytical approaches provide insight into the potential drivers of Lao
    PDR’s labor outcomes including the role of exports, and what the Government
    and firms can do to better position Lao producers in external markets so that
    more and better jobs are created for Lao workers in the future.

    3.	     Whereas the economy is undergoing some structural transformation
    away from agriculture, workers are primarily shifting into low-skill non-
    tradable service activities and there is no strong concurrent rural-to-urban
    shift. Agricultural employment continues to dominate the Lao labor market, but
    agricultural production accounts for only a small share of Lao exports. The most
    dynamic export sectors – mineral products, base metals, and wood and pulp –
    are not generating sufficient labor demand to absorb the large unskilled segment
    of the labor force. Mining wages are higher than other sectors, controlling for
    other factors, but mining activities are not labor-intensive. Even the garment
    sector, which accounts for a tenth of exports, employs less than 2 percent of the
    labor force, pays very low wages, and experienced slower real wage growth than
    the rest of the economy (except for hotels and restaurants).

    4.	     Manufacturing in Lao PDR is more export-oriented than average
    compared to other countries, with export rates similar to Vietnam. Exporting
    firms tend to be larger than non-exporting firms, both in Lao PDR and elsewhere.
    However, comparing Lao PDR’s 2012 export basket to countries at a similar
    level of development, Lao exports tend to be less sophisticated than those
    from Senegal, Cambodia, Indonesia, Bangladesh and the Philippines, based on
    indirect (global trade-weighted average) measures of wage, value-added, and
    human and physical capital. In the case of garments, which have a high labor
    content, Lao garment exports may in fact be less competitive due to higher
    wages vis-à-vis Bangladesh and Cambodia. Lao PDR’s small scale of garment
    production also makes it less well placed to compete for large contracts in
    certain markets compared to Cambodia and Bangladesh, even if Lao producers
    have found a competitive niche in European markets. In dynamic terms, the
                                 Summary - The Labor Impact of Lao Export Growth      3



labor sophistication of Lao PDR’s export basket has remained relatively flat
since 2006, and made little progress in closing the competitiveness gap vis-à-
vis comparator countries. This suggests relatively low-tech production methods
and/or weak education outcomes. These factors in turn limit exporters’ capacity
or incentives to invest in more productive technologies.

5.	     A key obstacle to attracting investment in high-value manufacturing is
the Lao labor force’s low schooling levels. With respect to wages, the Lao labor
market rewards higher education levels with higher wages, although we find
evidence of declining returns to each level of education between 2007/08 and
2012/13. For those with a tertiary degree, for example, the premium relative to
less than primary fell from 58 percent in 2007/08 to 39 percent in 2012/13,
suggesting that there is increasing supply of skilled labor to meet current demand
(this may be partly driven by civil service wage distortions). This also translates
into relatively lower incentives for workers to achieve higher education levels.
This trend contrasts with other dynamic economies where the diversification
into higher value products and the adoption of new technologies require more
and more top skills and therefore generate increasing returns to the highest
levels of education.

6.	      It is notable that in the garment sector in particular, wage growth for
those with a vocational degree was much faster than the average for all garment
workers (14 percent vs. 2.6 percent annual growth). Whereas this implies
increasing returns to semi-skilled workers, consistent with reported shortages
of skilled labor, the slower wage growth for unskilled or entry-level garment
workers may explain why employers have difficulty retaining workers (factories
report high turnover rates of new entrants, most of whom lack a secondary or
vocational degree). This either means that employers are actually willing to incur
the repeated recruitment and training costs of their rapidly changing unskilled
labor force, or that profit margins are too small to accommodate higher wages
for this majority segment of the garment sector workforce.
4   Summary - The Labor Impact of Lao Export Growth



    7.	     Data on worker movements between jobs and into and out of different
    sectors suggest that the Lao labor market is relatively fluid, but workers seeking
    better work opportunities in other sectors typically face significant costs to
    transition. High labor mobility costs are the norm for countries with a large
    share of primary employment, and Lao PDR is no exception. Skilled workers face
    relatively lower mobility costs than unskilled workers, while female workers face
    higher transition costs compared to men. The agriculture sector has the lowest
    entry costs, and as such acts as the “sector of last resort”.
                                 Summary - The Labor Impact of Lao Export Growth       5




                                       Policy Recommendations


8.	     Policies to facilitate better labor outcomes could focus on improving
existing firms’ or producers’ competitiveness, helping firms to enter and/or grow,
facilitating access to technology and higher value production, and enhancing
the skills in the labor market to attract and induce higher-value activities.

9.	     Small profit margins in the low-value garments sector mean that Lao
producers have little room for finding productivity gains vis-à-vis competitors
such as Bangladesh and Cambodia. A more promising strategy would focus
on creating more attractive niches or product lines for high income economies
through e.g., upgrading labor standards and environmental standards, thus
helping big brand retailers and buyers to meet their corporate social responsibility
objectives.

10.	    High turnover and exit rates from garment factories back to farm work
or migration results in productivity and production losses for the Lao economy.
Policies to reshape the incentive structure of garment jobs (such as working
conditions and/or career development) could entice workers to remain in
relatively more productive work.

11.	    A large pool of skilled and competitive labor is an essential component
both for attracting investment in higher-value activities, and for enabling firms
to upgrade the quality of their output. This means policies to increase educational
attainment, more support for basic education, curricula reform to meet market
demand including soft skills and entrepreneurial skills, and aligning vocational
training to private sector demand.
6   Summary - The Labor Impact of Lao Export Growth



    12.	    Exporting rather than selling to the domestic market is correlated
    with more skilled and unskilled employment, although the effect is quite
    small. Policies that help producers access new external markets could include
    joining (electronic) knowledge platforms, improving standards compliance
    and certification in line with international standards, reducing trading costs
    by improving trade logistics and trade facilitation systems, and providing
    enterprises with support for marketing assistance and training, for example.

    13.	     Whereas labor regulations do not seem to be a binding constraint on
    hiring, there is anecdotal evidence of confusion surrounding the implementation
    of the new minimum wage regulation which could diminish labor demand,
    suggesting a need for clarification and outreach by the Ministry of Labor. In
    addition, other recent World Bank reports1 identify critical business climate
    challenges that present larger impediments for firms trying to export, and that
    should be addressed.

    14.	    Lao’s relatively low-tech export basket limits its capacity to access
    higher income consumers seeking higher quality goods and services. Policies
    should therefore focus on facilitating access to technology and higher value
    production through for example more favorable (but still non-distortionary)
    investment incentives, or more generally by easing access to formal finance
    through banks or SME-targeted credit institutions.

    15.	   The high labor mobility costs in Lao PDR prevent efficient labor allocation
    across sectors, and could generate significant welfare losses in the event of a
    sudden change in the economic environment by slowing and dampening the labor
    market response. Policies to facilitate labor mobility could include labor market
    information or matching services, or cost-share training that is demand-driven
    and targeted to specific private sector needs.

    16.	  Diversifying production and employment away from the primary sector
    toward industry and services will also reduce labor mobility costs, enabling
    workers to transition more easily to better jobs. In addition to policies directly



    1	     See World Bank 2011b, World Bank 2014a, World Bank 2014b, World Bank 2015
                                Summary - The Labor Impact of Lao Export Growth      7



targeting lower mobility costs, there is scope for reforming distortionary public
employment hiring, compensation and human resource management policies,
and revisiting the role of SOEs. Reducing these distortions could curtail queuing
for public sector jobs and free more educated workers to enter the private sector.

17.	    The limitations of Lao PDR’s manufacturing sector – both in size and
quality – mean that any positive policy impacts are likely to have only modest
effects on aggregate welfare and inclusive growth. Policies will need to go
beyond the manufacturing sector to address the limited employment and
demand spillovers of mining production, and the limited market integration
and value addition in agricultural production. Policies to enhance agricultural
productivity, job quality and economic opportunities in rural areas will not only
foster greater equity, but will also reduce urban-rural distortions and dampen
the incentives to migrate.
