                                      Executive Summary

               Findings from the Joint IFAD-World Bank Assessment of the
        National Targeted Program on New Rural Development (NTP-NRD) Phase 1

                                    Overall Assessment

In its first phase, the NRD made important contributions to rural development, particularly
through its role in assisting the improvement of rural socio-economic infrastructure. However
its direct contribution to rural economic transformation is less clear. There have been gains in
some provinces and communes, particularly in terms of enhanced local level planning and
especially where donor-supported projects have been undertaken. However, there has been
little institutionalization of such gains and improved approaches and processes have generally
not been sustained after completion of subprojects. Clearly, rural development remains a
priority for Vietnam in order to achieve socio-economic development and sustainable growth.
This development, however, must go beyond access to improved socio-economic
infrastructure and services in rural areas and involve the broad based integration of small-
scale rural producers into sustainable value chains, connecting them to domestic and
international markets for both existing and new products. Along with this, there needs to be a
supportive social and economic platform for the self-improvement efforts of the people, their
organizations and the private sector. The key NRD lessons distilled from the IFAD-WB
assessment1 are as follows:

 The NRD criteria set for Provinces, Districts and Communes to attain were quite rigid
  and left little room for local investment prioritization; the 19 criteria in some cases led to
  construction of non-essential or low priority infrastructure and the criteria also did not
  sufficiently emphasized or promoted rural economic diversification and income
  generation opportunities.
 The implementation was not driven by needs-based commune-level planning
  mechanisms, and the accountability framework was unclear. Subsequently, the
  communes were not empowered as investment owners, and inadequate attention was
  given to the roles of Provinces and Districts in providing coordination and technical
  support, and
 There was no systematic monitoring of the development performance and financial
  management of the key institutional actors in planning and implementing NRD1.

                                           Key Findings

1. The principle of bottom-up Commune-level planning was compromised from the very
   beginning by the “target? nature of the NRD1 criteria, and the top-down pressures and
   incentives to achieve them, often regardless of actual commune needs;




1
  This technical assistance was provided to the VN MARD National Coordinating Office of the
National Targeted Program for New Rural Development (NTP-NRD) from December 2015 to June
2016. As a result of this technical assistance, IFAD and the WB produced the following documents:
(a), (b), and (c). This Executive Summary was prepared based on these 3 papers and feedback
provided from technical peer reviewers (Kevin John Crockford, Senior Rural Development Specialist
and Kai Alexander Kaiser, Senior Economist). The joint IFAD-WB technical assistance team was
comprised of Henning Pedersen (IFAD Country Director for Vietnam), Gary Howe (Strategic Planning
Specialist), Soren Davidsen (Senior Public Sector Specialist), Vinay Vutukuru (Senior Rural
Development Specialist), Douglas Forno (Institutions Specialist), Chris Jackson (Lead Agriculture
Economist), Carolina Figueroa-Geron (Lead Rural Development Specialist) and Tam Thi Do (Program
Assistant).

                                               1
2. The emphasis on achievement of the NRD1 targets/criteria would seem to have provided
   incentives to Provinces to make allocations more readily available to Communes with the
   greatest probability of success (in reaching all of the NRD 19 Criteria) rather than the
   greatest need for actual support in each commune;

3. The emphasis on new infrastructure development to meet targets led to exacerbation of a
   characteristic problem of public finance in Vietnam, i.e., inadequate provisions for
   recurrent costs, including capacity building and operations and maintenance – raising
   important questions about the sustainability of the investments financed;

4. Many of the key institutional actors at various levels were unprepared for their roles in
   NRD1, and received insufficient capacity building efforts or incentives to support the
   program;

5. Planning work at sub-national levels tend to be seen as the sole responsibility of the
   planning sections and units rather than the work of both planning and technical staff. This
   has minimized inputs from technical units who should play important roles in ensuring
   more realistic targets. The potential and important roles of Districts, supported by
   Province-level public entities in improving the effective planning and implementation of
   NRD 1 were neglected;

6. The impact and effectiveness of Commune-level investments were weakened by the lack
   of an integrated approach to planning, and resulted in multiple plans and report;

7. Planning and budgeting were not well aligned and often, policy objectives were not
   sufficiently costed or prioritized, resulting in unfunded multiple plans;

8. The link between planning and budgeting was missing both for recurrent and capital
   investments, and for ensuring sectoral plans were in line with relevant policies;

9. The lack of predictability in NTP transfers impeded planning, budgeting, and delivery of
   NTP targets. The level of resource allocation was not closely aligned with the targets and
   objectives due to their ambitious nature;

10. Complex, input-based guidance on NTP implementation has reduced flexibility and
    increased burden of reporting;

11. Provisions for supporting economic diversification through income generation livelihood
    opportunities were given little attention; and

12. There was little use of M&E functions to inform and correct policy and guide
    implementation. There was no systematic monitoring of the development performance
    and financial management of the key institutional actors in planning and implementing
    NRD1, nor was there any comprehensive assessment of development impact in rural
    areas. Lack of a baseline also impeded the tracking of implementation progress and
    impacts of the program.

Based on the above key findings, a number of clarifications and modifications would be
needed in the next phase of the NTP-NRD in regard to : (i) the oversight, policy guidance
and incentive framework; (ii) how national strategic plans and targets are to be integrated
with local-level needs and priorities; (iii) elaboration of technical and socio-economic criteria
through which to determine capacity and readiness, site selection, prioritization of investment,
and design aspects; (iv) investment review and approval processes; (v) procurement, (vi)
funds flow mechanisms and accounting; (vii) operation and maintenance; and (viii)


                                               2
monitoring and evaluation. Specific recommendations on each of these points are
summarized below.

                                      Recommendations


1.       Policy Guidance, Principles for Investment Prioritization, Incentive Framework,
         Resource Allocation and Implementation Guidelines, Roles & Responsibilities

         A Prime Minister Decision would be needed to complement and provide additional
         guidance to other such Government instruments. Specifically, for the next phase of
         the NTP-NRD, it is suggested that a PM Decision should clarify the strategic
         objectives and expectations, define oversight and implementation roles and
         responsibilities, and provide key policy guidance including the incentive framework
         that would be needed to motivate the proactive participation of Provinces, Districts
         and Communes in the NTP-NRD.

     A. The PM Decision as a means to lay out the principles on how NTP NRD would be
        managed and implemented: In order to achieve more efficient prioritization of
        investments and their tailoring to local production, ecosystem, and socio-economic
        conditions, clear guidance needs to be given as to how prioritization should be done
        and on the criteria that should be used to determine the suitability and eligibility of
        various types of investments. Importantly, there needs to be much greater flexibility
        in how the NRD criteria are to be applied. While still specifying the 19 NTP-NRD
        criteria (targets) for provinces, districts and communes, the PM Decision should:

         1) specifically allow for local-level flexibility in prioritizing investments based on
            local needs, rather than simply achieving centrally determined targets;

         2) be clear that a key planning and investment strategy for meeting the NRD
            objectives should be that investments are prioritized towards raising agricultural
            and fisheries productivity and value addition, including support for clustering of
            producers for start-up or expansion of micro to small enterprises.(i.e., in line with
            MARD’s strategic objectives under the Agriculture Restructuring Plan); and

         3) be clear that Value Chain Analyses would be used as the technical basis for
            identifying and prioritizing agricultural productivity and value addition
            investments in the socio-economic development planning (SEDP) process of
            Provinces, Districts and Communes.

         Other key principles for inclusion in the next phase of the NTP-NRD should be that
         as part of Provincial Plans:

         1) provision should be made for the integration of national strategic agricultural
            development objectives with local level needs and priorities;

         2) there should be broad stakeholder consultation in the Provincial, District and
            Commune investment planning process

         3) Commune-level NRD plans should be harmonized with Commune-level SPR
            plans through joint steering committees and procedures, and both should be fully
            integrated with institutionalized Commune-level SEDPs;




                                                3
    4) responsibility for implementation should be that of the local authorities, and
       Districts should be empowered as coordinators and technical assistance units for
       commune SEDP planning as well as NRD/SPR investments;

    5) national agencies should be directed to provide technical backstopping and
       strategic guidance;

    6) decision making on site selection, scope and scale of investment should to be
       based on clear technical and socio-economic based criteria; and

    7) continued participation and support under the NTP-NRD should be based on
       adherence to safeguard policies, procurement, and compliance with accounting
       procedures and requirements.

B. Incentive Framework for Provincial, District, and Commune participation: This is an
   important strategic design aspect for the NTP-NRD through which to influence the
   choices that Provinces, Districts and Communes will make in responding to the
   funding provided under the next phase of the NTP-NRD. Clear guidelines and
   procedures need to be developed by the NRD-NCO as to how rewards for improving
   planning, investment and implementation efficiencies are to be determined and
   allocated. Such incentives could include performance and competitive grants. There
   could also be different levels of cost-sharing between state and local levels of
   financing to provide an incentive for investments in activities such as environmental
   protection, climate change adaptation and mitigation, food safety or enterprise
   development which may otherwise receive less priority because of their less apparent
   immediate benefits e.g., compared with infrastructure.

    In the case of performance or competitive grants, criteria for award could be based on
    the extent to which investment prioritization is aligned with Province-level value
    chain development strategies, investment sustainability and benefits, as well as
    participation of small-scale producers and their organizations, the estimated total
    number of beneficiary rural households, and potential number of those who would
    graduate from poverty and near-poverty status. Eligible expenditures under such
    grants would need to be clear and could, for example, include investment in physical
    value chain-related infrastructure, equipment, and technical assistance.

C. Resource allocation under the NTP-NRD: The PM Decision should spell out how
   resources are to be allocated with attention being given to ensure adequate provision
   is made for capacity building to enable the efficiencies in implementing the NTP-
   NRD to be achieved. Extensive on-the-job training, workshops etc., will be needed
   to strengthen planning and investment prioritization, resource management and
   M&E. It is suggested that resources be allocated according to two broad and inter-
   linked components:

    1) Participatory Planning, Resource Mobilization, M&E and Implementation of
       Local Investments Support. For this, some 75% of the NTP-NRD budget could
       be allocated in the form of block grants for commune level planning and
       commune-owned investments such as infrastructure; and

    2) Development and Implementation of Agricultural (and other) Value chains. For
       this, some 25% of the NTP-NRD could be allocated for activities at the Province
       and District levels, which would focus at value chain development and income
       generation opportunities though farmer group organization, and instruments such
       as grants for enterprises and cooperatives.


                                          4
D. Implementation Guidelines. The PM decision could define some broad guidelines to
   facilitate the work of Provincial, District and Commune planners and decision
   makers. Such guidelines , it is suggested could be further amplified and detailed in
   Operation Manuals for the NTP-NRD, which to the maximum extent possible, should
   be harmonized with other Government-issued Operational Manuals and Circulars
   defining implementation procedures, specifications and standards (See Section 2
   below). Key points that could be made are as follows:

    1) Investment proposals for funding under the NTP-NRD should be required to
       specify the impact objectives and principal outputs (linked to the NRD Criteria).
       Additionally, proposals should detail sources of funding and how provision is to
       be made for recurrent costs.

    2) Planning should specifically address the larger challenge of rural economic
       transformation through commodity mapping to identify the priority commodities
       and sub-sectors that are competitive given the local context and market
       conditions and how improved production and income is to be achieved among
       large numbers of small-scale rural producers. i.e., though coordinated action
       among public and private partners (including farmers’ organizations) across
       Communes, and across District and Province, boundaries.

    3) The use of Value Chain analyses under the NTP-NRD should also be seen as
       contributing to the formulation, financing and implementation of broader
       National and Province-level development strategies e.g., in implementing the
       Agricultural Restructuring Plan, Non-Farm, Off-Farm Employment programs,
       etc., to provide for broad-based increases in income and employment.

E. Roles and Responsibilities of Agencies in terms of oversight, coordination and
   implementation should be defined, including their responsibilities in terms of
   monitoring and evaluating impact of interventions against the performance and
   outcome indicators. It is suggested that the PM Decision should spell out the critical
   features which could include the following:

    1) The mechanisms through which the NTO-NRD is to be managed and
       implemented needs to be clearly defined at the outset and have the full
       commitment of the responsible agencies. Roles and responsibilities of Ministries
       responsible for capacity and technical back-stopping for NTP-NRD should be
       spelled out;

    2) The NCO needs to have dedicated teams that will support the implementation of
       the program at the national, province and district levels. These dedicated teams
       could be a combination of government staff and hired professionals. However, it
       is essential that the project teams at various levels, national and commune are
       clear about the objectives of the program, have outlined roles and responsibilities,
       and receive appropriate training to fulfill their responsibilities;

    3) While some VCAs may be done at the national level, others may be more
       regionally focused while specifically addressing provincial roles and
       opportunities in the value chain. Ensuring the quality of these VCAs will be
       paramount and MARD has a key role to play in this as well as in ensuring
       transparency and avoidance of duplication in formulation of VCAs by different
       provinces;

    4) An NTP Program Steering Committee (NCO as the Secretariat) would be needed
       for (i) formulation of overall policy and resource allocation; (ii) issuance of

                                          5
             implementation guidelines and clearance of Operational Manuals; (iii) program
             level monitoring; and (iv) inter-sectoral coordination and improvement of policy
             and regulatory environment;

         5) Provincial Responsibilities should include: (i) overall responsibility for
            overseeing direct implementation by Communes, including technical agency
            support; (ii) performance monitoring, within the framework of national
            legislation and guidelines; and (iii) leadership of province-level value chain
            strategy development. At the Province level, capacity could be established in the
            form of a small unit to: (i) plan and oversee Province- and District value chain
            assessments and studies, and the overall Provincial program for institutional
            capacity building for value chain development; (ii) support the process of
            awarding performance or competitive grants; and (iii) monitor plan
            implementation and investment project achievements. A multi-stakeholder Value
            Chain Advisory Committee (including concerned private sector operators,
            representatives of farmers, financial sector institutions, and line agencies) should
            be established in each participating province to provide a consultative basis for
            capacity development;

         6) District responsibilities could include: (i) review and coordination of Commune
            plans; (ii) review of implementation of Commune plans for conformity with
            national procedures and norms; (iii) support for and facilitation of
            implementation of Commune plans; (iv) validating Commune performance self-
            reports; and (v) promotion of value-chain strategies at District and Commune
            levels; and

         7) Commune responsibilities could include: (i) participatory development planning,
            (ii) financial planning for investment and maintenance; (iii) implementation of
            plan and financial management within norms; and (iv) performance reviews and
            commune-level monitoring.


2.       Operational Manuals

Detailed Operational Manuals will need to be prepared to guide the implementation and to
provide transparent tools and procedures for the many processes and decision points that will
be needed to effectively implement, manage, ensure accountability and monitor and evaluate
the effectiveness of the NTP-NRD. Key Operational Manuals and their substantive content
could include the following:

     A. Planning Process Manual: This would inter alia describe in detail: (a) how there
        is to be integration of national strategic plans and targets with local-level plans,
        needs and priorities; (b) stakeholder consultation processes; and (c) elaboration of
        technical and socio-economic criteria through which to determine capacity and
        readiness, site selection, and prioritization of investments. The following additional
        aspects should also be taken into account in preparing the Planning Operational
        Manual:

         1) The Planning and Investment Prioritization Guidelines should define how NTP-
            NRD plans and investment priorities can be more effectively integrated as a part
            of the Socio-Economic Development Plans (SEDPs) of provinces, districts and
            communes;

         2) Commune-level NRD plans should be harmonized with Commune-level SPR
            plans through joint steering committees and harmonized procedures;

                                                6
     3) Commune level NRD plans should include, for each investment proposed: (i)
        results/impact objectives and principal outputs (linked to the NRD Criteria); (ii)
        specification of relevant technical norms, implementation and procurement
        modalities, review and approval procedures; (iii) assessment of relevant human
        and institutional implementation capacity; and (iv) adequate provisions for O&M
        of infrastructure investments; and source and timing of funding;

     4) Participatory planning at the commune level should be integral to the planning
        process with technical vetting being undertaken by line agencies and coordinated
        by provinces and districts. The developed planning systems and processes should
        be applicable to both NRD and SPR NTPs; and

     5) Planning and investment prioritization for NTP-NRD should be based on value
        chain analyses which should include: (i) areas of local comparative advantage in
        major commodities in production and processing; (ii) key components of the
        corresponding value chains; (iii) stock-taking of the local capacities; (iv) a
        strategic gap analysis of the value chains; (v) identification of the main potential
        actors in filling the gap and their technical, infrastructural, organizational and
        financial resource requirements; and (vi) potential approaches to exploiting
        opportunities.

B. Infrastructure Manual: This would cover (climate-resilient) design standards and
   technical criteria for selection and prioritization of infrastructure investments,
   procurement requirements and procedures and provisions for Operation and
   Maintenance. Specific recommendations for consideration would be:

     1) Establishment of local infrastructure should be in accordance with appropriate
        technical standards. Adherence to these standards should be spelled out and
        vetted by appropriate technical national agencies, including appropriate social
        and environmental safeguards;

     a) Each infrastructure funded under the NRD should include an O&M sustainability
        plan which, from the outset would define both the technical and financing
        requirements and responsibilities;

     b) Formal agreements need to be made with appropriate technical agencies to
        support preparation, implementation and O&M of NRD-funded infrastructure and
        livelihood subprojects; and

     c) Adequate capacity building should be provided at various levels for feasibility
        study preparation, simple business planning and supervision of such subprojects.

C.   Funds Flow and Accounting Manual: This manual would need to spell out in detail
     the budgeting and accounting procedures to be followed. Specific points to be taken
     into consideration in preparing the manual would be:

     1) Central government resources channeled through the NRD should be focused on
        the poorest provinces and communes (in terms of incidence and magnitude of
        poor households using existing data and poverty maps) according to a transparent
        and progressive allocation formula responsive to local conditions. Provinces
        should sub-allocate central government NRD resources to communes on the basis
        of the same progressive formula. Provinces should also take this formula into
        account in allocating their own resources for co-financing NRD investments at
        the Commune level.

                                            7
    2) The regular budget preparation calendar should be followed to allow scrutiny of
       local budgets by People’s Councils;

    3) Increased transparency and participation in the budget process should be pursued
       through publication of Citizens’ Budgets and other instruments to improve
       communication;

    4) Net of modest retentions for Province- and District-level capacity building to
       enhance their capacity to support Commune-level planning and implementation
       of the NRD, all central government resources channeled through the NRD to the
       Provinces should be sub-allocated by the Provinces to the Communes, and
       transferred to NRD Commune accounts;

    5) On the basis of the allocation formula, Provinces and Communes should receive
       an indicative medium-term NRD central government funding envelope, to be
       released in tranches, subject to:
       i. preparation of approved medium-term and annual Commune NRD/improved
           SEDP plans; and
       ii. satisfactory performance and financial absorption in the use of prior- NRD 2
           allocations

D. Monitoring and Evaluation Manual: The principal function of the NRD-M&E
   should be to report on implementation and achievement of agreed plans in order to
   identify issues in a timely manner and to facilitate prompt and relevant remedial
   actions. Standard monitoring formats should be provided and maintained in an
   electronic format, in order to allow for report aggregation at the District, Province
   and National levels. Procedures for baseline data collection, as well as indicators for
   monitoring program performance in terms of intermediate outputs (targets) and
   outcomes would need to be spelt out. Specific recommendations are:

    1) Clear, measurable outcome indicators need to be adopted to monitor the
       program’s intended results. These indicators need to be tracked and monitored at
       the Commune, Province, District and National level.

    2) Provision should be made for social accountability systems such as community
       score cards, social audits, grievance systems and annual learning events to serve
       as a feedback loop to inform reform in the implementation of the NTP-NRD;

    3) There should be periodic field visits by District, Provincial, and National
       monitoring teams to Communes, and include interviews with households to
       assess concerns;

    4) The principal responsibility for M&E and implementation should lie with the
       Communes, within the framework of the Commune NRD plans; and

    5) Line agencies should draw upon information that they gather in the course of
       their normal responsibilities in providing a framework for facilitating, and
       tracking all public investment and financial management;

    6) Effective financial monitoring of the decentralized NRD would be greatly
       facilitated by full implementation of national general financial reporting systems
       such as the TABMIS at the Province-, District- and Commune-levels, in order to
       allow detailed tracking of expenditures. The linking of TABMIS with the


                                           8
   physical tracking of investments through geo-tagging would provide a powerful
   tool for enhancing the efficiency of the NTP-NRD; and

7) The NRD-NCO should produce semi-annual quantitative and qualitative reports
   on the implementation of the NRD, drawing upon the information contained in
   the NRD monitoring and MIS; highlighting achievements, disbursements,
   problems, and remedial actions to be taken.




                                   9
